रजिस्ट्री सं ० डी ० एल ० – ( एन ) 04 / 0007 / 2003-23 REGISTERED NO . DL— ( N ) 04/0007/2003 – 23 


भारत का राजपत्र 

The Gazette of India 

सी.जी. डी . एल . अ . - 15032023-244417 


सं ० 2 ] 
No. 2 ] 


CG - DL - E - 15032023-244417 


असाधारण 

EXTRAORDINARY 


- खण्ड 2 

Section 2 

प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


भाग II 

PART II 


नई दिल्ली , बुधवार , मार्च 15 , 2023 / फाल्गुन 24 , 1944 ( शक ) 

NEW DELHI , WEDNESDAY , MARCH 15 , 2023 / Phalguna 24 , 1944 ( SAKA ) 


इस भाग में भिन्न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके । 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation . 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 15th March , 2023 : – 

BILL No. 62 OF 2023 


A Bill to empower the Commander - in - Chief or the Officer - in - Command of 
Inter - services Organisations in respect of service personnel who are subject to 
the Air Force Act , 1950 , the Army Act , 1950 and the Navy Act , 1957 , who are 
serving under or attached to his command , for the maintenance of discipline and 
proper discharge of their duties , and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto . 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy - fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows : 


CHAPTERI 
PRELIMINARY 

1. ( 1 ) This Act may be called the Inter - services Organisations ( Command , Control Short title and 
and Discipline ) Act , 2023 . 

commencement . 


( 2 ) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may , by notification 
in the Official Gazette , appoint . 


Application of 
Act . 


Definitions . 


2 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[ PART II 


2. The provisions of this Act shall apply to all persons who are subject to the Air 
Force Act , 1950 , the Army Act , 1950 and the Navy Act , 1957 , and to persons of such other 
forces as the Central Government may specify , by notification , under section 4 , who are 
serving in or attached to an Inter - services Organisation . 

3. ( 1 ) In this Act , unless the context otherwise requires , 

( a ) " Air Officer " means any officer of the Air Force above the rank of group 
captain ; 


( b ) " Chief of Defence Staff " means an officer of the regular Army , or the Indian 
Navy , or the Air Force , as the case may be , appointed as such by the Central 
Government : 


( c ) " Commander - in - Chief " means a General Officer of the regular Army , or a 
Flag Officer of the Indian Navy , or an Air Officer of the Air Force , appointed as 
Commander - in - Chief of a Joint Services Command , and in his absence , the officer on 
whom the command devolves ; 


( d ) " Commanding Officer " means the officer in actual command of the unit , ship 
or establishment and includes an officer appointed as such by the Commander - in - Chief 
or the Officer - in - Command , as the case may be , of an Inter - services Organisation ; 


( e ) " Flag Officer " means an officer of the rank of Admiral of the Fleet , Admiral , 
Vice - Admiral or Rear - Admiral ; 


( f ) " General Officer " means an officer of the regular Army above the rank of 
Brigadier , 


( g ) " Inter - services Organisation " means a body of troops including a Joint 
Services Command consisting of persons , subject to the Air Force Act , 1950 , the 
Army Act , 1950 and the Navy Act , 1957 or any two of the said Acts ; 

( h ) " notification " means a notification published in the Official Gazette ; 

( i ) " officer " , in relation to an Inter - services Organisation , means an officer as 
defined in clause ( xxiii ) of section 4 of the Air Force Act , 1950 , or clause ( xviii ) of 
section 3 of the Army Act , 1950 , or clause ( 16 ) of section 3 of the Navy Act , 1957 , as 
the case may be ; 


( 1 ) " Officer - in - Command " of an Inter - services Organisation means either a 
General Officer of the regular Army , or a Flag Officer of the Indian Navy , or an Air 
Officer of the Air Force , appointed as the Officer - in - Command of an Inter - services 
Organisation , other than Joint Services Command , and in his absence , the officer on 
whom the command devolves : 

( k ) " regulations " means the regulations made under the respective Service 
Acts ; 


( 1 ) " rules " means the rules made under this Act and under the respective Service 
Acts , as the case may be ; 


( m ) " Service Acts " means the Air Force Act , 1950 , or the Army Act , 1950 , or the 
Navy Act , 1957 or any two of the said Acts or all the said Acts ; and 

( n ) " service personnel " means persons who are subject to any of the Service 
Acts . 

( 2 ) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Air Force 
Act , 1950 , or the Army Act , 1950 , or the Navy Act , 1957 shall have the meanings , respectively , 
assigned to them under the said Acts . 


45 of 1950 . 
46 of 1950 . 
62 of 1957 . 


45 of 1950 . 
46 of 1950 . 
62 of 1957 . 


45 of 1950 . 
46 of 1950 . 
62 of 1957 . 


45 of 1950 . 
46 of 1950 . 
62 of 1957 . 


45 of 1950 . 
46 of 1950 . 
62 of 1957 . 


SEC . 21 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


3 


CHAPTER II 

SPECIAL PROVISION FOR CERTAIN FORCES 

4. ( 1 ) The Central Government may , by notification , specify any force or any part 
thereof , raised and maintained in India under the authority of the said Government , to which 
all or any of the provisions of this Act shall , with or without modifications , apply and 
accordingly all the officers referred to in clause ( i ) of sub - section ( 1 ) of section 3 shall be 
deemed to be officers within the meaning of the respective Acts relating to the said forces . 


( 2 ) Upon issuance of a notification under sub - section ( 1 ) , the authority to exercise all 
the disciplinary and administrative powers under the respective Acts governing such force 
or any part thereof including the powers conferred by warrants or commissions issued 
under such Acts governing that force or any part thereof , shall vest in the Commander - in - Chief 
or the Officer - in - Command , as the case may be , of the Inter - services Organisation . 


( 3 ) Where any of the provisions of this Act applies to a force or any part thereof as 
referred to in sub - section ( 2 ) , the Central Government may , by notification , direct that by 
what authority or which officer , the jurisdiction , powers or duties incidental to the operation 
of the provisions of this Act shall be exercised or performed in respect of that force or any 
part thereof . 


CHAPTER III 


CONSTITUTION OF INTER - SERVICES ORGANISATION AND ITS OFFICERS 

5. ( 1 ) The Central Government may , by notification , constitute an Inter - services 
Organisation , which may include a Joint Services Command , comprising of units or service 
personnel who are subject to any of the Service Acts , as may be placed under the command 
of the Commander - in - Chief or , as the case may be , the Officer - in - Command . 


Special 
provision for 

certain forces 

under Central 
Government . 


Organisation 
or Joint 
Services 

( 2 ) The Central Government may , by an order published in the Official Gazette , direct Command . 
that any power exercisable by the Commander - in - Chief or , as the case may be , the 
Officer - in - Command may also be exercisable by any other officer specially empowered in 
this behalf by the said Government . 

6. ( 1 ) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act , 


( b ) the Commander - in - Chief or , as the case may be , the Officer - in - Command of 
an Inter - services Organisation , who has been appointed and functioning as such 
immediately before the date of commencement of this Act , shall be deemed to have 
been appointed under the provisions of this Act . 


Constitution 
of Inter 

services 


Existing 
Inter - services 

( a ) the Inter - services Organisations constituted by the Central Government Organisations 
and functioning as such immediately before the date of commencement of this Act , 
shall be deemed to have been constituted under the provisions of this Act ; 


( 2 ) Nothing contained in this Act shall render invalid any action taken or acts 
performed , immediately before the commencement of this Act , by the Inter - services 
Organisation , or by the Commander - in - Chief or by the Officer - in - Command , as the case may 
be , of an Inter - services Organisation , while functioning as such under any law applicable at 
that time . 


and 


Commander 
in - Chief or 
Officer - in 

Command to 
continue . 


7. ( 1 ) The Commander - in - Chief or , as the case may be , Officer - in - Command of an 
Inter - services Organisation , shall be the head of such Inter - services Organisation and shall 
exercise command and control over the personnel serving in or attached to that Inter - services 
Organisation , for the purpose of maintenance of discipline and proper discharge of their Command . 
duties . 

Powers of 
Commander 
in - Chief or 
Officer - in 


Commanding 
Officer . 


Superintendence 
of Central 
Government . 


Power to 
declare 
persons to be 
on active 
service . 


Power to 

make rules . 


Overriding 

effect of this 
Act . 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith . 


Power to 

remove 

difficulties . 


Laying of 
rules before 
Parliament . 


4 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[ PART II 


( 2 ) For the purposes of sub - section ( 1 ) , the Commander - in - Chief or , as the case may 
be , the Officer - in - Command of an Inter - services Organisation shall be competent to exercise 
all the disciplinary and administrative powers vested in and exercised by 

( a ) the General Officer Commanding the Army ; 

( b ) the Flag Officer Commanding - in - Chief of a Naval Command ; 

( c ) the Air Officer Commanding - in - Chief of an Air Command ; 

( d ) any other officer or authority specified in the Service Acts or in the rules and 
regulations made thereunder , including the powers conferred by warrants or 
commissions issued under the provisions of such Service Acts ; and 


( e ) any other officer or authority as may be specified in the notification issued 
under section 4 . 


8. The Commanding Officer of an Inter - services Organisation shall , in addition to 
having command over any unit , ship or establishment , also perform such duties as may be 
assigned to him in respect of such Inter - services Organisation by its Commander - in - Chief 
or , as the case may be , the Officer - in - Command and shall be empowered to initiate all 
disciplinary or administrative actions over the personnel appointed , deputed , posted or 
attached to that Inter - services Organisation . 


9. The superintendence of the Inter - services Organisation shall vest in the Central 
Government , which shall have the power to issue directions to each of such organisations , 
on any matters concerning national security or general administration , if it considers 
necessary and expedient so to do in the public interest . 


10. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Service Acts , the Central Government 
may , by notification , declare that any service personnel or class of service personnel to 
whom the Service Acts apply shall , with reference to any Inter - services Organisation in 
which he or they may be serving in or attached to or with reference to any provision of this 
Act , be deemed to be on active service within the meaning of this Act and the Service Acts . 


CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 

11. The Central Government may make rules for the purposes of carrying out the 
provisions of this Act . 


12. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act . 


13. No suit , prosecution or any other legal proceeding shall lie against any person 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act . 


14. ( 1 ) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act , the Central 
Government may , by order published in the Official Gazette , make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act , as may appear to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty : 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a 
period of three years from the commencement of this Act . 


( 2 ) Every order made under this section shall be laid , as soon as may be after it is 
made , before each House of Parliament . 


15. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid , as soon 
as may be after it is made , before each House of Parliament , while it is in session , for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 


SEC . 21 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


5 


sessions , and if , before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid , both Houses agree in making any modification in such rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made , the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect , as the case may be ; so , however , that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule . 


6 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[ PART II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Presently , the service personnel of Air Force , Army and Navy are governed by the 
provisions of the Air Force Act , 1950 , the Army Act , 1950 and the Navy Act , 1957 ( the 
Service Acts ) . Only officers of the respective services are empowered to exercise disciplinary 
powers over the service personnel under the respective Service Acts . This has a direct 
impact on command , control and discipline of Inter - services Organisations like Andaman 
and Nicobar Command or Defence Space Agency , and joint training establishment like 
National Defence Academy or National Defence College , as the Commander - in - Chief or 
Officer - in - Command of such Inter - services Organisations are not empowered to exercise 
disciplinary or administrative powers over the personnel belonging to other services . 


2. As a consequence , the personnel serving in Inter - services Organisations need to 
be reverted to their parent Service units for any disciplinary or administrative action . This is 
not only time consuming , but also has financial implications relating to movement of the 
personnel . The problem becomes more cumbersome when the disciplinary or administrative 
proceedings arise from the same set of facts and circumstances but involves personnel 
belonging to different services . As a result , multiple sets of proceedings under the respective 
Service Acts are required to be initiated , which impedes expeditious disposal of cases , 
thereby affecting the standard of discipline . 


3. Accordingly , a need arises to empower the Commander - in - Chief and Officer - in 
Command of the Inter - services Organisations to exercise control over the service personnel 
serving under or attached under their command , for maintenance of discipline and proper 
discharge of their duties , without disturbing the unique service conditions or amending the 
Service Acts . 


4. The proposed Bill will essentially be an enabling legislation , which empowers the 
Heads of the Inter - services Organisations to exercise effective command , control and 
discipline on all personnel of regular Air Force , Army and Navy and to persons of other 
forces as notified by the Central Government , who are serving in or attached to an 
Inter - services Organisation , without amending the respective Acts . 


5. The salient features of the Inter - services Organisations ( Command , Control and 
Discipline ) Bill , 2023 , inter alia , are as follows : 


( i ) to empower the Central Government to constitute Inter - services Organisation , 
by notification , which may include a Joint Services Command , comprising of units or 
service personnel subject to the Air Force Act , 1950 , the Army Act , 1950 and the Navy 
Act , 1957 , as may be placed under the command of the Commander - in - Chief or the 
Officer - in - Command ; 


( ii ) to empower the Commander - in - Chief , Officer - in - Command or any other 
officer , specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government , with all the 
disciplinary and administrative powers in respect of personnel serving in or attached 
to their Inter - services Organisations , irrespective of the Service to which they belong , 
for the maintenance of discipline and proper discharge of their duties ; 


( iii ) to provide that the service personnel shall continue to be governed by 
their respective Service Acts for the purposes of disciplinary or administrative action , 
if any , when serving in or attached to an Inter - services Organisation ; 


( iv ) to provide that the Inter - services Organisations , which were constituted 
by the Central Government and functioning as such immediately before the date of 
commencement of the proposed legislation , shall be deemed to have been constituted 
under the provisions of the proposed legislation ; 


( v ) to provide that the Commander - in - Chief or the Officer - in - Command of an 
Inter - services Organisation , who was appointed and functioning as such immediately 


SEC . 21 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


7 


before the date of commencement of the proposed legislation , shall be deemed to 
have been appointed under the provisions of the proposed legislation ; 


( vi ) to pave way for various other tangible benefits such as expeditious disposal 
of cases , saving of time and public money by avoiding multiple proceedings and 
greater integration and jointmanship amongst Armed Forces personnel ; 


( vii ) to provide for overriding effect over anything inconsistent contained in 
other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any 
other law other than the proposed legislation . 

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives . 


NEW DELHI , 

The 3rd March , 2023 . 


RAJNATH SINGH . 


8 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


[ PART II 


The Inter - services Organisations ( Command , Control and Discipline ) Bill , 2023 seeks 
to empower the Commander - in - Chief or the Officer - in - Command or any other officer , specially 
empowered in this behalf by the Central Government , with all the disciplinary and administrative 
powers in respect of service personnel who are subject to the Air Force Act , 1950 , the Army 
Act , 1950 and the Navy Act , 1957 and to persons of other forces as notified by the Central 
Government , serving under or attached to his command in an Inter - services Organisation , 
for the maintenance of discipline and proper discharge of their duties , and for the matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto . 


The said Bill is essentially an enabling legislation , which empowers the Heads of the 
Inter - services Organisations to exercise effective command , control and discipline on all 
personnel serving in or attached to these Organisations and does not involve any additional 
financial implication . 


SEC . 21 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


9 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purpose 
of carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation . 


The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure and 
administrative detail , and as such , it is not practicable to provide for them in the proposed Bill 
itself . The delegation of legislative power is , therefore , of a normal character . 


MGIPMRND - 2788GI ( S3 ) —15-03-2023 . 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH , 
Secretary - General . 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER , GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS , MINTO ROAD , NEW DELHI - 110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS , DELHI - 110054 . 


Kshitiz Mohan 


Digitally signed by 
Kshitiz Mohan 
Date . 2023.03.15 
222237 +05 : 30 


