रजिस्ट्री Fe Ste Uer—( WA) 04/0007/2003—26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


JN क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-26032026-271301 
CG-DL-E-26032026-271301 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग ता — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 8] नई दिल्ली, बुधवार, मार्च 25, 2026/85 4, 1948 (शक) 
No. 8] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, MARCH 25, 2026/CHAITRA 4, 1948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 25th March, 2026:— 
BILL No. 97 oF 2026 


A Bill further to amend the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010. 

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 

1. (J) This Act may be called the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 2026. 

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of 


this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this 
Act, shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Substitution of 
certain 
expressions with 
certain other 
expressions. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


2. Throughout the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), for the words and figures “Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973”, the words and figures “Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023” 
shall be substituted. 


3. In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(a) clause (a) shall be re-numbered as clause (aa) thereof and before 
clause (aa) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(a) “Administrator” means such officer or authority as may be 
notified by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act;’; 


(8) clause (7) shall be omitted; 


(c) after clause (7) as so omitted, the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


‘(fa) “Designated authority” means such officer or authority as 
may be notified by the Central Government for the purposes of this 
Act;’; 


(d) in clause (g), in sub-clause (i), for the words and figures 
“section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956”, the words and figures 
“section 379 of the Companies Act, 2013” shall be substituted; 


(e) in clause (), in sub-clause (vi), for the words and figures 
“Companies Act, 1956”, the words and figures “Companies Act, 2013” shall 
be substituted; 


(f) after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘Gja) “key functionary’”, in relation to a person other than an 
individual, includes— 


(i) the Director of a company; 

(ii) a partner in a firm; 

(iii) a trustee of a trust; 

(iv) the Karta of a Hindu undivided family; 


(v) an office bearer, member of the governing body, 
managing committee or other controlling authority of a society, 
trust, trade union or association of individuals; and 


(vi) any other officer or person, by whatever name called, 
who has control over, or responsibility for the management or 
affairs of such person;’; 


(g) in clause (m), in sub-clause (iv), for the words and figures 
“section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956”, the words and figures “section 8 of 
the Companies Act, 2013” shall be substituted; 


(A) for clause (7), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(n) “political party” means an association or body of individual 
citizens of India— 


(i) to be registered with the Election Commission as a 
political party under section 29A of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1951; or 


(zi) which has set up candidates for election to any Legislature, 
but is not so registered or deemed to be registered under the Election 
Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968;’; 


42 of 2010. 


2 of 1974. 
46 of 2023. 


1 of 1956. 
18 of 2013. 


1 of 1956. 
18 of 2013. 


1 of 1956. 
18 of 2013. 


43 of 1951. 


25 of 1867. 
51 of 2023. 


1 of 1956. 


18 of 2013. 


1 of 1956. 


18 of 2013. 


45 of 1860. 
45 of 2023. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(i) in clause (q), for the words and figures “Press and Registration of 
Books Act, 1867”, the words and figures “Press and Registration of 
Periodicals Act, 2023” shall be substituted; 


(j) in clause (r), for the words, brackets and figures “clause (4/) of 
section 2 of the Companies Act, 1956”, the words, brackets and figures 
“clause (77) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013” shall be substituted; 


(k) in clause (7), for the words and figures “Companies Act, 1956”, the 
words and figures “Companies Act, 2013” shall be substituted. 


4. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(a) in clause (g), for the words “association or company”, the word 
“person” shall be substituted; 


(5) in clause (A), for the words “the association or company”, the words 
“an association or company engaged in the activities” shall be substituted; 


(c) in Explanation 1, for the words and figures “section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code”, the words, brackets and figures “clause (28) of section 2 
of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023” shall be substituted. 


5. In section 12 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (4), in clause (e), for the words “directors or office 
bearers”, the words “key functionaries” shall be substituted; 


(6) for sub-section (6), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(6) The certificate granted under sub-section (3) shall be valid 
for a period of five years. 


(7) The prior permission given under sub-section (3) shall be 
valid for a specific purpose or specific amount of foreign contribution 
proposed to be received and such foreign contribution shall be received 
and utilised within such period as may be prescribed.”. 


6. In section 12A of the principal Act, the words “office bearers or Directors 
or other” shall be omitted. 


7. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (8), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(c) not alienate, encumber or otherwise deal with any asset created out 
of the foreign contribution, except with the prior approval of the Central 
Government.”. 


8. In section 14A of the principal Act, the words, brackets and figures “, and 
the management of foreign contribution and asset, if any, created out of such 
contribution has been vested in the authority as provided in sub-section (/) of 
section 15” shall be omitted. 


9. After section 14A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
“14B,. (1) The certificate shall be deemed to have ceased on the expiry 
of its period of validity if— 
(a) the application for renewal has not been made under 
sub-section (2) of section 16; 


(6) the application for renewal has been made, but refused by the 
Central Government under the second proviso to sub-section (3) of 
section 16; or 


(c) the certificate is not renewed before its expiry. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Amendment of 
section 12. 


Amendment of 
section 12A. 


Amendment of 
section 13. 


Amendment of 
section 14A. 


Insertion of new 
section 14B. 


Cessation of 
certificate. 


Omission of 
section 15. 
Insertion of new 
Chapter IIIA. 


Vesting of 
foreign 
contribution and 
assets created 
out of foreign 
contribution in 
certain cases. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) No person whose certificate has ceased to exist shall either receive 
or utilise the foreign contribution unless the certificate is renewed.”. 


10. Section 15 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
11. After Chapter III of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“CHAPTER INA 
VESTING OF FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION AND ASSETS IN DESIGNATED 
AUTHORITY 
16A. (/) The foreign contribution and the assets created out of foreign 
contribution of any person— 


(a) whose certificate has been cancelled under section 14; or 
(b) who has surrendered the certificate under section 14A; or 


(c) whose certificate has ceased under section 14B or any rules 
made under this Act, 


shall, from the date of such cancellation, surrender or cessation, vest 
provisionally in the Designated authority in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) An asset shall vest wholly in the Designated authority whether 
created or acquired partly from foreign contribution and partly from other 
sources: 


Provided that the person referred to in sub-section (J) may make an 
application to the Designated authority for return of any distinct or ascertainable 
portion of the asset created or acquired from other sources and the Designated 
authority, on being satisfied, shall by an order, return such portion of the asset to 
the applicant in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) Upon vesting of the assets in it under sub-section (J), the 
Designated authority may either directly or through an Administrator, take 
possession of the assets and shall— 


(a) be responsible for the supervision, management, 
safeguarding, preserving or maintaining the assets so vested in it; 


(b) if considered necessary or expedient so to do in the public 
interest, undertake the management of activities of the person whose 
assets are provisionally vested in it under sub-section (/), in such 
manner and for such period as may be prescribed and the Designated 
authority may utilise the foreign contribution for managing such assets 
and activities. 


(4) Where, in respect of any person referred to in sub-section (/),— 
(a) a fresh certificate is granted under section 12; 
(b) the certificate is renewed under section 16; or 
(c) the certificate is restored by revision under section 32, 


within such period as may be prescribed, then the Designated authority shall 
return the unutilised foreign contribution and such of the assets vested 
provisionally in it, subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(5) If the person referred to in sub-section (/) fails to obtain a fresh 
certificate or get its certificate renewed or restored within the period referred 
to in sub-section (4), the foreign contribution and the assets created out of 
foreign contribution shall thereupon stand permanently vested in the 
Designated authority. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(6) The Designated authority shall apply the foreign contribution and 
the assets permanently vested in it for public purposes and may, by order— 


(a) transfer such assets to any Ministry, Department, authority or 
agency of the Central Government or of a State Government or any 
local authority, in such manner as may be prescribed; or 


(b) dispose of such assets through sale or any other appropriate 
process, in such manner as may be prescribed and credit the sale 
proceeds together with any unutilised foreign contribution to the 
Consolidated Fund of India: 


Provided that no person referred to in sub-section (/) or any of its key 
functionaries at the time of cancellation, surrender or cessation or any person 
acting on behalf or for the benefit of such person or any of its key 
functionaries shall directly or indirectly acquire or derive any interest in the 
assets so dealt with. 


(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (6), the 
Designated authority shall, where any asset permanently vested in it or 
portion thereof is a place of worship, entrust the management or operation of 
such asset or portion thereof to such person, in such manner and on such 
terms and conditions as may be prescribed and ensure that the religious 
character of such place of worship is maintained. 


16B. The provisions of this Act, as amended by the Foreign 
Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2026, shall apply to all foreign 
contributions and assets created out of foreign contributions vested under 
section 15 as omitted by the said Act, or any rules made under this Act, as it 
stood immediately before the commencement of the said Amendment Act, 
and all such foreign contributions and assets shall, from the date of 
commencement of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment 
Act, 2026, be deemed to be provisionally vested in the Designated authority 
under sub-section (/) of section 16A. 


16C. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, where any person who was permitted to accept foreign 
contribution under this Act ceases to exist or is rendered inoperative or 
defunct,— 


(a) the last key functionaries of such person shall inform the 
Central Government of such cessation or status of being inoperative or 
defunct, in such form and manner and within such period as may be 
prescribed; 


(6) the foreign contribution received by such person and the 
assets created out of foreign contribution shall stand permanently 
vested in the Designated authority under sub-section (5) of 
section 16A. 


16D. (/) Where the Designated authority sells any immovable property 
vested in it under this Act, it shall, upon receipt of the sale proceeds, issue a 
certificate of sale in such form as may be prescribed, in favour of the 
transferee and such certificate shall, notwithstanding that the original title 
deeds of the property have not been delivered to the transferee, be conclusive 
proof of the transferee’s ownership of the property: 


Provided that where such property is transferred by the Designated 
authority otherwise than by way of sale, the Designated authority shall issue 
a certificate of transfer in such form as may be prescribed and such 
certificate shall have the same legal effect as a certificate of sale. 


Treatment of 
foreign 
contributions 
and assets 
already vested. 


Vesting of assets 
where persons 
cease to exist. 


Certificate of 
sale or certificate 
of transfer of 
vested 
immovable 


property. 


Duties and 
responsibilities 
of Designated 
authority. 


Duties and 
responsibilities 
of persons 
whose foreign 
contributions 
and assets are 
vested in 
Designated 
authority. 


Powers of 
Designated 
authority and 
Administrator. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, the certificate of sale issued under sub-section (/) shall be a 
valid instrument for the registration of the property in favour of the 
transferee and such registration shall not be refused on the ground of absence 
of original title deeds. 


(3) Any property vested in the Designated authority under this Act 
shall not be transferred, whether by order of attachment, seizure or sale in 
execution of a decree of a Civil Court or orders of any tribunal or other 
authority, except in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 


16E. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 16A, the 
Designated authority shall be responsible for— 


(a) maintaining proper records, registers, inventories and 
accounts of the foreign contributions and assets vested in it; 


(6) reporting to the Central Government any violation of the 
provisions of this Act or any fraudulent activity that comes to its notice 
during the discharge of its duties; 


(c) submitting such periodic reports to the Central Government as 
may be prescribed; and 


(d) discharging such other incidental or ancillary functions as 
may be assigned to it by the Central Government. 


(2) The Designated authority shall act in accordance with such 
directions or orders, whether general or special, as may be issued to it by the 
Central Government from time to time. 


16F. Every person whose foreign contribution or assets are vested in 
the Designated authority and all key functionaries of such person, shall— 


(a) afford to the Designated authority or to any person authorised 
by it, full and unhindered access to its books of account, records 
(including electronic records), premises and properties and allow 
inspection, inventory and valuation thereof; 


(b) produce or deliver all books, accounts, documents, securities, 
keys and movable assets and hand over possession or control of bank 
accounts, lockers and safe deposits, as may be required by the 
Designated authority; 


(c) not alienate, encumber, part with possession of, or conceal, 
remove or otherwise deal with any foreign contribution or asset created 
out of such contribution, except with the prior approval of the 
Designated authority; 


(व) keep such foreign contribution and assets intact and in the same 
condition, and shall carry on its activities under the supervision of, and 
subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified by the 
Designated authority; 


(e) furnish correct and complete information, returns and 
declarations and cause an authorised representative to appear when 
called for; and 


(f) provide such assistance and comply with such further directions as 
may be issued by the Designated authority or the Central Government, as 
may be required for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


16G. The Designated authority and the Administrator, for the purposes 
of discharging their functions under this Act, shall— 


5 of 1908. 


45 of 2023. 


1 of 1872. 
47 of 2023. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(a) have all the powers of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of summoning and 
enforcing the attendance of any person, examining them on oath, 
requiring the discovery and production of documents, receiving 
evidence on affidavits, issuing commissions and such other matters as 
may be prescribed; 


(b) be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of 
clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


16H. All officers of the Central Government, State Governments, 
Union territory Administrations, local authorities, public financial 
institutions, banks and such other authorities or agencies as may 
be specified by the Central Government shall extend such assistance 
to the Designated authority as may be required for the discharge 
of its duties. 


16-I. The Designated authority shall not delegate any of its powers or 
functions conferred on or assigned to it under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder, except to such extent, in such manner and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed. 


16J. The Designated authority may revise any of its orders passed 
under this Chapter, either on its own motion or on an application made to it 
by the person referred to in section 16A or the last key functionaries referred 
to in section 16C, within ninety days from the date of such order, and pass an 
order in relation thereto, as it thinks fit. 


16K. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Designated authority 
passed under this Chapter may prefer an appeal, within ninety days— 


(a) to the Court of the District Judge within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction the vesting, management or disposal was made; 


(8) subject to such pecuniary or other limits as may be prescribed, 
to such judicial officer, not below the rank of a Civil Judge of Senior 
Division, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in 
this behalf. 


16L. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the Central 
Government may, if it is necessary or expedient so to do in the public 
interest, exempt such person or class of persons, in such manner and to such 
extent and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed, from the 
provisions of this Chapter.”. 


12. In Chapter IV of the principal Act, in the Chapter heading, for the words 
“AUDIT AND DISPOSAL OF ASSETS”, the word “AUDIT” shall be 
substituted. 


13. Section 22 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


14. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the words and 
figures “Indian Evidence Act, 1872”, the words and figures “Bharatiya Sakshya 
Adhiniyam, 2023” shall be substituted. 


15. In section 27 of the principal Act, in the marginal heading, for the words 
and figures “Act 2 of 1974”, the words and figures “Act 46 of 2023” shall be 
substituted. 


16. For section 35 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


Officers of 
Government and 
other authorities 
to assist 
Designated 
authority. 


Delegation of 
powers by 
Designated 
authority. 


Power of 
Designated 
authority to 
revise its order. 


Appeal against 
order of 
Designated 
authority. 


Power to grant 
exemption from 
provisions of 
this Chapter. 


Amendment in 
heading of 
Chapter IV. 


Omission of 
section 22. 
Amendment of 
section 26. 


Amendment of 
section 27. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 35. 


Punishment for 
contravention of 
any provision of 
Act. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 39. 
Offences by 
persons other 
than individual. 


Amendment of 
section 43. 


Amendment of 
section 48. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


“35. Whoever accepts, utilises or assists any person, political party or 
organisation in accepting or utilising, any foreign contribution or any currency or 
security from a foreign source, in contravention of any provision of this Act or 
any rule or order made thereunder, shall be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.”. 


17. For section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“39. (1) Where any offence under this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder has been committed by a person other than an individual, every 
key functionary of such person who, at the time the offence was committed, 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the person for the conduct of the 
business of the person, as well as the person, shall be deemed to be guilty of 
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render such 
key functionary liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence 
to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an 
offence under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder has been 
committed by a person other than an individual and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any key functionary of such person, 
such key functionary shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.”. 


18. Section 43 of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section (/) 


thereof and after sub-section (/) as so numbered, the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“(2) No investigation shall be initiated for any offence punishable 
under this Act except with the prior approval of the Central Government.”. 


19. In section 48 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(a) after clause (/), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(la) the period for receipt and utilisation of the foreign 
contribution under sub-section (7) of section 12;”; 


(b) clauses (n) and (०) shall be omitted; 
(c) after clause (q), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(qa) the manner of provisionally vesting in the Designated 
authority of the foreign contribution and the assets created out of 
foreign contribution of any person under sub-section (/) of 
section 16A; 


(qb) the manner of returning the distinct or ascertainable portion 
of the asset created or acquired from other sources by the Designated 
authority under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 16A; 


(qc) the manner and period of undertaking the management of 
activities of the person by the Designated authority or the 
Administrator under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 16A; 


(qd) the period for obtaining, renewing or restoring the certificate 
of registration and the conditions and manner of returning the 
unutilised foreign contribution and assets by the Designated authority 
under sub-section (4) of section 16A; 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(ge) the manner of transferring assets to any Ministry, 
Department, authority or agency of the Central Government or the 
State Government or any local authority under clause (a) of 
sub-section (6) of section 16A; 


(qf) the manner of disposal of assets through sale or any other 
appropriate process under clause (5) of sub-section (6) of section 16A; 


(42) the manner and terms and conditions of entrusting the 
management or operation of assets or portion thereof to an eligible 
person under sub-section (7) of section 16A; 


(qh) the form, manner and period of furnishing information by 
the last key functionaries under clause (a) of section 16C; 
(qi) the form of issuing a certificate of sale or certificate of 


transfer by the Designated authority under sub-section (/) of 
section 16D; 


(qj) the submission of periodic reports by the Designated 
authority under clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 16E; 


(qk) such other matters under clause (a) of section 16G; 


(qi) the extent, manner and conditions of delegation of powers or 
functions by the Designated authority under section 16-I; 


(qm) the pecuniary or other limits of preferring an appeal by a 
person aggrieved by an order of Designated authority, to such officer 
under clause (b) of section 16K; 


(qn) the manner, extent and conditions subject to which any 
person or class of persons may be granted exemption from the 
provisions of Chapter IIIA under section 16L;”; 


(d) clause (v) shall be omitted. 


20. In section 53 of the principal Act, after sub-section (/), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(1A) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the 


Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2026, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient, for the purpose of removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 


of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.”. 


Amendment of 
section 53. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (the Act) regulates the 
acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution and foreign hospitality to ensure 
that such inflows do not adversely affect national interest, public order or national 
security. The Act came into force on Ist May, 2011 and has been amended in the 
years 2016, 2018 and 2020. At present, approximately 16,000 associations are 
registered under the Act and receive around & 22,000 crore annually. 


2. Over the period, certain operational and legal gaps have been identified, 
particularly in relation to the management of foreign contribution and assets created 
therefrom in cases where registration is cancelled, surrendered or otherwise ceases. 
Section 15 of the Act provides for vesting of assets, but the absence of a 
comprehensive framework for supervision, management and disposal of such assets 
has led to administrative uncertainty and scope for misuse. Further, multiplicity of 
investigations, inconsistency in penalties, absence of timelines for utilisation, lack 
of express provision for cessation of registration, and ambiguity regarding treatment 
of assets during suspension have resulted in implementation challenges. 


3. It is therefore proposed to amend the Act to introduce a comprehensive 
statutory framework for vesting, supervision, management and disposal of foreign 
contribution and assets through a Designated authority, including provisional and 
permanent vesting; to provide timelines for receipt and utilisation under prior 
permission; to provide for cessation of certificate; to regulate handling of assets 
during suspension; to rationalise penalties; and to require prior approval of the 
Central Government for initiation of investigation. 


4. The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2026, inter alia, 
seeks to provide for— 


(a) amendment of section 12 to provide timelines for receipt and 
utilisation under prior permission; 


(b) amendment of section 13 to regulate dealing with assets during 
suspension of registration; 


(c) insertion of a new section 14B to provide for cessation of certificate 
upon expiry, non-renewal or refusal of renewal; 


(d) omission of section 15 and insertion of a new Chapter IIIA to provide 
a comprehensive framework for vesting, supervision, management and 
disposal of foreign contribution and assets, in a Designated authority, 
including provisional and permanent vesting; 


(e) substitution of section 35 to rationalise penalties; 


(f) amendment of section 43 to require prior approval of the Central 
Government for initiation of investigation; and 


(g) making other consequential amendments. 


5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The 19th March, 2026. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The provisions of the proposed legislation do not involve any expenditure, 
either recurring or non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 48 of the 
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (42 of 2010) (the Act) relating to the 
power of the Central Government to make rules. The proposed amendments to 
sub-section (2) of the said section seek to empower the Central Government to make 
rules in respect of the following matters, namely:—(a) the period for receipt and 
utilisation of the foreign contribution under sub-section (7) of section 12; (b) the 
manner of provisionally vesting in the Designated authority of the foreign 
contribution and the assets created out of foreign contribution of any person under 
sub-section (/) of section 16A; (c) the manner of returning the distinct or 
ascertainable portion of the asset created or acquired from other sources by the 
Designated authority under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 16A; (d) the 
manner and period of undertaking the management of activities of the person by the 
Designated authority or the Administrator under clause (9) of sub-section (3) of 
section 16A; (e) the period for obtaining, renewing or restoring the certificate of 
registration and the conditions and manner of returning the unutilised foreign 
contribution and assets by the Designated authority under sub-section (4) of 
section 16A; (f) the manner of transferring assets to any Ministry, Department, 
authority or agency of the Central Government or the State Government or any local 
authority under clause (a) of sub-section (6) of section 16A; (g) the manner of 
disposal of assets through sale or any other appropriate process under clause (b) of 
sub-section (6) of section 16A; (४) the manner and terms and conditions of 
entrusting the management or operation of portion of assets to an eligible person 
under sub-section (7) of section 16A; (7) the form, manner and period of furnishing 
information by the last key functionaries under clause (a) of section 16C; (7) the 
form of issuing a certificate of sale or certificate of transfer by the Designated 
authority under sub-section (/) of section 16D; (A) the submission of periodic reports 
by the Designated authority under clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 16E; 
(J) such other matters under clause (a) of section 16G; (m) the extent, manner and 
conditions of delegation of powers or functions by the Designated authority under 
section 16-I; (0) the pecuniary or other limits of preferring an appeal by a person 
aggrieved by an order of Designated authority, to such officer under clause (5) of 
section 16K; (०) the manner, extent and conditions subject to which any person or 
class of persons may be granted exemption from the provisions of Chapter IIIA 
under section 16L. 


2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure 
and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill 
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH, 
Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


MGIPMRND—688GI(S4)—25-03-2026. 


Digitally signed 


KSHITIZ by KSHITZ 
M O H A N Date: 2026.03.26 


02:09:01 +05'30' 


