रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल" -(एन)04/0007/2003--24 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—24 


प्यारत का Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


Goh. -S). Wet. -37.-09082024-25624I 
CG-DL-E-09082024-25624 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


a 8] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्र वार, अगस्त 9, 2024/श्रावण 8, 946 (शक) 
No. 8] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, AUGUST 9, 2024/SRAVANA 8, 946 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on 9th August, 2024:— 


BILL No. |l0 oF 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, |934, the Banking 
Regulation Act, 949, the State Bank of India Act, 955, the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 


970 and the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, |980. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


. (/) This Act may be called the Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 


notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this 
Act, and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act, shall 
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision. 


CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENT TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, |934 
Amendment of 2. In the Reserve Bank of India Act, 934, in section 42,— 
section 42. 
(a) in sub-section (/), in the Explanation, for clause (0), the following 
clause shall be substituted, namely:— 

‘(b) “fortnight” means the period from the first day to the fifteenth 
day of each calendar month or sixteenth day to the last day of each 
calendar month, both days inclusive;’; 

(5) in sub-section (2),— 

(7) in the long line,— 

(A) for the words “each alternate Friday”, the words “the last 
day of each fortnight” shall be substituted; 

(B) for the words “seven days”, the words “five days” shall 
be substituted; 

(ii) in the second proviso,— 

(A) for the words “such alternate Friday”, the words “the last 
day of any such fortnight” shall be substituted; 

(B) for the words “that Friday”, the words “the last day of 
that fortnight” shall be substituted; 

(iii) the third proviso shall be omitted; 

(c) sub-section (2A) shall be omitted. 

CHAPTER III 

AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, |949 
Amendment of 3. In the Banking Regulation Act, 949 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to 
5७202 as the Banking Regulation Act of 949), in section 5, in clause (ne), in 
sub-clause (i), for the words “five lakhs of rupees”, the words “two crore rupees or 
such other amount as may be notified in the Official Gazette by the Central 
Government” shall be substituted. 

Amendment of 4. In the Banking Regulation Act of 949, in section l0A, in sub-section (2A), 


secu ५३६६ in clause (i), after the words “eight years”, the words “and ten years in case of 


a co-operative bank” shall be inserted. 


Amendment of 5. In the Banking Regulation Act of 949, in section l6, in sub-section (3), 
section l6. after the words “Reserve Bank”, the following shall be inserted, namely:— 


“or the director of a central co-operative bank elected to the Board of the 
state co-operative bank in which he is a member”. 


eae of 6. In the Banking Regulation Act of 949, in section 8,— 
section |8. 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 
(i) for the words “last Friday”’, the words “last day” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words “alternate Fridays”, the words “the last day of the 
fortnight” shall be substituted; 


2 of 934. 


0 of 949. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(iii) for the words “such Fridays or if any such Friday”, the words 
“the last day of the fortnight or if the last day of any such fortnight” shall 
be substituted; 


(0) in the Explanation, for clause (b), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


‘(6) “fortnight” shall mean the period from the first day to the 
fifteenth day of each calendar month or sixteenth day to the last day of 
each calendar month, both days inclusive;’. 
7. In the Banking Regulation Act of 949, in section 24,— ne OF 


section 24. 
(a) in sub-section (2A), for the word “Friday”, the word “day” shall be 
substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (3), for the words “each alternate Friday during the 
month, or if any such Friday”, the words “the last day of each fortnight during 
the month, or if the last day of any such fortnight” shall be substituted; 


(c) in sub-section (4),— 


(7) in clause (a), for the words “any alternate Friday or, if such 
Friday”, the words “the last day of any fortnight or, if the last day of any 
such fortnight” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for clause (0), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(b) if the default occurs again on the last day of the next 
succeeding fortnight, or, if the last day of such fortnight is a public 
holiday, on the preceding working day, and continues on the last 
day of the succeeding fortnights or preceding working days, as the 
case may be, the rate of penal interest shall be increased to a rate 
of five per cent. per annum above the bank rate on each such 
shortfall in respect of last day of that fortnight and last day of each 
succeeding fortnight or preceding working day, if last day of such 
fortnight is a public holiday, on which the default continues.”; 


(d) in sub-section (7),— 


(7) for the words “next succeeding alternate Friday, or if such 
Friday is a public holiday’, the words “last day of the next succeeding 
fortnight, or if the last day of such fortnight is a public holiday” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) for the words “subsequent alternate Friday”, the words “last 
day of every subsequent fortnight” shall be substituted. 
8. In the Banking Regulation Act of 949, in section 25,— Amendment of 


section 25. 
(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “last Friday of every quarter or, if 


that Friday”, the words “last day of every quarter or, if that day” shall be 
substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “last Friday of the previous quarter, 
or, if that Friday”, the words “last day of the previous quarter, or, if that day” 
shall be substituted. 


9. In the Banking Regulation Act of 949, in section 27, in sub-section (/), for Amendment of 


the words “last Friday of every month or if that Friday”, the words “last day of every section 27. 
month, or, if that day” shall be substituted. 
0. In the Banking Regulation Act of 949, in section 45ZA,— Amendment of 
section 45ZA. 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “one person”, the words “one or 
more persons not exceeding four, either successively or simultaneously” shall 
be substituted; 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(b) after sub-section (/), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(IA) Where the nomination is made successively in favour of 
more than one person under sub-section (/), the nomination shall be 
effective only in favour of one person in the order of priority specified 
in section 45ZG. 


(JB) Where the nomination is made simultaneously in favour of 
more than one person under sub-section (/), the nomination shall be 
effective in favour of all such persons in proportion to which it is 
declared, and the following terms and conditions shall apply, namely:— 


(a) the nomination shall not be made in favour of more than 
four persons; 


(b) the nomination shall explicitly state the proportion of 
amount of deposit in percentage in favour of each nominee; 


(c) the nomination shall be made in respect of the whole 
amount of deposit; 


(d) if any nominee dies before receiving deposit from the 
banking company, the nomination in respect of such nominee 
alone shall become ineffective and the amount of deposit 
purported to be nominated in favour of deceased nominee shall be 
treated as if nomination had not been made in respect of that 
portion of deposit, 


and any nomination which does not comply with any of the terms and 
conditions specified in clauses (a) to (c), shall be invalid, as if nomination had 
not been made by the depositor or all the depositors together, as the case may 


be.”. 
Amendment of Il. In the Banking Regulation Act of 949, in section 45ZC, in sub-section (/), 
section 4520. for the words “one person”, the words “one or more persons not exceeding four, 
successively,” shall be substituted. 
Amendment हा of 2. In the Banking Regulation Act of !949, in section 45ZE, for sub-section (/), 
Seances the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(॥) Where one or more individuals hire a locker from a banking 
company, whether such locker is located in the safe deposit vault of such 
banking company or elsewhere, the individual or, as the case may be, all the 
individuals together, may nominate one or more persons not exceeding four, 
successively, to whom, in the event of the death of the sole hirer or the death 
of all the hirers, the banking company may give access to the locker and liberty 
to remove the contents of the locker.”. 


Insertion of 3. In the Banking Regulation Act of 949, after section 45ZF, the following 
new section i ; rt __ 

reas section shall be inserted, namely: 

Priority of “45ZG. (/) Where the nomination is made in favour of more than one 
successive person successively under sub-section (/) of section 45ZA or sub-section (/) 


iommnanions: of section 45ZC or sub-section (/) of section 45ZE, the nomination shall be 


effective only in favour of one person in the following order of priority, 
namely:— 


(a) nomination of the first nominee shall be effective if that 
nominee survives the person or persons who made the nomination; 


(b) nomination of the second nominee shall become effective only 
after the death of the first nominee; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(c) nomination of any nominee lower in the order of nomination 
shall become effective only after the death of all the nominees whose 
names are higher in the order of nomination. 


(2) Where the order of nomination is not mentioned, persons shall be 
deemed to have been nominated in the order in which their names appear in 
the nomination. 


(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the nominations 
made simultaneously in favour of more than one person under sub-section (/) 
of section 45ZA.”. 


4. In the Banking Regulation Act of 949, in section 56,— 


(a) in clause (c), for sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“(ii) clause (nb) shall be omitted;”; 
(0) in clause (7) relating to substitution of section 8, in sub-section (/),— 


(7) for the words “last Friday”, the words “last day” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) for the words “alternate Friday”, the words “the last day of the 
fortnight” shall be substituted; 


(iii) for the words “such Fridays or if any such Friday”, the words 
“the last day of the fortnight or if the last day of any such fortnight” shall 
be substituted; 


(iv) in the Explanation, for clause (0), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely: — 


‘(b) “fortnight” shall mean the period from the first day to 
the fifteenth day of each calendar month or sixteenth day to the last 
day of each calendar month, both days inclusive;’. 


CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENTS TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, !955 
23 of 955. 5. In the State Bank of India Act, 955, in section 38A,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “dividend”, the word “money” 
shall be substituted; 


(0) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The State Bank shall transfer, in accordance with the rules 
8 of 203. made under section 24 of the Companies Act, 203, to the Investor 
Education and Protection Fund established under section 25 of the 

said Act,— 


(7) any money which remains unpaid or unclaimed for a 
period of seven years from the date of its transfer in the Unpaid 
Dividend Account of the State Bank; 


(7) all shares in respect of which dividend has not been paid 
or claimed for a period of seven consecutive years, along with a 
statement thereof containing the details specified in the said rules; 


(iii) any interest or redemption amount upon any bond issued 
by the State Bank which remain unpaid or unclaimed for a period 
of seven years from the date such interest or such redemption 
amount became due for payment. 


Amendment of 
section 56. 


Amendment of 
section 38A. 


Amendment of 
section 4]. 


Amendment of 
section 0. 


Amendment of 
section l0B. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(4) Any person whose shares or unclaimed or unpaid money has 
been transferred to the Investor Education and Protection Fund under 
sub-section (3), shall be entitled to claim the transfer or refund from the 
said Fund, in accordance with the rules made under section 24 and 
section !25 of the Companies Act, 203. 


(5) The money transferred under sub-section (3) to the Investor 
Education and Protection Fund shall be utilised for the purposes and in 
the manner specified in section 25 of the Companies Act, 203.”. 


6. In the State Bank of India Act, 955, in section 4],— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words and figures “section 226 of the 
Companies Act, 956”, the words and figures “section l4| of the Companies 
Act, 203” shall be substituted; 


(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) The auditors shall receive such remuneration as the State Bank 
may fix.”. 
CHAPTER V 
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, |970 
7. In the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 


Act, 970 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Act of 970), in section 0, in 
sub-section (2),— 


(a) for the words and figures “section 226 of the Companies Act, 956”, 
the words and figures “section 4l of the Companies Act, 203” shall be 
substituted; 


(b) for the words “Reserve Bank may fix in consultation with the Central 
Government”, the words “corresponding new bank may fix” shall be 
substituted. 


8. In the Act of 970, in section 0B,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “dividend to Unpaid Dividend 
Account”, the word “money” shall be substituted; 


(0) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The corresponding new bank shall transfer, in accordance 
with the rules made under section 24 of the Companies Act, 20]3, to 
the Investor Education and Protection Fund established under section 25 
of the said Act,— 


(7) any money which remains unpaid or unclaimed for a 
period of seven years from the date of its transfer in the Unpaid 
Dividend Account of the corresponding new bank; 


(7) all shares in respect of which dividend has not been paid 
or claimed for a period of seven consecutive years, along with a 
statement thereof containing the details specified in the said rules; 


(iii) any interest or redemption amount upon any bond issued 
by the corresponding new bank which remain unpaid or unclaimed 
for a period of seven years from the date such interest or such 
redemption amount became due for payment. 


8 of 203. 


8 of 20]3. 


23 of 955. 


| of 956. 
8 of 20]3. 


5 of 970. 


| of 956. 
8 of 20]3. 


8 of 20]3. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(3A) Any person whose shares or unclaimed or unpaid money has 
been transferred to the Investor Education and Protection Fund under 
sub-section (3), shall be entitled to claim the transfer or refund from the 
said Fund, in accordance with the rules made under section 24 and 


8 of 203. section 25 of the Companies Act, 203.”; 

(c) in sub-section (4), for the words, figures and letter “section 205C of 
| of 956. the Companies Act, 956”, the words and figures “section 25 of the 
8 of 203. Companies Act, 203” shall be substituted. 

CHAPTER VI 


AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 980 
9. In the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Amendment of 
40 of 980. Act, |980 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Act of 980), in section 0, in ५७७७० 
sub-section (2),— 


| of 956. (a) for the words and figures “section 226 of the Companies Act, 956”, 
8 of 203. the words and figures “section 4l of the Companies Act, 20l3” shall be 
substituted; 


(b) for the words “Reserve Bank may fix in consultation with the Central 
Government”, the words “corresponding new bank may fix” shall be 
substituted. 
20. In the Act of 980, in section |0B,— Amendment of 
section l0B. 
(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “dividend to Unpaid Dividend 
Account”, the word “money” shall be substituted; 


(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The corresponding new bank shall transfer, in accordance 
I8 of 203. with the rules made under section 24 of the Companies Act, 203, to 
the Investor Education and Protection Fund established under 

section 25 of the said Act,— 


(7) any money which remains unpaid or unclaimed for a 
period of seven years from the date of its transfer in the Unpaid 
Dividend Account of the corresponding new bank; 


(7) all shares in respect of which dividend has not been paid 
or claimed for a period of seven consecutive years, along with a 
statement thereof containing the details specified in the said rules; 


(iii) any interest or redemption amount upon any bond issued 
by the corresponding new bank which remain unpaid or unclaimed 
for a period of seven years from the date such interest or such 
redemption amount became due for payment. 


(3A) Any person whose shares or unclaimed or unpaid money has 
been transferred to the Investor Education and Protection Fund under 
sub-section (3), shall be entitled to claim the transfer or refund from the 
said Fund, in accordance with the rules made under section 24 and 

8 of 20I3. section 25 of the Companies Act, 203.”; 


(c) in sub-section (4), for the words, figures and letter “section 205C of 
] of 956. the Companies Act, !956”, the words and figures “section 25 of the Companies 
8 of 203. Act, 203” shall be substituted. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
As the banking sector has evolved over the years and with a view to improve 
bank governance and investor’s protection, it has become necessary to make certain 
amendments in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 934, the Banking Regulation 
Act, 949 (the “BR Act”), the State Bank of India Act, 955, the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, !970 and the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,l980. 


2. The proposed Bill seeks, inter alia, to improve governance standards, 
provide consistency in reporting by banks to the Reserve Bank of India, ensure 
better protection for depositors and investors, improve audit quality in public sector 
banks, bring customer convenience in respect of nominations and to provide for 
increase in the tenure of the directors in co-operative banks. 


3. Therefore, it is felt necessary to amend the said enactments and for that 
purpose to introduce the Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2024 in Parliament. The 
salient features of the amendments proposed in the said Bill, inter alia, are— 


(a) to amend clause (ne) of section 5 of the BR Act so as to redefine 
“substantial interest”, increasing the threshold for shareholding of a beneficial 
interest by an individual, etc., from five lakhs rupees to two crore rupees, to 
reflect the present value, as the same was last fixed in 968; 


(b) to amend clause (7) of sub-section (24) of section l0A of the BR Act, 
increasing the tenure of directors (excluding the chairman and whole-time 
director) in co-operative banks from eight years to ten years, so as to align 
with the Constitution (Ninety-Seventh Amendment) Act, 20]]; 


(c) to amend sub-section (3) of section 6 of the BR Act, so as to allow 
a director of a central co-operative bank to serve on the board of a state 
co-operative bank; 


(d) to amend sections 8, 24, 25 and section 56 of the BR Act, to revise 
the reporting dates for the submission of statutory reports by banks to the 
Reserve Bank of India, so as to align them to the last day of the fortnight or 
month or quarter, to ensure consistency in reporting; 


(e) to amend sections 45ZA, 45ZC, and 45ZE of the BR Act, so as to allow 
for the nomination of up to four persons, including provisions for simultaneous 
and successive nominations, to ease services for depositors and their nominees, 
particularly regarding deposits, articles in safe custody, and safety lockers; 


(f) to amend section 38A of the State Bank of India Act, 955, section 0B 
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 970 
and section !0B of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, !980, so as to provide for the transfer of unclaimed dividends, 
shares, and interest or redemption of bonds to the Investor Education and Protection 
Fund, and allow individuals to claim transfers or refunds from that fund; 


(g) to amend section 4| of the State Bank of India Act, 955, section 0 
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 970 and section 0 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act, |980, so as to provide discretion to public sector banks 
in the matter of remuneration of auditors. 


4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 
The 6th August, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


BILt No. |l2 oF 2024 


A Bill to provide for the responsibilities, liabilities, rights and immunities 
attached to carriers with respect to the carriage of goods by sea and 
for matters connected therewith or related thereto. 


WHEREAS the delegates at the International Conference on Maritime Law 
held at Brussels in October, 922, agreed unanimously to recommend their 
respective Governments to adopt as the basis of a Convention a draft Convention 
for the unification of certain rules relating to bills of lading; 


AND WHEREAS at a meeting held at Brussels in October, 923, the rules 
contained in the said draft Convention were amended by the Committee appointed 
by the said Conference; 


AND WHEREAS the said rules were amended by the Protocol signed 


at Brussels on 23rd February, |968 and by the Protocol signed at Brussels 
on 2lst December, |979; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Application of 
Schedule. 


No implied 
absolute 
undertaking in 
contracts to 
which applicable 
tules apply. 


Statement as to 
application of 
Schedule to be 
included in bills 
of lading. 


Modification of 
Article VI of 
applicable rules 
in relation to 
goods carried in 
sailing ships and 
by specified 
routes. 


Modification of 
paragraphs 4 
and 5 of Article 
वा in relation to 
bulk cargoes. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
issue directions. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


AND WHEREAS it is expedient that the said rules as so amended and as set out 
with modifications in the Schedule thereto should, subject to the provisions of this 
Act, have the force of law with a view to establishing the responsibilities, 
liabilities, rights and immunities attaching to carriers under bills of lading. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “applicable rules” mean the applicable rules provided in the 
Schedule to this Act; 


(6) “notification” means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette and the expression “notify” with its grammatical variation and 
cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly; and 


(c) “Schedule” means the Schedule annexed to this Act. 


3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the applicable rules laid down in the 
Schedule shall have effect in relation to and in connection with the carriage of 
goods by sea in ships carrying goods from any port in India to any other port, 
whether in or outside India. 


4. There shall be no implied absolute undertaking in any contract for the 
carriage of goods by sea, to which the applicable rules apply, by the carrier of the 
goods to provide a seaworthy ship. 


5. Every bill of lading, or similar document of title, issued in India, which 
contains or is evidence of any contract to which the applicable rules apply, shall 
contain an express statement that it is to have effect subject to the applicable rules 
laid down in the Schedule, as applied by this Act. 


6. Article VI of the applicable rules shall, in relation to— 


(a) the carriage of goods by sea in sailing ships, carrying goods from 
any port in India to any other port whether in or outside India; 


(b) the carriage of goods by sea in ships, carrying goods from a port 
in India notified in this behalf, to a port in Sri Lanka specified in the said 
notification, 


have effect as though the said Article referred to goods of any class instead of to 
particular goods and as though the proviso to the second paragraph of the said 
Article were omitted. 


7. Where under the custom of any trade,— 


(a) the weight of any bulk cargo inserted in the bill of lading is a 
weight ascertained or accepted by a third party other than the carrier or the 
shipper; and 


(5) the fact that the weight is so ascertained or accepted is stated in the 
bill of lading, 


then, notwithstanding anything contained in the applicable rules, the bill of lading 
shall not be deemed to be prima facie evidence against the carrier of the receipt 
of goods of the weight so inserted in the bill of lading, and the accuracy thereof 
at the time of shipment shall not be deemed to have been guaranteed by the 
shipper. 


8. The Central Government may give such directions, as it may deem necessary, 
for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act. 


26 of 925. 


44 of 958. 


l0 of 897. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ll 


9. (7) If the Central Government is satisfied that is necessary or expedient 
so to do, it may, by notification, amend the Schedule. 


(2) Any amendment notified under sub-section (/) shall have effect as if 
enacted in this Act and shall come into force on the date of the notification, unless 
the notification otherwise directs. 


0. Every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should 
not be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done in pursuance of that notification. 


I. (Z) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to 
it to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of a period of two years, from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


2. (/) The Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 925 is hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act referred to in sub-section (J), it 
shall not affect,— 


(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything done or 
any action taken or purported to have been done or taken or suffered 
thereunder under the Act so repealed; or 


(6) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or 
incurred under the Act so repealed; or 


(c) the operation of any rule, notification, order, notice or direction 
issued or exemption granted thereunder, in so far as it is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, and shall be in force until it is repealed or 
superseded under the corresponding provisions of this Act; or 


(d) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty as aforesaid, and any such proceeding or 
remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty may 
be imposed as if that Act had not been repealed; or 


(e) the reference made to the repealed Act under any other legislation, 
rule, order, or any other legal instrument and any such reference shall, in so 
far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be construed to 
as a reference to this Act or its corresponding provisions. 


(3) Nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of section 33] and the 
provisions of Part XA, of the Merchant Shipping Act, 958, or the operation of 
any other enactment for the time being in force limiting the liability of the owners 
of sea-going vessels. 


(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of 
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 897 shall apply with regard to the effect of 
repeal. 


Power of 
Central 
Government to 
amend 
Schedule. 


Laying of 
notification 
before 
Parliament. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


THE SCHEDULE 
[See sections 3, 5 and 9] 
APPLICABLE RULES RELATING TO BILLS OF LADING 


ARTICLE I: Definitions —In these applicable rules the following expressions 
have the meanings hereby assigned to them respectively, that is to say— 


(a) “carriage of goods” covers the period from the time when the 
goods are loaded on to the time when they are discharged from the ship; 


(0) “carrier” includes the owner or the charterer who enters into a 
contract of carriage with a shipper; 


(c) “contract of carriage” applies only to contracts of carriage covered 
by a bill of lading or any similar document of title, in so far as such 
document relates to the carriage of goods by sea including any bill of lading 
or any similar document as aforesaid issued under or pursuant to a 
charterparty from the moment at which such bill of lading or similar 
document of title regulates the relations between a carrier and a holder of 
the same; 


(d) “goods” includes any property including live animals as well as 
containers, pallets or similar articles of transport or packaging supplied by 
the consignor, irrespective of whether such property is to be or is carried on 
or under deck; 


(e) “ship” means any vessel used for the carriage of goods by sea. 


ARTICLE II: Risks.—Subject to the provisions of Article VI, under every 
contract of carriage of goods by sea the carrier, in relation to the loading, handling, 
stowage, carriage, custody, care, and discharge of such goods, shall be subject to 
the responsibilities and liabilities, and entitled to the rights and immunities 
hereinafter set forth. 


ARTICLE III: Responsibilities and liabilities ——(/) The carrier shall be 
bound, before and at the beginning of the voyage, to exercise due diligence to — 


(a) make the ship seaworthy; 
(b) properly man, equip, and supply the ship; and 


(c) make the holds, refrigerating and cool chambers, and all other parts 
of the ship in which goods are carried, fit and safe for their reception, 
carriage and preservation. 


(2) Subject to the provisions of Article IV, the carrier shall properly and 
carefully load, handle, stow, carry, keep, care for and discharge the goods carried. 


(3) After receiving the goods into his charge, the carrier, or the master or 
agent of the carrier, shall, on demand of the shipper, issue to the shipper a bill of 
lading showing among other things— 


(a) the leading marks necessary for identification of the goods, as the 
same are furnished in writing by the shipper before the loading of such 
goods starts, provided such marks are stamped or otherwise shown clearly 
upon the goods if uncovered, or on the cases or coverings in which such 
goods are contained, in such a manner as should ordinarily remain legible 
until the end of the voyage; 


(8) either the number of packages or pieces, or the quantity, or weight, 
as the case may be, as furnished in writing by the shipper; 


(c) the apparent order and condition of the goods: 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


Provided that no carrier, master or agent of the carrier, shall be bound to 
state or show in the bill of lading any marks, number, quantity, or weight, which 
he has reasonable ground for suspecting not accurately to represent the goods 
actually received, or which he has had no reasonable means of checking. 


(4) Such a bill of lading shall be prima facie evidence of the receipt by the 
carrier of the goods as therein described in accordance with clauses (a), (b) 
and (c) of paragraph 3 of this Article. However, proof to the contrary shall not be 
admissible when the bill of lading has been transferred to a third party acting in 
good faith. 


(5) The shipper shall be deemed to have guaranteed to the carrier the 
accuracy at the time of shipment of the marks, number, quantity, and weight, as 
furnished by him, and the shipper shall indemnify the carrier against all loss, 
damages, and expenses arising or resulting from inaccuracies in such particulars. 
The right of the carrier to such indemnity shall in no way limit his responsibility 
and liability under the contract of carriage to any person other than the shipper. 


(6) (a) Unless notice of loss or damage and the general nature of such loss 
or damage be given in writing to the carrier or his agent at the port of discharge 
before or at the time of the removal of the goods into the custody of the person 
entitled to delivery thereof under the contract of carriage, or if, the loss or damage 
be not apparent, within three days, such removal shall be prima facie evidence of 
the delivery by the carrier of the goods as described in the bill of lading. 


(b) The notice in writing need not be given if the state of the goods has at 
the time of their receipt been the subject of joint survey or inspection. 


(c) In any event the carrier and the ship shall be discharged from all liability 
in respect of loss or damage unless suit is brought within one year after delivery of 
the goods or the date when the goods should have been delivered. This period may, 
however, be extended if the parties so agree after the cause of action has arisen: 


Provided that a suit may be brought after the expiry of the period of one year 
referred to in this sub-paragraph within a further period of not more than three 
months as allowed by the court. 


(d) In the case of any actual or apprehended loss or damage, the carrier and 
the receiver shall give all reasonable facilities to each other for inspecting and 
tallying the goods. 


(7) After the goods are loaded, the bill of lading to be issued by the carrier, 
master or agent of the carrier, to the shipper shall, if the shipper so demands, be a 
“shipped” bill of lading, provided that, if the shipper shall have previously taken 
up any document of title to such goods, he shall surrender the same as against the 
issue of the “shipped” bill of lading, but at the option of the carrier, such document 
of title may be noted at the port of shipment by the carrier, master, or agent with 
the name or names of the ship or ships upon which the goods have been shipped 
and the date or dates of shipment, and when so noted the same shall for the 
purpose of this Article be deemed to constitute a “shipped” bill of lading. 


(S) Any clause, covenant or agreement in a contract of carriage relieving the 
carrier or the ship from liability for loss or damage to or in connection with goods 
arising from negligence, fault or failure in the duties and obligations provided in 
this Article or lessening such liability otherwise than as provided in these 
applicable rules, shall be nu// and void and of no effect. 


(9) A benefit of insurance or similar clause shall be deemed to be a clause 
relieving the carrier from liability. 


ARTICLE IV: Rights and immunities —(/) Neither the carrier nor the ship 
shall be liable for loss or damage arising or resulting from unseaworthiness unless 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


caused by want of due diligence on the part of the carrier to make the ship 
seaworthy, and to secure that the ship is properly manned, equipped and supplied, 
and to make the holds, refrigerating and cool chambers and all other parts of the 
ship in which goods are carried fit and safe for their reception, carriage and 
preservation in accordance with the provisions of paragraph | of Article III. 
Whenever loss or damage has resulted from unseaworthiness, the burden of 
proving the exercise of due diligence shall be on the carrier or other person 
claiming exemption under this section. 


(2) Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be responsible for loss or damage 
arising or resulting from— 


(a) act, neglect, or default of the master, mariner, pilot, or the servants 
of the carrier in the navigation or in the management of the ship; 


(0) fire, unless caused by the actual fault or privity of the carrier; 

(c) perils, dangers and accidents of the sea or other navigable waters; 
(d) act of God; 

(e) act of war; 

(f) act of public enemies; 

(g) arrest or restraint of princes, rulers or people, or seizure under legal process; 
(A) quarantine restriction; 


(i) act or omission of the shipper or owner of the goods, his agent, or 
representative; 


(7) strikes or lock-outs or stoppage or restraint of labour from whatever 
cause, whether partial or general; 


(k) riots and civil commotions; 
(/) saving or attempting to save life or property at sea; 


(m) wastage in bulk or weight or any other loss or damage arising from 
inherent defect, quality, or vice of the goods; 


(n) insufficiency of packing; 
(०) insufficiency or inadequacy of marks; 
(p) latent defects not discoverable by due diligence; 


(q) any other cause arising without the actual fault or privity of the 
carrier, or without the fault or neglect of the agents or servants of the carrier, 
but the burden of proof shall be on the person claiming the benefit of this 
exception to show that neither the actual fault nor privity of the carrier nor 
the fault or neglect of the agents or servants of the carrier contributed to the 
loss or damage. 


(3) The shipper shall not be responsible for loss or damage sustained by the 
carrier or the ship arising or resulting from any cause without the act, fault or 
neglect of the shipper, his agents, or his servants. 


(4) Any deviation in saving or attempting to save life or property at sea, or 
any reasonable deviation shall not be deemed to be an infringement or breach of 
these applicable rules or of the contract of carriage, and the carrier shall not be 
liable for any loss or damage resulting therefrom. 


(5) (a) Neither the carrier nor the ship shall in any event be or become liable for 
any loss or damage to or in connection with goods in an amount exceeding 666.67 
Special Drawing Rights per package or unit or two Special Drawing Rights 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY I5 


per kilogram of gross weight of the goods lost or damaged, whichever is higher 
or the equivalent of that sum in other currency, unless the nature and value of such 
goods have been declared by the shipper before shipment and inserted in the bill 
of lading. This declaration if embodied in the bill of lading shall be prima facie 
evidence, but shall not be binding or conclusive on the carrier. 


(b) Where a container, pallet or similar article of transport is used to consolidate 
goods, the number of packages or units enumerated in the bill of lading and as packed 
in such article of transport shall be deemed to be the number of packages or units for 
the purposes of this paragraph as far as these packages or units are concerned. 


(c) Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be entitled to the benefit of 
limitation of liability provided for in this paragraph if it is proved that the damage 
resulted from an act or omission of the carrier done with intent to cause damage, 
or recklessly and with knowledge that damage would probably result. 


(d) Where the nature or value of the goods has been knowingly mis-stated 
by the shipper in the bill of lading, the liability of the carrier or ship shall not 
exceed the value so stated. 


(e) By agreement between the carrier, master or agent of the carrier and the 
shipper, another maximum amount than that mentioned in this paragraph may be 
fixed, provided that such maximum shall not be less than the figure above named. 


(f) Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be responsible in any event for loss 
or damage to or in connection with goods if the nature or value thereof has been 
knowingly mis-stated by the shipper in the bill of lading. 


(6) (a) Goods of an inflammable, explosive or dangerous nature to the 
shipment whereof the carrier, master or agent of the carrier, has not consented, 
with knowledge of their nature and character, may at any time before discharge 
be landed at any place or destroyed or rendered innocuous by the carrier without 
compensation, and the shipper of such goods shall be liable for all damages and 
expenses directly or indirectly arising out of or resulting from such shipment. 


(6) If any such goods shipped with such knowledge and consent shall 
become a danger to the ship or cargo, they may in like manner be landed at any 
place or destroyed or rendered innocuous by the carrier without liability on the 
part of the carrier except to general average, if any. 


ARTICLE V: Surrender of Rights and Immunities, and Increase of 
Responsibilities and Liabilities—A carrier shall be at liberty to surrender in 
whole or in part all or any of his rights and immunities or to increase any of his 
responsibilities and liabilities under the applicable rules contained in any of these 
Articles, provided such surrender or increase shall be embodied in the bill of 
lading issued to the shipper. The provisions of these applicable rules shall not 
apply to charterparties, but if bills of lading are issued in the case of a ship under 
a charterparty they shall comply with the terms of these applicable rules. Nothing 
in these applicable rules shall be held to prevent the insertion in a bill of lading of 
any lawful provision regarding general average. 


ARTICLE VI: Special conditions —Notwithstanding the provisions of the 
preceding Articles, a carrier, master or agent of the carrier, and a shipper shall, in 
regard to any particular goods be at liberty to enter into any agreement in any 
terms to the responsibility and liability of the carrier for such goods, and as to the 
rights and immunities of the carrier in respect of such goods, or his obligation as 
to seaworthiness, so far as this stipulation is not contrary to public policy, or the 
care or diligence of his servants or agents in regard to the loading, handling, 
stowage, carriage, custody, care, and discharge of the goods carried by sea, 
provided that in this case no bill of lading has been or shall be issued and that the 
terms agreed shall be embodied in a receipt which shall be a non-negotiable 
document and shall be marked as such. Any agreement so entered into shall have 
full legal effect: 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Provided that this Article shall not apply to ordinary commercial shipments 
made in the ordinary course of trade, but only to other shipments where the charter 
or condition of the property to be carried or the circumstances, terms and 
conditions under which the carriage is to be performed, are such as reasonably to 
justify a special agreement. 


ARTICLE VII: Limitations on the application of the applicable rules — 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a carrier or a shipper from entering into 
any agreement, stipulation, condition, reservation or exemption as to the 
responsibility and liability of the carrier or the ship for the loss or damage to or in 
connection with the custody and care and handling of goods prior to the loading 
on and subsequent to the discharge from the ship on which the goods are carried 
by sea. 


ARTICLE VIII: Limitation of liability—The provisions of these applicable 
rules shall not affect the rights and obligations of the carrier under any statute 
for the time being in force relating to the limitation of the liability of owners of 
sea-going vessels. 


ARTICLE IX: Gold value——The monetary units mentioned in these 
applicable rules are to be taken to be gold value. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l7 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 925 (the said Act) was enacted 
to amend the law with respect to carriage of goods by sea, with a view to 
establishing the responsibilities, liabilities, rights and immunities attaching to 
carriers under bills of lading. The said Act is substantially based on the 
International Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules of Law relating to 
Bills of Lading of August 924 (“Hague Rules”), which was amended by the 
Protocol signed at Brussels on 23rd February, 968 and on 2lst December, 979 
(“Visby Rules”). The Schedule to the said Act, provided the Hague Rules, as 
amended by the Visby Rules, with modifications, to be referred to as “Rules” in 
the said Act. 


2. The said Act is applicable to outward cargo, that is, ships carrying goods 
from Indian port to any other port, whether in or outside India. Every bill of lading, 
or similar document of title, issued in India, which contains or is evidence of any 
contract to which the rules apply, shall contain an express statement that it is to 
have effect subject to the provisions of the rules as applied by the said Act. 


3. Though the substantive aspects of the said Act continue to remain relevant 
for maritime trade, being a pre-independence statute, it is imperative that some 
new provisions need to be incorporated therein without changing the substance or 
spirit of the said Act, so as to bring it in line with modern legislations in order to 
facilitate simplification and ease of understanding. 


4. Accordingly, it is proposed to repeal and re-enact the said Act with a 
new legislation and for the said purpose, to introduce the Carriage of Goods by 
Sea Bill, 2024 in Parliament. The salient features of the modifications proposed 
in the Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill, 2024, inter alia, are— 


(a) to substitute the term “Rules” with “applicable rules”, which provides 
for Hague Rules, as amended by the Visby Rules, with modifications; 


(0) to empower the Central Government to amend the Schedule by 
notification in the Official Gazette and to provide for laying of every such 
notification before Parliament; 


(c) to empower the Central Government to issue such directions as it 
may deem fit to carry out all or any of the provisions of the Act; 
y y MA p 


(d) to omit the transitional provision relating to non-applicability of 
the Rules under the said Act, proposed to be repealed, to contract for the 
carriage of goods by sea before the first day of January, 926; 


(e) to provide for necessary repeal and savings. 


5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; SARBANANDA SONOWAL. 
The 6th August, 2024. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


BILt No. I] oF 2024 


A Bill to make provisions for the transfer of rights of suit and all liabilities 
to the consignee named in a bill of lading and every endorsee of a bill of 
lading, to whom the property in the goods mentioned in the bill of lading 
shall pass, upon or by reason of a consignment or an endorsement, and 
for matters connected therewith or related thereto. 


WHEREAS by the custom of merchants, a bill of lading of goods being 
transferable by endorsement, the property in the goods may thereby pass to the 
endorsee, but nevertheless all rights in respect of the contract contained in the bill 
of lading continue in the original shipper or owner; 


AND WHEREAS it is expedient that such rights should pass with the property; 


9 of 856. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


AND WHEREAS it frequently happens that the goods in respect of which bills 
of lading purport to be signed have not been laden on board; 


AND WHEREAS it is proper that such bills of lading in the hands of a bona fide 
holder for value should not be questioned by the master or other person signing 
the same, on the ground of the goods not having been laden as aforesaid. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (Z) This Act may be called the Bills of Lading Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. Every consignee of goods named in a bill of lading and every endorsee of 
a bill of lading, to whom the property in the goods therein mentioned shall pass, 
upon or by reason of such consignment or endorsement, shall have transferred to 
and vested in him all rights of suit, and be subject to the same liabilities in respect 
of such goods as if the contract contained in the bill of lading had been made with 
such consignee or endorsee. 


3. Nothing contained in this Act shall prejudice or affect— 
(a) any right of stoppage in transit; or 
(8) any right to claim freight against the original shipper or owner; or 


(c) any liability of the consignee or endorsee by reason or in consequence 
of his being such consignee or endorsee, or of his receipt of the goods by 
reason or in consequence of such consignment or endorsement. 


4. (J) Every bill of lading in the hands of a consignee or endorsee for 
valuable consideration, representing goods to have been shipped on board a 
vessel, shall be conclusive evidence of such shipment as, against the master or 
other person signing the same, notwithstanding that such goods or some part 
thereof may not have been so shipped: 


Provided that the master or other person so signing may exonerate himself 
in respect of such misrepresentation, by showing that it was caused without any 
default on his part, and wholly by the fraud of the shipper, or of the holder, or 
some person under whom the holder claims. 


(2) Nothing in sub-section (/) shall apply where the holder of the bill of 
lading shall have had actual notice at the time of receiving such bill of lading that 
the goods had not been laden on board. 


5. The Central Government may give such directions, as it may deem 
necessary, for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act. 


6. (/) The Indian Bills of Lading Act, 856 is hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act referred to in sub-section (J), it 
shall not affect 


(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything done or 
any action taken or purported to have been or taken or suffered thereunder 
under the Act so repealed; or 


(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or 
incurred under the Act so repealed; or 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Rights under 
bills of lading to 
vest in 
consignee or 
endorsee. 


Right of 
stoppage in 
transit or claims 
for freight not to 
be affected. 


Bill of lading in 
hands of 
consignee, etc., 
conclusive 
evidence of 
shipment as 
against master, 
etc. 


Power of 
Central 
Government to 
give directions. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(c) the operation of any rule, notification, order, notice or direction 
issued, or exemption granted thereunder, in so far as it is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, and shall be in force until it is repealed or 
superseded under the corresponding provisions of this Act; or 


(d) any penalty incurred in respect of any contravention under the Act 
so repealed; or 


(e) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty as aforesaid, and any such proceeding or 
remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty may 
be imposed as if that Act had not been repealed; 


(f) the reference made to the repealed Act under any other legislation, 
rule, order, or any other legal instrument and any such reference shall, in so 
far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be construed as a 
reference to this Act or its corresponding provisions. 


(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of 
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 897 shall apply with regard to the effect — 0 of 897. 
of repeal. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Indian Bills of Lading Act, 856 (the said Act) was enacted to amend the 
Law relating to Bills of Lading with a view to address two aspects, namely,— 


(a) transferring of all rights in respect of the contract contained in the 
bill of lading along with the property to the consignee or endorsee of the bill 
of lading; and 


(0) ensuring that a transferred bill of lading in the hands of a bona fide 
holder be treated as conclusive evidence of the goods being laden on board. 


2. Since endorsement of rights over bills of lading is an important aspect of 
its use in carriage of goods by sea, the provisions of the said Act have extensive 
commercial applicability and is crucial to determine the transfer of rights of suit 
and liabilities to endorsees and consignees to whom any bill of lading has been 
transferred. 


3. Though the substantive aspects of the said Act continue to remain 
relevant, being a pre-independence statute, it is imperative that the provisions of 
the said Act require to be revisited without changing the substance or spirit of the 
said Act, so as to bring it in line with modern legislations in order to facilitate 
simplification and ease of understanding. Further, a new provision is proposed to 
be incorporated to empower the Central Government to issue directions to carry 
out the provisions of the proposed legislation. 


4. Accordingly, it is proposed to repeal and reenact the said Act with a new 
legislation and for the said purpose, to introduce the Bills of Lading Bill, 2024 in 
Parliament. 


5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; SARBANANDA SONOWAL. 
The 6th August, 2024. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bit No. II3 oF 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Railways Act, |989. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 

. (J) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2024. 

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 2 of the Railways Act, 989 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), after clause (/A), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(/B) “Board” means the Railway Board constituted under sub-section (/) 
of section 2A;’. 


24 of 989. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


3. After Chapter I of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be Insertion of new 
inserted, namely:— Chapter IA. 


“CHAPTER IA 
RAILWAY BOARD 


2A. (/) There shall be constituted a body to be known as the Railway Railway Board. 
Board to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions 
assigned to it under this Act and the Railway Board constituted under the 
Resolution of the Government of India, Public Works Department No. 256G, 
dated the l8th February, 905, with its composition as revised from time to 
time, shall be deemed to be the Railway Board constituted under this Act. 


(2) The Central Government may, by notification, invest the Railway 
Board, either absolutely or subject to any conditions, with all or any of the 
powers or functions of the Central Government under this Act with respect 
to all or any Railways. 


(3) The qualification, experience and terms and conditions of appointment 
of the Chairman and the other Members of the Board and the manner of 
filling up the said posts shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Board shall consist of such number of Members as may be 
prescribed. 


(5) The Board shall be provided with a Secretary and such officers and 
other employees as may be necessary to exercise such powers and discharge 
such duties under this Act and all correspondence shall be addressed to the 
Secretary to the Board. 


(6) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other 
officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(7) The Chairman and Members of the Board appointed under the 
Resolution of the Government of India, Public Works Department No. 256G, 
dated the l8th February, 905, with its composition as revised from time to 
time and the Secretary, officers and other employees appointed to the Board 
before the commencement of the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2024, shall be 
deemed to have been appointed under this Act: 


Provided that the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman, 
Members, Secretary, officers and other employees of the Board holding the 
office as such immediately before the commencement of the Railways 
(Amendment) Act, 2024 shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their 


appointment. 
2B. Any notice, determination, direction, requisition, appointment, Mode of 
expression of opinion, approval or sanction, to be given or signified on the signifying 
part of the Board, for any of the purposes of, or in relation to, any powers or See 
rom Board. 


functions with which it may be invested by notification under sub-section (2) 
of section 2A, shall be sufficient and binding if in writing signed by the 
Secretary to the Board, or by any other person authorised by the said Board 
to act in its behalf in respect of the matters to which such authorisation may 
relate; and the Board shall not in any case be bound in respect of any of the 
matters aforesaid unless by some writing signed in manner aforesaid.” 


Amendment of 
section 200. 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


4. In section 200 of the principal Act,— 


(7) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(॥) The Indian Railways Act, l890 and the Indian Railway 
Board Act, 905 are hereby repealed.”’; 


(ii) in sub-section (2),— 


(a) in the opening portion, for the words, figures and brackets 
“the Indian Railways Act, 890 (hereinafter referred to as the repealed 
Act)”, the words, figures and brackets “the Indian Railways Act, 890 
and the Indian Railway Board Act, 905 (hereinafter referred to as the 
repealed Acts)” shall be substituted; 


(b) in clause (a), for the words “the repealed Act”, the words “the 
repealed Acts” shall be substituted; 


(2) in clause (6), for the words “the repealed Act”, at both the 
places where they occur, the words and figures “the Indian Railways 
Act, 890” shall be substituted. 


9 of 890. 
4 of 905. 


9 of 890. 


4 of 905. 


9 of 890. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Establishment of railway network started as a branch of the Public Works 
Department before independence. 


2. When the network expanded, Indian Railways Act, 890, was enacted to 
enable proper functioning of different railway entities. 


3. As railways gained popularity, many Princely States and other entities 
came up to establish and expand railway network. 


4. Soon it was realised that railways need a structure different from the 
Public Works Department because of two major reasons, namely:— 


(a) First, railway is an operating organisation and therefore, it requires 
flexibility and independent policy making. 


(b) Second, railway has network effect and therefore, uniform 
standards are needed for harmonious development. 


5. Based on the aforesaid reasons, railway organisation was separated from 
the Public Works Department. The Railway Board Act, !905 was enacted. 


6. A contemporary railway law, the Railways Act, !989 was enacted in 989 
by repealing the Indian Railways Act, 890. That time itself, the Indian 
Railway Board Act, !905 could also have been merged with the main law to 
make it comprehensive. 


7. The current Bill proposes to simplify the legal framework by 
incorporating the proposals of the Indian Railway Board Act, |905 in the Railways 
Act, 989. This will reduce the need to refer to two laws. Instead reference will be 
required only to one law. 


8. The functioning and independence of Railway Board will be enhanced 
with this Bill. All the provisions in the Indian Railway Board Act, 905 are 
proposed to be incorporated in the Railways Act, 989 through this Bill. 


New DELHI; ASHWINI VAISHNAW. 
The 7th August, 2024. 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill seeks to repeal the Indian Railway Board Act, 905 by suitably 
incorporating the provisions for constitution and composition of Railway Board into 
the Railways Act, 989. The Railway Board is already in existence. The expenditure 
of Railway Board will continue to be met from yearly Budgetary provision under 
revenue Budget of Indian Railways as being done presently. The Bill does not 
propose to create any new Board or body resulting in additional financial 
implication. 


2. The provisions regarding the terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairman, Members of the Board, Secretary and the officers and other employees’ 
are already in place and no change is proposed in the proposed Bill. These provisions 
may result in expenditure in the discharge of statutory functions of the Government 
in regular course of business, which would be met from yearly budgetary provision 
under revenue segment of Railway’s budget. However, any additional financial 
implication at this stage is not quantifiable. 


3. The expenditure for Railway Board proposed to be constituted as statutory 
body under the Railways Act, 989 would continue to be met from budgetary 
provision under revenue segment of Railway’s budget. The Budget allocation for 
the Railway Board for financial year 2024-25 is Rs. 440.0] crore under Revenue 
Head. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
make rules for providing the qualification, experience and terms and conditions of 
appointment of the Chairman and the other Members of the Railway Board and the 
manner of filling up the said posts. 


2. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause empowers the Central Government to 
make rules for providing the Board with such number of Members. 


3. Sub-clause (6) of the said clause empowers the Central Government to 
make rules for providing the terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and 
other officers and employees of the Board. 


4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in 
the Bill itself. The delegation of Legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary General 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-0054. 


soe Digitally signed by Kshitiz 
Kshitiz et 


Date: 2024.08.09 22:5:42 
Mohan 0830 


MGIPMRND—20GI(S3)—9-8-2024. 


