रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. 0. L.-33004/99 


Aid > राज्जपतन्र 


Che Gazette of Jndia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-09062025-263674 
CG-DL-E-09062025-263674 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 


भाग 1--खण्ड 3---उप-खण्ड (iii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (iii) 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं. 19] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, जून 2 , 2025/ /ज्येष्ठ 12, 1947 
No. 19] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, JUNE 2, 2025/ JYAISTHA 12, 1947 


भारत निर्वाचन आयोग 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2025 


आ. अ. 19(अ).--लोक प्रतिनिधित्व अधिनियम, 1951 (1951 का 43) की धारा 106 के अनुसरण 
में भारत निर्वाचन आयोग एतट्दारा वर्ष 2019 की निर्वाचन याचिका सं. 1 में बंबई उच्च न्यायालय का 
निर्णय/आदेश दिनांक 01/04/2024 प्रकाशित करता है। 


[फा. सं. 82/एमएच-एचपी/1/2019] 
आदेश से, 
अजय कुमार, प्रधान सचिव 


ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 30th May, 2025 
O. N. 19(E).— In pursuance of Section 106 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 


1951) the Election Commission of India hereby publishes the judgment/order dated 01/04/2024 of the 
High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Election Petition No. 1 of 2019. 


[F. No. 82/MH-HP/1/2019] 
By Order, 
AJOY KUMAR, Principal secy. 
3605 GI/2025 (1) 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART I—SEC. 3(iii)] 


IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY 
ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION 
APPLICATION [L] NO.31043 OF 2023 
IN 
ELECTION PETITION NO.1 OF 2019 


Shri Sha Bra Dr. Jaisiddeshwar 
Shivacharya Mahaswamiji @ 


Nurandswami Gurubasayya Hiremath 


1 


Age: 63, Occ. Farmer, 

R/o. Sansthan Hiremath, Gaudgaon (BU) | 
Mukkam Post: Mauje Gaudgaon, ] 

Tal. : Akkalkot, Dist: Solapur - 413227. | APPLICANT 


IN THE MATTER BETWEEN: 


Kirtikumar Dattatray Shivsaran 
Age: 26, Occupation : Student 
Opp. Dr. Ambedkar Udyan, 
41/187, New Budhwar Peth, 
Anand Chowk, Solapur, 


eee) 


Maharashtra : 413 002. PETITIONER 
V/s. 
Shri Sha Bra Dr. Jaisiddeshwar ] 
Shivacharya Mahaswamiji @ ] 
Nurandswami Gurubasayya Hiremath ] 
Age: 63, Occ. Farmer, ] 
R/o. Sansthan Hiremath, Gaudgaon (BU) | 
Mukkam Post: Mauje Gaudgaon, ] 
Tal. : Akkalkot, Dist: Solapur — 413227. ] RESPONDENT 
a/w 
ELECTION PETITION NO.1 OF 2019 
a/w 
AEP [L] NO.26326 OF 2023 
A/W 
AEP [L] NO.28041 OF 2023 
IN 


ELECTION PETITION NO.1 OF 2019 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


Kirtikumar Dattatray Shivsaran 
Age: 26, Occupation : Student 
Opp. Dr. Ambedkar Udyan, 
41/187, New Budhwar Peth, 
Anand Chowk, Solapur, 
Maharashtra : 413 002. 


V/s. 


Shri Sha Bra Dr. Jaisiddeshwar 
Shivacharya Mahaswamiji @ 
Nurandswami Gurubasayya Hiremath 


Age: 63, Occ. Farmer, 


1 >> 


PETITIONER 


Se) 


R/o. Sansthan Hiremath, Gaudgaon (BU) | 
Mukkam Post: Mauje Gaudgaon, ] 
Tal. : Akkalkot, Dist: Solapur — 413227. ] RESPONDENT 


Mr. S.R. Ganbavale a/w Mr. Kush M. Lahankar i/b Mr. Abhijit Patil, for Applicant. 


Mr. Prakash Ambedkar i/b Mr. Sandeep Rankhambe, for Respondent. 


CORAM : PRITHVIRAJ K. CHAVAN, J. 
RESERVED ON : 4% JANUARY, 2024. 
PRONOUNCED ON: 1° APRIL, 2024. 
ORDER: 
1. This is an application moved by the applicant — returned candidate - Sha _ Bra 


5. 


Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji @ Nurandswami Gurubasayya Hiremath 
under Order — VII, Rule -11 (a) and (d) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short 
“C.P.C”) for rejection of the Election Petition on the ground that the petition neither 
discloses any cause of action nor is in compliance with the provisions of Section 81 (3) of 
The Representation of the People Act, 1951 (for short “Act”). 


Applicant is the original respondent in the Election Petition whose election to 4274 
Solapur (SC) Lok Sabha General Election Constituency, 2019 has been challenged by the 
respondent (original petitioner) by stating that the said election is void. 


The applicant, upon receiving summons in the Election Petition filed a written 
statement accompanied with certain documents. 


It is contended that the entire Election Petition hinges on a single allegation, namely 
the vulnerability of Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) employed in general elections. 
The respondent-original petitioner contended that discrepancy of 132 votes existed between 
the votes cast and the votes counted. 


The applicant contends that the respondent’s Election Petition lacks specific 


allegations and primarily serves as a platform to address the issue of EMV usage in the 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i11)] 


electoral process. According to the applicant, this matter is akin to a Public Interest 
Litigation. 


6. It is the specific contention of the applicant that there is non compliance of Section 
81 of the Act. Section 81, sub-section (3) mandates that every Election Petition shall be 
accompanied by as many copies thereof as there are respondents mentioned in the 
Election Petition and every such copy shall be attested by the petitioner with his own 
signature to be a true copy of the petition. The applicant, therefore, states that till this date, 
the respondent has failed to provide a copy of the original Election Petition and, instead, 
has served an amended version. Even the amended Election Petition lacks attestation by the 
respondent under his own signature to confirm it’s accuracy as a true copy of the original 
petition. Neither the respondent nor his legal Counsel have affixed their signatures to the 
Election Petition or it’s annexures as “True Copy”. Original copies of the Election Petition 
were never provided to the applicant. Copies of the amended Election Petition also lack 
original signature of the respondent anywhere on the Election Petition or it’s 
annexures. It is further contended that non compliance or failure to attest the copies under 
his original signature as “True Copy” is fatal in the maintainability of the — Election 
Petition. Election Petition, on this ground, alone is liable to be rejected under Section 86 (1) of 
the said Act. 


Ts It is further contended that the Election Petition is liable to be dismissed on the 
ground of non joinder of necessary parties as contemplated under Section 82 of the Act since, 
admittedly, the respondent has not joined all the candidates who contested the said election of 
4274 Solapur Lok Sabha General Constituency, 2019. 


8. It is contended that cause title of the Election Petition admits that the respondent 
is an ordinary resident of New Budhwar Peth, Anand Chowk, District Solapur. However, 
the entire Petition is devoid of any pertinent information as to how the respondent has been 
aggrieved by the election of the applicant as a Member of Parliament from the 42™ Solapur 
Lok Sabha General Elections in 2019. Additionally, the Election Petition fails to provide 
any details as to whether the respondent has exercised his right to vote in Solapur during the 
said General Elections. The Election Petition is liable to be dismissed on this count also. 


9. The applicant further contends that the Election Petition is also liable to be 
dismissed on the ground that there are no averments as to whether the respondent exercised 
his right to vote in Solapur during the said general elections. The applicant contends that the 
respondent averred non compliance of the provisions of Section 65 of the Act and corrupt 
practice by the Election Commission of India as well as Returning Officer thereby benefiting 
the applicant, however, no material facts or particulars have been pleaded in respect of the 
aforesaid allegations. He would argue that material fact herein is the EVM Machine. The 
Election Petition deserves to be dismissed for non disclosure of any cause of action for filing 
the Election Petition as contemplated under Order — VII, Rule - 11 (a) of the C.P.C. 


10. According to the applicant, the Election Petition notably lacks any mention or substantive 
discourse concerning the concept of “Corrupt Practice”, which holds significance in 
the context of Election disputes, as defined under Sections 1, 2 and 3 of the Act. The Election 
Petition also lacks details of any alleged corrupt practice, in the sense, the respondent has not 
addressed छा. elucidated upon any potential instances or allegations of conduct that might 
fall within the ambit of corrupt practices, as defined and prescribed by the statutory provisions 
under the Act. Even if paragraphs 4 to 11 are taken into consideration at it’s face value, no 
cause of action is disclosed, much less, grounds under Section 100 of the Act. It is contended 
that there is not a single material fact or particular pleaded by the respondent in support of his 
grievance set out in paragraph 3 of the Election Petition, or for that matter, anywhere in the 
Election Petition. The Election Petition, therefore, deserves to be dismissed. 


11. According to the applicant, mere non compliance of the provisions of the Act cannot 
serve as a ground for filing an Election Petition unless and until it is specifically pleaded that 
the election’s outcome, as it pertains to a returned candidate, has been materially affected. The 
applicant states that upon reviewing the Election _ Petition, it is evident that the respondent 
has not pleaded anywhere in the petition that election’s result, concerning the 
applicant, has been materially affected due to non compliance with the provisions of Section 
65 of the Act. The respondent has failed to plead even a single material fact or particular about 
alleged corrupt practice on the part of the Election Commission of India and the Returning 
Officer. There is even no pleading in respect of a single material fact or particular about any 
benefit received by the applicant. None of _ the allegations of corrupt practice alleged by the 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


respondent falls within the purview of Section 123 of the said Act. It has not been pointed out 
under which ground of Section 100 the allegations of corrupt practice fall. 


12. It is further stated that an affidavit filed by the respondent is not in the prescribed 
form as provided by the Act and the rules framed thereunder in support of the allegations of 
corrupt practice. Affidavit filed by the respondent is not an affidavit in the eyes of _ law and, 
hence, failure to file an affidavit in requisite form, both in form and substance, is fatal to the 
maintainability of the Election Petition. 


13. Paragraphs 5 to 7 of the Election Petition do not contain any single material fact 
or particular about alleged corrupt practice falling within the purview of Section 123 of the 
said Act. 


14. There is no averment in the Election Petition establishing the applicant’s status as an 
“Elector” as envisaged under Section 21 of the Act. 


15. Amendment carried out by the respondent in the Election Petition by adding 
paragraphs 31 (A) to 31 (D) is without any order of this Court granting leave to amend the 
Petition. This is in breach of Rule — 150 of the Bombay High Court (Original Side) Rules. 
The applicant states that there is non compliance of mandatory provisions of Section 81 (3) 
of the Act. 


16. The applicant has placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in case 
of Dahiben Vs. Arvind Bhai, 2020 (7) Supreme Court Cases, 366 wherein it is held that 
powers under Order VII - Rule 11 of C.P.C. may be exercised by the Court at any 
stage of the suit, either before registering the plaint, or after issuing the summons to the 
Defendants, or before conclusion of the trial. The plea that once issues are framed, 
the matter may not necessarily go to trial cannot be accepted. The applicant has, therefore, 
prayed for rejection of the Election Petition. 


17. In his reply, the respondent has raised several objections and grounds to reject the 
application under Order-VII, Rule-11 of the C.P.C. It is contended that the Returning Officer 
appointed by the Election Commission of India is entrusted with the responsibility of safe 
custody of the Electronic Voting Machines. Custody of the Electronic Voting Machines is also 
the responsibility of the Returning Officer/District Election Officer. The Returning Officer 
of Lokshabha Constituency of 42™ Solapur admitted in his Affidavit-in-Reply to the 
Election Petition that there is a difference in the polled votes and the counted votes. Non 
tallying of votes is in contravention of Section 65 of the Act. It is contended that the 
applicant has not approached this Court with clean hands as _application seeking rejection of 
the Election Petition under Order- VII, Rule-11 of the C.P.C itself is not tenable since 
despite service of _ the Election Petition upon the applicant on 10" July, 2019, areply came 
to be filed on 8" August, 2023 i.e nearly after 1490 days. In _ view of Order-VIII, Rule-1 of 
the C.P.C, written statement is to be 166 within 30 days of receipt of summons. The 
Court may extend time by 90 days. As such, the application which has been filed after such a 
long delay needs to be rejected. 


18. The respondent contends that the declaration of the election result without verifying 
whether the polled votes and counted votes are equal amounts to subversion of the rules and 
directions issued by the Election Commission under Article 324 of the Constitution and is 
the crux of the present Election Petition. There is non compliance of Section 65 and 66 of 
the Act as well as Rules and directions of the Election Commission. It is not true that the 
respondent has not complied with the requirement of Section 86 (1) of the Act. Contention 
of the applicant as regards non compliance of Section 81 (3) of the Act is misleading and 
tantamount to casting aspersion on the office of this Court. The respondent contends that he 
had filed six photo copies of the Election Petition before Master and Prothonotary (Judicial) 
of this Court. Each copy is attested by the respondent under his own signature to be a true 
copy. The duly attested copies have been served upon the applicant through Registered Post 
Acknowledgment Due. The allegations levelled by the applicant are, thus baseless and 
frivolous. 


19. The respondent has referred sub-clause 15.30. The Election Commission of India 
has framed rules. The said rules provide that if there is a difference between polled votes 
and counted votes then the matter should be referred to the Election Commission of India 
and after receiving the directions from the Election Commission of India, result shall be 
declared as per it’s directions. Thus, averments set out in the Election Petition, according 
to the respondent, are quite relevant. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i11)] 


20. Material fact and legal corruption mentioned by the respondent in the Election 
Petition falls within the purview of Section 100, sub-section-1 (d) (ii) and (iv) of the Act. 
The respondent has referred Rule - 986 of the Bombay High Court Original Side Rules as 
well as the rules framed in regard to election petitions 1.6 Rule — 8 of the Election Petition 
Rules. 


21. It is further contended that Sections 86, 108 and 116 of the Act lay down 
requirement for dismissal of the Election Petition. Once such provision is enacted in the Act, 
provisions of the C.P.C cannot be applied. The respondent has, therefore, prayed for 
dismissal of the application with costs. 


22. I heard Mr. Ganabavale, learned Counsel for the applicant as well as 
Mr. Ambedkar, learned Counsel for the respondent at a considerable length. 


23. The salient features highlighted by Mr. Ganbavale in support of his contention of 
rejection of the Election Petition are multiple, however, the main contention is that not only 
the Election Petition needs to be rejected in view of Order-VII, Rule-11 (d) of the C.P.C but 
also for non compliance of Sections 65, 82 and 86 (1) of the Act as well as for want of 
grounds which are required to be stated in view of Section 100 (1) (b) of the said Act. He 
would argue that no material facts or particulars are pleaded in respect of the allegations of 
corruption by the respondent. There is non compliance of Rule-94-A of the Conduct of 
Election Rules, 1961. 


24. Mr. Ganbavale would further argue that there are several averments in the 
Election Petition which are factually incorrect, meaning thereby, the respondent had never 
contested the election and, therefore, the Election Petition cannot be continued on that 
ground also. He would argue that it is not known whether the respondent was an elector 
or a candidate for the elections of Loksabha Constituency of 42nd Solapur General 
Elections which were held on 29" April, 2019. Certain bald statements are made in the 
Election Petition sans affidavit as per the requirement of Form No.25. Mr. Ganbavale has 
taken me through the contents of the Election Petition, threadbare, to highlight various 
lacunae and as such, prayed for dismissal of the Election Petition. In support of his 
contention, Mr. Ganabavale has placed reliance upon following three decisions; 


(a) Eldeco Housing and Industries Limited Vs. Ashok 
Vidyarthi and others, (2023 SCC Online SC 1612); 


(b) Kamala and others Vs. K.T. Eshwara SA and others; 


(c) Dahiben Vs/ Arvindbhai Kalyanji Bhanusali through Legal 
Representatives, (2020) 7 SCC 366. 


in regard to Order-VII, Rule-11(d) of the C.P.C. 


25: Mr. Ambedkar, learned Counsel for the respondent vehemently argued that the 
Election Petition involves a very vital point of national importance wherein the authenticity 
of Electronic Voting Machines is in question. He would invite my attention to Section 
100 (1) (9) (1) and (iv) and 100 (2) (d) of the Act by contending that election of the 
aforesaid Constituency had been materially affected by corrupt practices committed in the 
interest of the applicant — returned candidate. Apart from the aforesaid fact, there was non 
compliance of the provisions of the Constitution as well as as the Act. 


26. While countering the arguments of Mr. Ganbavale, Mr. Ambedkar would contend 
that the Election Petition contains concise statement of all the material facts on which it 
relies. Particulars of corrupt practices have been averred in the petition, more particularly, in 
paragraphs 5 and 6. Mr. Ambedkar would invite my attention to clause (b) of Article 329 of 
the Constitution of India which bars jurisdiction of Court in election matters. He would 
argue that it is not the statutory but a constitutional right to challenge the Election and, 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


therefore, application as moved by the applicant — returned candidate belatedly, is only in 
order to thwart the Election Petition. 


27. As far as cause of action is concerned, learned Counsel would submit that since 
there is breach of duty not only on the part of the the Election Commission but also on 
the part of the Returning Officer which, in fact, is a cause of action to file the present 
Election Petition. He would argue that the Returning Officer committed breach of the duty in 
not referring the matter to the Election Commission but, declared the result and, therefore, it 
gave rise to a cause of action. Mr. Ambedkar would, however, submit that there are no 
specific allegations of corrupt practices. According to him, act of the Election Commission 
being “partisan” amounts _ to corrupt practice. 


28. The learned Counsel would further contend that the written statement has not been 
filed within 90 days as it has been delayed by a considerable period and, therefore, it cannot 
be heard to say that the Election Petition needs to be rejected under Order-VII, Rule— 11 
(d) of the C.P.C. It is submitted that there are no averments in the written statement as 
regards non mention of material facts in the Election Petition. Mr. Ambedkar would argue 
that since the evidence of Returning Officer has already been recorded on 
22704 August, 2023 and in his evidence, the Returning Officer admitted difference of votes 
being “technical mistake”, it would not be appropriate to reject the Election Petition at 
this stage. The Counsel has emphasized that will of the people has not been reflected in the 
aforesaid election but it was the will of the Electronic Voting Machines which is against the 
principles of democracy. Entire exercise of the applicant, according to Mr. Ambedkar, is 
only to stall the proceedings with an ulterior motive, especially when a_ witness has 
already been examined. He submits that in view of Rule - 9 (Appendix - व) of the High 
Court Original Side Rules, there is due compliance of Sections 83 and 86 of the Act. 


29. Learned Counsel has invited my attention to Rule-11 of the High Court Original 
Side Rules vis-a-vis Section 97 of the Act which contemplates recrimination when seat 
claimed. The Counsel has, therefore, prayed for rejection of the application. 


30. Before adverting to the averments in the Election Petition, it would be expedient to 
have a quick look at the provisions of Order- VII, Rule-11 (a) and (d) of the C.P.C. The 
underlying object of Order-VII, Rule — 11 (a) and (d) is that if in a suit, no cause of 
action is disclosed, or the suit is barred by any law, the Court would not permit the plaintiff 
to unnecessarily protract the proceedings in the suit or in the petition so that further 
judicial time is not wasted if on the minute reading of the petition it is found that the same is 
found without any merit and does not disclose any right to sue, then the Court would be 
justified in exercising powers under the said provisions. It is equally true that the powers 
under Order-7, Rule- 11 can be exercised by the Court at any stage of the suit either 
before registering the plaint, or before issuing summons to the defendant/respondent or 
before conclusion of the trial. Learned Counsel for the applicant has, therefore, rightly 
placed useful reliance upon a latest judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of 
Eldeco Housing and Industries Limited Vs. Ashok Vidyarthi and others,'. The 
Supreme Court has drawn support from it’s earlier decisions while discussing the scope of 
Order-VII, Rule-11 of the C.P.C. 


31. Mr. Ganbavale has strenuously urged to dismiss the Election Petition on the 
ground that not only it does not disclose cause of action or a triable issues but there is non 
compliance of various sections of the Act viz: Section 65, 81 (3) and 82. Section 82 of the 
Act reads thus; 


“82. Parties to the petition.- A petitioner shall join as respondents 
to his petition - 


1 (2023) SCC Online SC, 1612. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i11)] 


(a) where the petitioner, in addition to claiming a 
declaration that the election of all or any of the returned candidates 
is void, claims a further declaration that he himself or any other 
candidate has been duly elected, all the contesting candidates other 
than the petitioner, and where no such further declaration is 
claimed, all the returned candidates; and 


(b) any other candidate against whom allegations of any 
corrupt practice are made in the petition”. 


a2: Admittedly, the respondent has not joined all the candidates who contested the 
said Election of 42nd Solapur (SC) Loksabha Constituency, 2019 which is mandatory 
and, therefore, the Election Petition can be dismissed in view of Section 86 of the said 
Act. Mr. Ganbavale has invited my attention to the photostat copy of final result of the 
election to the house of the people from 42 - Solapur (SC) Parliamentary Constituency. 
Final result sheet indicates 13 candidates who were in the fray. Applicant — Sha 
Bra. Dr. Jai Siddeshwar Shivachary Mahaswamiji secured highest number of votes. 
Admittedly, except respondent’s candidate viz: Prakash Yashwant Ambedkar, none 
of other candidates who contested the said election have been joined for the reasons 
best known to the respondent. Section 86 provides that the High Court shall dismiss an 
election petition which does not comply with the provisions of section 81 or section 82 
or section 117 of the Act. There is no satisfactory answer to this argument of the 
learned Counsel for the applicant. The Election Petition, thus, can be dismissed in view 
of section 86 of the Act. 


33. It is the contention of Mr. Ganbavale that the title clause of the Election Petition 
reveals that respondent is an ordinary student residing opposite Dr. Ambedkar Udyan, 
41/187, New Budhwar Peth, Anand Chowk, Solapur. A bare look at the Election Petition 
reveals no information as to how and in what manner, the respondent is aggrieved by the 
aforesaid general election of the applicant as a Member of Parliament from 427 Solapur 
General Elections, 2019. The Election Petition is sans any averments as to whether the 
respondent exercised his right to vote during the said election. Section 81 of the Act reads 
thus; 


“81. Presentation of petitions.- (1) An election petition calling in 
question any election may be presented on one or more of the 
grounds specified in [sub-section (1) of section 100 and section 
101 to the [High Court] by any candidate at such election or any 
elector [within forty-five days from, but not earlier than, the date of 
election of the returned candidate, or if there are more than one 
returned candidate at the election and the dates of their election are 
different, the later of those two dates]. 


34. It is apparent from the plain language used in Section 81 (1) that when an 
election is called in question in an Election Petition, it should contain one or more 
grounds specified in sub-section (1) of Section 100 and section 101 by any candidate at 
such election or any elector. Admittedly, the respondent was not a candidate. It is not 
even shown that he was an “Elector”, meaning thereby, he had entitled to vote at the 
election to which the Election Petition relates, whether he has voted at Election or not. 
There is absence of even this important aspect in the Election Petition as to whether the 
respondent had voted at such election or not. The Election Petition, thus, can also be 
dismissed in view of Section 86 of the Act. 


35. Interestingly, before amending the petition as late as on 15" December, 2023, it 
has been contended by the respondent that he had duly contested the election which 
is factually incorrect. Subsequently, petition came to be amended and the word 
“campaigned” has been substituted by deleting the words “he had duly contested”. 
This itself indicates that the earlier Averment as regards contesting aforesaid election 
was factually incorrect. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


36. Mr. Ganbavale has also invited my attention to one more interesting aspect of this 
case wherein the candidate on whose behalf the election petition has been filed himself is 
an arguing Counsel namely Mr. Prakash Ambedkar. I will not venture into that aspect as 
the moot point in this case is tenability of the petition in view of Order-VIH, Rule-11 of the 
C.P.C. 

37. The next important point which needs to be seen is as to whether the Election 
Petition, in its entirety, depicts any material facts or particulars pertaining to the alleged non 
compliance of mandatory provisions and directions issued under Section 65 of the Act as 
well as any material fact’s relating to the allegation of corrupt practice by the Election 
Commission of India and the returning Officer resulting into benefiting the returned 
candidate. 


38. Section 83 of Act reads as under; 


“83. Contents of petition.-(1) An election petition- 


(a) _ shall contain a concise statement of the material facts 
on which the petitioner relies; 


(b) — shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice 
that the petitioner alleges, including as full a statement as 
possible of the names of the parties as alleged to have 
committed such corrupt practice and the date and place of the 
commission of each such practice; and 


(c) — shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the 
manner laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 
1908) for the verification of pleadings: 


[Provided that where the petitioner alleges any corrupt practice, 
the petition shall also be accompanied by an affidavit in the 
prescribed form in support of the allegation of such corrupt 
practice and the particulars thereof. ] 


(2) Any schedule or annexure to the petition shall also be 
signed by the petitioner and verified in the same manner as the 
petition]”’. 


39. It would be interesting to see as to whether the Election Petition contains a concise 
statement of material facts as regards alleged non compliance of mandatory provisions 
and/or corrupt practices and whether full particulars of any such corrupt practices have been 
put forth or averred in the Election Petition? 


40. A proviso to Section 83 (1) is important, in the sense, when there are allegations 
of any corrupt practices, the Election Petition shall also be accompanied by an affidavit in 
the prescribed form in support of the allegation of such corrupt practices and the _ particulars 
thereof. Mandate of stating material and comprehensive particulars of any alleged corrupt 
practices, including a full statement as well as the names of the parties alleged to have 
committed such corrupt practice/s, along with date and place of the alleged commission of 
each such practice is essential. The Election Petition notably lacks any mention or 
substantive disclosure consisting the details of “corrupt practices” which holds significance 
in the context of election disputes as defined under Section 123 of the Act. 


4l. Learned Counsel has not been able to point out under which of the clauses of 
section 123 of the Act alleged corrupt practices have been committed by the Election 
Commission of India and the Returning Officer. 


10 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii1)] 


42. The respondent has not elucidated upon any potential instances or allegations of 
conduct that might fall within the ambit of the ‘corrupt practice’ as defined and prescribed 
by the aforementioned statutory provisions. It was incumbent upon _ the respondent, in 
accordance with the required requirements and precedents, to provide comprehensive 
examination and _— substantiation of any such allegations or implications of “corrupt 
practices” to establish a valid cogent Election Petition. 


43. A conjoint reading of paragraph 4 to 11 of the Election Petition would indicate no 
cause of action, much less, any grounds as stipulated in Section 100 of the Act. Mr. 
Ambedkar, learned Counsel for the respondent, however, tried to convince me by 
inviting my attention to clause (1) (d), (ii) and (iv) of Section 100 by contending that the 
Election Petition is based on these points. | Section 100 (1) (d) provides that subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (2) if the High Court is of the opinion that the result of the election, 
in so far as it concerns a returned candidate, has been materially affected, (ii) by any corrupt 
practice committed in the interests of the returned candidate by any agent other than his 
election agent, and clause (iv) contemplates that by any non compliance with the provisions 
of the Constitution or of this Act or _ of any rules or orders made under this Act. There are 
no averments in the Election Petition, as already stated, as regards any corrupt practices 
committed in the interest of the returned candidate either by the Election Commission 
of India or Returning Officer. It is not the case of the respondent that any agent other than 
the election agent of the applicant has committed any corrupt practice. I am afraid, I cannot 
buy arguments of Mr. Ambedkar that the material facts of the alleged corrupt practice have 
been incorporated and pleaded in paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Election Petition which is 
reproduced hereinbelow; 


“5. In the Loksabha constituency of the 42 Solapur 
Parlmantary Constituency there are 18,50,002 of 
registered voters Of which 10,81,386 polled their votes. The 
copy of _ the polled votes given by Returning Officer _ is 
enclosed as EXHIBIT “A”. In normal circumstances the 
number of polled votes should tally with the counted votes. 
Petitioner’s candidates fared 1,70,007 votes, whereas 
the Respondent sponsored by BJP fared 5,24,985 votes. 
However the counted are votes 10,81,254. A copy of the 
counted votes 23/05/2019 as provided by Returning Officer 
is enclosed as EXHIBIT “B”. The petitioner says that the 
counted voted does not match and 132 additional votes, 
this is serious discrepancy in the _ grand total. There are 
132 votes which are more than the votes polled. 


6. That the certificate u/r 66 in form 22 came _ to be issued 
illegally in favour of the | Respondent without complying 
with the mandatory requirements under the law which is 
absolutely illegal and is void”. 


44. In a well-known judgment in the case of Samant N. Balkrishna and another Vs. 
George Fernandez and others,” the Hon’ble Supreme Court has enunciated the scope of 
Section 83 of the Act on this aspect. Every fact which shall have to be proved to formulate a 
complete cause of action is a material fact. In essence, material facts are the entire bundle of 
facts which would constitute a cause of action and which facts would have to be established 
by the petitioner to be entitled to the relief claimed. The difference between material facts 
and material particulars is explained by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid 
judgment. The relevant paragraph is extracted below; 


“29. Having dealt with the substantive law on the subject 
of election petitions we may now turn to the procedural 
provisions in the Representation of People Act. Here we 
have to consider sections 81, 83 and 84 of the Act. The 


2 (1963) 3 SCC 238 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(iii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


11 


first provides the procedure for the presentation of election 
petitions.The proviso to sub-section alone is material here. 
It provides that an election petition may be presented on 
one or more of the grounds specified in sub-section (1) of 
section 100 and section 101. That as we have shown 
above creates the substantive right. Section 83 then 
provides that the election-petition must contain a concise 
statement of the material facts on which the petitioner 
relies and further that he must also set forth full 
particulars of any corrupt practice that the petitioner 
alleges including as full a statement as possible of the 
names of the parties alleged to have committed such 
corrupt practice and the date and place of the commission 
of each such practice. The section is mandatory and 
requires first a concise statement of material facts and then 
requires the fullest possible particulars. What is the 
difference between material facts and particulars? The 
word ‘material’ shows that the facts necessary to formulate 
a complete cause of action must be stated. Omission of a 
single material fact leads to an incomplete cause of action 
and the statement of claim becomes bad. The function of 
particulars is to present as full a picture of the cause of 
action with such further information in detail as to make 
the opposite party understand the case he will have to 
meet. There may be some _ overlapping between material 
facts and particulars but the two are quite distinct. Thus 
material facts will mention that a statement of fact (which 
must be set out) was made and it must be alleged that it 
refers to the character and conduct of the candidate that it 
is false or which the returned candidate believes to be 
false or does not believe to be true and that it is calculated 
to prejudice the chances of the petitioner. In the particulars 
the name of the person making the statement, with the 
date, time and place will be mentioned. The material facts 
thus will show the ground of corrupt practice and the 
complete cause of action and the particulars will give the 
necessary information to present a full picture of the cause 
of action. In stating the material facts it will not do merely 
to quote the words of the section because then the 
efficiency of the words ‘material facts’ will be lost. The fact 
which constitutes the corrupt practice must be — stated and 
the fact must be co-related to one of the heads of corrupt 
practice. Just as a_ plaint without disclosing a proper 
cause of action cannot be said to be a good plaint, so also 
an election petition without the material facts relating to 
a corrupt practice is no election petition at all. A petition 
which merely cites the sections cannot be said to disclose 
a cause of action where the allegation is the making of a 
false statement. That statement must appear and the 
particulars must be full as to the person making the 
statement and the necessary information. Formerly the 
petition used to be in two parts. The material facts had to 
be included in the petition and the particulars in a 
schedule. It is inconceivable that a petition could be filed 
without the material facts and the schedule by merely 
citing the corrupt practice from the statute. Indeed the 
penalty of dismissal summarily was enjoined for petitions 
which did not comply with the requirement. Today _ the 
particulars need not be separately included in a schedule 
but the distinction remains. The entire and complete 
cause of action must be in the petition in the shape of 
material facts, the particulars being the further information 


12 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


to complete the picture. This distinction is brought out by 
the provisions of section 86 although the penalty of 
dismissal is taken away. Sub-section (5) of that section 
provides: 


“(5) The High Court may, upon such terms as to 
costs and otherwise as it may deem fit, allow the 
particulars of any corrupt practice alleged in the 
petition to be amended or amplified in such 
manner asmay in its opinion be necessary 
for ensuring a fair and effective trial of the petition, 
but shall not allow any amendmentof the petition 
which will have the effect of introducing 
particulars of a corrupt practice not previously 
alleged in the petition.” 


The power of amendment is given in respect of particulars but 
there is a prohibition against an amendment “which will have the 
effect of introducing particulars of a corrupt practice not 
previously alleged in the petition”. One alleges the corrupt 
practice in the material facts and they must show a complete 
cause of action. If a petitioner has omitted to allege a corrupt 
practice, he cannot be permitted to give — particulars of the 
corrupt practice. The argument that the latter part of the fifth 
sub-section is directory only cannot stand in view of _ the 
contrast in the language of the two parts. The first part is 
enabling and the second part creates a positive bar. Therefore, 
if a corrupt practice is not alleged, the particulars cannot be 
supplied. There is, however, a difference of approach between the 
several corrupt practices. If for example the charge is bribery 
of voters and the particulars give a few instances, other 
instances can be added; if the charge is use of vehicles for free 
carriage of voters, the particulars of the cars employed may 
be — amplified. But if the charge is that an agent did something, 
it cannot be amplified by giving particulars of acts on the part of 
the candidate or vice versa. In the scheme of election law 
there are separate corrupt practices which cannot be said to 
grow out of the material facts related to another person. 
Publication of false statements by an agent is one cause of action, 
publication of false statements, by the candidate is quite a 
different cause of action. Such a cause of action must be 
alleged in the material facts before particulars may be given. 
One cannot under the cover of particulars of one corrupt 
practice give particulars of a new corrupt practice. They 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii1)] 


constitute different causes of action”’. 


The Election Petition is dehors material facts and full particulars of the alleged corrupt 


practices. 


45. Whenever there are allegations of corrupt practice in the petition, it is mandatory to 
accompany the petition with an affidavit prescribed in a particular form indicating the 
allegations of such corrupt practice and particulars thereof. Rule 94A of the conduct of 
Election Rules provides that the affidavit referred to in the proviso of sub-section | of 
Section 83 shall be sworn before the Magistrate First Class or a Notary or Commissioner and 
shall be in form No.25. There is no such affidavit sworn by the respondent, much less, in 
form No.25 as mandated in proviso to section 83, sub section (1) of the Act. 


46. Mr. Ambedkar, in order to buttress his contention has pressed into service a few 
decisions, however, he emphasized upon a _ decision of the Supreme Court in the case of 
Kanimozhi Karunanidhi Vs. A. Santhana Kumar and others’. There can be no 


____argument that a right to elect, though fundamental it is to 
3 Special Leave Petition (c) No.28241 2019 


democracy, is neither a 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


13 


fundamental right nora common law वश; 115 purely a statutory right. Similarly, right 
to be elected and the __ right to dispute an election are also statutory rights. Since they are 
statutory creations, they are subject to statutory limitations. An Election Petition is not an 
action at common law, nor in equity. Itis | aspecial jurisdiction to be exercised in 
accordance with the statute creating it. The concept familiar to common law and equity 
must remain stranger to election law unless statutorily embodied. It is equally true that 
the Representation of the People Act is acomplete and self-contained Code within 
which must be found any rights claimed in relation to an election dispute. 


47. Mr. Ambedkar would invite my attention to paragraphs 23 to 27 of the aforesaid 
judgment to buttress his point as regards material facts on which the Election Petition is 
related; 


“23. The law so far developed and settled by this Court with regard 
to the non-compliance of the requirement of Section 83(1)(a) of the 
EP Act, namely - "an Election petition must contain a_ concise 
statement of material facts on which the petitioner relies", is that 
such noncompliance of Section 83(1)(a) read with Order VII, Rule 
11, CPC, may entail dismissal of the Election Petition right at the 
threshold. "Material facts" are facts which if established would give 
the petitioner the relief asked for. The test required to be answered 
is whether the court could have given a direct verdict in favour of 
the election petitioner in case the returned candidate had not 
appeared to oppose the Election petition on the basis of the facts 
pleaded in the petition. They must be such facts as would afford a 
basis for the allegations made in the petition and would constitute 
the cause of action as understood in the Code of Civil 
Procedure 1908. Material facts would include positive statement of 
facts as also positive statement of a negative fact. 


24. A Three-Judge Bench in Hari Shanker Jain vs. Sonia Gandhi (supra) had an 
occasion to deal with Section 83(1)(a) of the RP Act and the Court dismissed the Election 
petition holding that the bald and vague averments made in the election petitions do not 
satisfy the requirements of pleading "material facts" within the meaning of Section 83(1)(a) 
of the RP Act read with the requirements of Order VII Rule 11 CPC. It was observed in paras 
23 and 24 as under: - 


"23. Section 83(1)(a) of RPA, 1951 mandates that an election petition 
shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the 
petitioner relies. By a series of decisions of this Court, it is well settled that 
the material facts required to be stated are those facts which can be 
considered as materials supporting the allegations made. In other words, 
they must be such facts as would afford a basis for the allegations made in 
the petition and would constitute the cause of action as understood in the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The expression "cause of action" has been 
compendiously defined to mean every fact which it would be necessary for 
the plaintiff to prove, if traversed, in order to support his right to the 
judgment of court. Omission of a single material fact leads to an 
incomplete cause of action and the statement of claim becomes bad. The 
function of the party is to present as full a picture of the cause of action 
with such further information in detail as to make the opposite party 
understand the case he will have to meet. (See Samant N. Balkrishna v. 
George Fernandez [(1969) 3 SCC 238 : (1969) 3 SCR 603: (AIR 1969 SC 
1201)], Jitendra Bahadur Singh v. Krishna Behari [(1969) 2 SCC 433: 
(AIR 1970 SC 2761. Merely quoting the words of the section like 
chanting of a mantra does not amount to stating material facts. Material 
facts would include positive statement of facts as also positive averment of 
a negative fact, if necessary. In V.S. Achuthanandan y. P.J. Francis [(1999) 
3 SCC 737: (AIR 1999 SC 2044)] this Court has held, on a conspectus of a 
series of decisions of this Court, that material facts are such preliminary 
facts which must be proved at the trial by a party to establish existence of a 
cause of action. Failure to plead "material facts" is fatal to the election 


14 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii1)] 


petition and no amendment of the pleadings is permissible to introduce 
such material facts after the time-limit prescribed for filing the election 
petition. 


24. It is the duty of the court to examine the petition irrespective of any 
written statement or denial and reject the petition if it does not disclose a 
cause of action. To enable a court to reject a plaint on the ground that it 
does not disclose a cause of action, it should look at the plaint and 
nothing else.Courts have always frowned upon vague pleadings which 
leave a wide scope to adduce any evidence. No amount of evidence can 
cure basic defect in the pleadings." 


25. In case of Mahadeorao Sukaji Shivankar vs. Ramaratan Bapu & 
Ors. (2004 (7) SCC, 181: AIROnline 2004 SC, 585) a Three-Judge Bench 
of this Court again had an occasion to deal with the issues as to what 
would constitute "material facts" and what would be the consequences of 
not stating the "material facts" in the Election petition, as contemplated in 
Section 83(1)(a) of the RP Act, and the Court observed as under: 


"6. Now, it is no doubt true that all material facts have to be set out in an 
election petition. If material facts are not stated in a plaint or a petition, 
the same is liable to be dismissed on that ground alone as the case would 
be covered by clause (a) of Rule 11 of Order 7 of the Code. The question, 
however, is as to whether the petitioner had set out material facts in the 
election petition. The expression "material facts" has neither been defined 
in the Act nor in the Code. It may be stated that the material facts are 
those facts upon which a party relies for his claim or defence. In other 
words, material facts are facts upon which the plaintiff's cause of action 
or the defendant's defence depends. What particulars could be said to be 
material facts would depend upon the facts of each case and no rule of 
universal application can be laid down. It is, however, absolutely 
essential that all basic and primary facts which must be proved at the 
trial by the party to establish existence of cause of action or defence are 
material facts and must be stated in the pleading of the party. 


7. But, it is equally well settled that there is distinction between 
"material facts" and — "particulars". Material facts are primary or basic 
facts which must be pleaded by the petitioner in support of the case set up 
by him either to prove his cause of action or defence. Particulars, on the 
other hand, are details in support of material facts pleaded by the party. 
They amplify, refine and embellish material facts by giving finishing touch 
to the basic contours of a picture already drawn so as to make it full, 
more clear and more informative. Particulars ensure conduct of fair trial 
and would not take the opposite party by surprise." 


26. In Anil Vasudev Salgaonkar vs. Naresh Kushali Shigaonkar, 2009 
(9) SCC, 310: (2009 AIR SCW, 6812) this Court has discussed number of 
earlier decisions on the issue as to when the Election petition could be 
dismissed summarily if it does not furnish the cause of action in exercise of 
powers under the Code of Civil Procedure read with Section 83 of 
the R.P. Act. 


"50. The position is well settled that an election petition can be 
summarily dismissed if it does not furnish the cause of action 
in exercise of the power under the Code of Civil Procedure. 
Appropriate orders in exercise of powers under the Code can 
be passed if the mandatory requirements enjoined by Section 
83 of the Act to incorporate the material facts in the election 
petition are not complied with. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(iii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


15 


51. This Court in Samant N. Balkrishna case [(1969) 3 SCC 
238 :(AIR 1969 SC 1201)] has expressed itself in no uncertain 
terms that the omission of a single material fact would lead to 
an incomplete cause of action and that an election petition 
without the material facts relating to a corrupt practice is not 
an election petition at all. In Udhav Singh v. Madhav Rao 
Scindia [(1977) 1 SCC 511: (AIR 1976 SC 744)] the law 
has been enunciated that all the primary facts which must be 
proved by a party — to establish a cause of action or his 
defence are material facts. In the context of a charge of 
corrupt practice it would mean that the basic facts which 
constitute the ingredients of the particular corrupt practice 
alleged by the petitioner must be specified in order to succeed 
on the charge. Whether in an election petition a particular fact 
is material or not and as such required to be pleaded is 
dependent on the nature of the charge levelled and the 
circumstances of the case. All the facts which are essential to 
clothe the petition with complete cause of action must be 
pleaded and failure to plead even a single material fact would 
amount to disobedience of the mandate of Section 83(1) (a). 
An election petition therefore can be and must be dismissed if 
it suffers from any such vice. The first ground of challenge 
must therefore fail. 


52. In V.Narayanaswamy v. C.P.— Thirunavukkarasu [(2000) 2 
SCC 294: (AIR 2000 SC 694)] this Court reiterated the legal 
position that an election petition is liable to be dismissed if it 
lacks in material facts. In L.R. Shivaramagowda vy. T.M. 
Chandrashekar [(1999) 1 SCC 666 : (AIR 1999 SC 252)] this 
Court again considered the importance of pleadings in an election 
petition alleging corrupt practice falling within the scope of 
Section 123 of the Act and observed as under: (SCC p. 677, para 
11) 


"11. This Court has repeatedly stressed the importance 
of pleadings in an election petition and pointed out the 
difference between ‘material facts' and ‘material 
particulars’. While the failure to plead material facts is 
fatal to the election petition and no amendment of the 
pleading could be allowed to introduce such material 
facts after the time-limit prescribed for filing the 
election petition, the absence of material particulars 
can be cured at a later stage by an appropriate 
amendment ”’. 


53. In Udhav Singh case [(1977) 1 SCC 511: AIR 
1976 SC 744)] this Court observed as under: (SCC pp. 522- 
23, para 41) 


"41. Like the Code of Civil Procedure, this section also 
envisages a distinction between ‘material facts' and 
‘material particulars’. Clause (a) of sub-section (1) 
corresponds to Order 6 Rule 2, while clause (b) is 
analogous to Order 6 Rules 4 and 6 of the Code. The 
distinction between ‘material facts' and ‘material 
particulars' is important because _ different 
consequences may flow from a deficiency of such facts 
or particulars in the pleading. Failure to plead even a 
single material fact leads to an incomplete cause of 
action and incomplete allegations of such a charge are 
liable to be struck off under Order 6 Rule 16, Code of 
Civil Procedure. If the petition is based solely on those 
allegations which suffer from lack of material facts, the 
petition is liable to be summarily rejected for want of a 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i11)] 


cause of action. In the case of a petition suffering from 
a deficiency of material particulars, the court has a 
discretion to allow the petitioner to supply the 
required particulars even after the expiry of limitation." 


54. In H.D. Revanna case [(1999) 2 SCC 217 : AIR 1999 SC 768)] the appeal 
was filed by the candidate who had succeeded in the election and whose 
application for dismissal of the election petition in limine was rejected by the 
High Court. This Court noticed that it has been laid down by this Court that 
non-compliance with the provisions of Section 83 may lead to dismissal of the 
petition if the matter falls within the scope of Order 6 Rule 16 and Order 7 Rule 
11 of the Code of Civil Procedure. In Harmohinder Singh Pradhan v. Ranjeet 
Singh Talwandi [(2005) 5 SCC 46 : (AIR 2005 SC 2379)] this Court observed 
thus: (SCC p. 51, para 14) 


"14. Necessary averment of facts constituting an appeal on the ground 
of ‘his religion' to vote or to refrain from voting would be material 
facts within the meaning of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 83 of 
the Act. If such material facts are missing, they cannot be supplied 
later on, after the expiry of period of limitation for filing the election 
petition and the plea being deficient, can be directed to be struck down 
under Order 6 Rule 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and if 
such plea be the sole ground of filing an election petition, the petition 
itself can be rejected as not disclosing a_ cause of action under clause 
(a) of Rule 11, Order 7 of the Code." 


55. In Harkirat Singh v. Amrinder Singh [(2005) 13 SCC 511: (AIR 2006 SC 
713)] this Court again reiterated the distinction between "material facts" and 
"material particulars" and observed as under: (SCC p. 527, paras 51-52) 


"51. A distinction between ‘material facts' and 
‘particulars’, however, must not be overlooked. ‘Material 
facts’ are primary or basic facts which must be 
pleaded by the plaintiff or by the defendant in 
support of the case set up by him either to prove his 
cause of action or defence. ‘Particulars’, on the other hand, 
are details in support of material facts pleaded by 
the party. They amplify, refine | and embellish material 
facts by giving distinctive touch to the basic contours of 
a picture already drawn so as to make it full, more clear 
and more informative. 'Particulars' thus ensure conduct of 
fair _ trial and would not take the opposite party by 

surprise. 


32. All material facts' must be pleaded by the party in 
support of the case set up by him. Since the object and 
purpose is to enable the opposite party to know the 
case he has to meet with, in the absence of pleading, a 
party cannot be allowed to lead evidence. Failure to state 
evena _ single material fact, hence, will entail dismissal 
of the suit or petition. Particulars, on the other hand, are 
the details of the case which is in the nature __ of evidence 
a party would be leading at _ the time of trial." 


36. In Sudarsha Avasthi v. Shiv Pal Singh [(2008) 7 SCC 604 : (AIR 
2008 SC 2724)] this Court observed as under: (SCC p. 612, para 20) 


"20. The election petition is a serious matter and it cannot be 
treated lightly or in a fanciful manner nor is it given to a 
person who uses this as a handle for vexatious purpose." 


57. It is settled legal position that all "material facts" must be pleaded by 
the party in support of the case set up by him within the period of 
limitation. Since the object and purpose is to enable the opposite party 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


17 


to know the case he has to meet with, in the absence of pleading, a party 
cannot be allowed to lead evidence. Failure to state even a single material 
fact will entail dismissal of the election petition. The election petition 
must contain a concise statement of "material facts" on which the 
petitioner relies. 


58. There is no definition of "material facts" either in the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 nor in the Code of Civil 
Procedure. In a series of judgments, this Court has laid down 


that all facts necessary to formulate a complete cause of action should 
be termed as "material facts". All basic and primary facts which must be 
proved by a party to establish the existence of cause of action or defence 
are material facts. "Material facts" in other words mean the entire bundle 
of facts which would constitute a complete cause of action. This Court in 
Harkirat Singh case [(2005) 13 SCC 511 : (AIR 2006 SC 713)] tried to 
give various meanings of "material facts". The relevant para 48 of the 
said judgment is reproduced as under: (SCC pp. 526-27) 


"48. The expression 'material facts' has neither been 
defined in the Act nor in the Code. According to the 
dictionary meaning, ‘material’ means ‘fundamental’, ‘vital’, 
‘basic’, ‘cardinal’, ‘central’, ‘crucial’, ‘decisive’, 
‘essential’, ‘pivotal’, ‘indispensable’, ‘elementary’ or 
‘primary’. [Burton's Legal Thesaurus (3rd Edn.), p. 349.] 
The phrase 'material facts’, therefore, may be said to be 
those facts upon which a party relies for its claim or 
defence. In other words, ‘material facts' are facts upon 
which the plaintiff's cause of action or the defendant's 
defence depends. What particulars could be said to be 
‘material facts' would depend upon the facts of each case 
and no rule of universal application can be laid down. It is, 
however, absolutely essential that all basic and primary 
facts which must be proved at the trial by the party to 
establish the existence of a cause of action or defence are 
material facts and must be stated in the pleading by the 
party." 


27. In Ram Sukh vs. Dinesh Aggarwal (AIR 2010 SC 1227) (supra), 
this Court again while examining the maintainability of Election petition 
filed under Section 100(1)(d)(iv) of the RP Act, elaborately considered 
the earlier decisions and observed that it was necessary for the election 
petitioner to aver specifically in what manner the result of the election in 
so far as it concerned the returned candidate was materially affected 
due to omission on the part of the Returning Officer. The Court in the said 
case having found that such averments being missing in the Election 
petition, upheld the judgment of the High Court/Election Tribunal rejecting 
the Election petition at the threshold. The Court observed in paras 14 to 21 
as under: - 


"14. The requirement in an election petition as to the 
statement of material facts and the consequences of lack of 
such disclosure with reference to Sections 81, 83 and 86 of 
the Act came up for consideration before a_ three-Judge 
Bench of this Court in Samant N. Balkrishna v. George 
Fernandez [(1969) 3 SCC 238 : AIR 1969 SC 1201)]. 
Speaking for the three-Judge Bench, M. Hidayatullah, C.J, 
inter alia, laid down that: 


i) Section 83 of the Act is mandatory and requires first 
a concise statement of material facts and then the fullest 
possible particulars; 


(ii) omission of even a single material fact leads to an 
incomplete cause of action and statement of claim becomes 
bad; 


18 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


(iii) the function of particulars is to present in full a 
picture of the cause of action and to make the opposite party 
understand the case he will have to meet; 


(iv) material facts and particulars are distinct matters - 
material facts will mention statements of fact and particulars 
will set out the names of persons with date, time and place; 
and 


(9 in stating the material facts it will not do merely to 
quote the words of the section because then the efficacy of the 
material facts will be lost. 


15. At this juncture, in order to appreciate the real object 
and purport of the phrase "material facts", particularly 
with reference to election law, it would be appropriate to 
notice the distinction between the phrases "material facts" as 
appearing in clause (a) and "particulars" as appearing in 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 83. As stated above, 
"material facts" are primary or basic facts which have to be 
pleaded by the petitioner to prove his cause of action and by 
the defendant to prove his defence. "Particulars", on the 
other hand, are details in support of the material facts, 
pleaded by the parties. They amplify, refine and embellish 
material facts by giving distinctive touch to the basic 
contours of a picture already drawn so as to make it full, more 
clear and more informative. Unlike "material facts" which 
provide the basic foundation on which the _ entire edifice of 
the election petition is built, "particulars" are to be stated to 
ensure that the opposite party is not taken by surprise. 


16. The distinction between "material facts" and 
"particulars" and their requirement in an election petition was 
succinctly brought out by this Court in Virender Nath 
Gautam v. Satpal Singh [(2007) 3 SCC 617 : AIR 2007 SC 
581)] wherein C.K. Thakker, J., stated thus: (SCC pp. 631-32, 
para 50) 


"50. There is distinction between facta probanda (the facts 
required to be proved i.e. material facts) and facta probantia 
(the facts by means of which they are proved i.e. particulars 
or evidence). It is settled law that pleadings must contain only 
facta probanda — and not facta probantia. The material facts 
on which the party relies for his claim are called facta 
probanda and they must be stated in the pleadings. But the 
facts or facts by means of which facta probanda (material 
facts) are proved and which are in the nature of facta 
probantia (particulars or evidence) need not __ be set out in 
the pleadings. They are not facts in issue, but only relevant 
facts required to be proved at the trial in order to establish the 
fact in issue. 


17. Now, before examining the rival submissions in the 
light of the aforestated legal position, it would be expedient 
to deal with another submission of the learned counsel for the 
appellant that the High Court should not have exercised its 
power either under Order 6 Rule 16 or Order 7 Rule 11 of the 
Code to reject the election petition at the threshold. The 
argument is twofold viz.: 


(i) that even if the election petition was liable to be 
dismissed ultimately, it should have been dismissed only 
after affording an opportunity to the election petitioner to 
adduce evidence in support of his allegation in the petition, 
and 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii1)] 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(iii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


19 


(ii) since Section 83 does not find a place in Section 86 of 
the Act, rejection of the petition at the threshold would 
amount to reading into sub-section (1) of Section 86 an 
additional ground. In our opinion, both the contentions are 
misconceived and untenable. 


18. Undoubtedly, by virtue of Section 87 of the Act, the 
provisions of the Code apply to _ the trial of an election 
petition and, therefore, in the absence of anything to the 
contrary in the Act, the court trying an election petition can 
act in exercise of its power under the Code, including Order 
6 Rule 16 and Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code. The object of 
both the provisions is to ensure that meaningless litigation, 
which is otherwise bound to prove abortive, should not be 
permitted to occupy the judicial time — of the courts. If that is 
so in matters pertaining to ordinary civil litigation, it must 
apply with greater vigour in election matters where the 
pendency of an election petition is likely to inhibit the elected 
representative of the people in the discharge of his public 
duties for which the electorate have reposed confidence in 
him. The submission, _ therefore, must fail. 


19. Coming to the second limb of the argument viz. 
absence of Section 83 in Section 86 of the Act, which 
specifically provides for dismissal of an election petition which 
does not comply with certain provisions of the Act, in our 
view, the issue is no longer res integra. A similar plea was 
negatived by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Hardwari 
Lal v. Kanwal Singh [(1972) 1 SCC 214 : (AIR 1972 SC 515)], 
wherein speaking for the Bench, A.N. Ray, J. (as His Lordship 
then was) said: (SCC p. 221, para 23) 


"23. Counsel on behalf of the respondent submitted that an 
election petition could not be dismissed by reason of want 
of material facts because Section 86 of the Act conferred 
power on the High Court to dismiss the election petition 
which did not comply with the provisions of Section 81, or 
Section 82 or Section 117 of the Act. It was emphasised 
that Section 83 did not find place in Section 86. Under 
Section 87 of the Act every election petition shall be tried by 
the High Court as nearly as may be in accordance with the 
procedure applicable under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, to the trial of suits. A suit which does not furnish cause 
of action can be dismissed." 


20. The issue was again dealt with by this Court in 
Azhar Hussain v. Rajiv Gandhi [1986 Supp SCC 315 : (AIR 
1986 SC 1253)] . Referring to earlier pronouncements of 
this Court in Samant N. Balkrishna [(1969) 3 SCC 238] and 
Udhav Singh v. Madhav Rao Scindia [(1977) 1 SCC 511] 
wherein it was observed that the omission of a single material 
fact would lead to incomplete cause of action and that an 
election petition without the material facts is not an election 
petition at all, the Bench in Azhar Hussain case [1986 Supp 
SCC 315 : (AIR 1986 SC 1253)] held that all the facts which 
are essential to clothe the petition with complete cause of 
action must be pleaded and omission of even a single material 
fact would amount to disobedience of the mandate of Section 
83(1)(a) of the Act and an election petition can be and must be 
dismissed if it suffers from any such vice. 


21. We may now advert to the facts at hand to examine 
whether the election petition suffered from the vice of 
nondisclosure of material facts as stipulated in Section 


20 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i11)] 


83(1) (a) of the Act. As already stated the case of the election 
petitioner is confined to the alleged violation of Section 
100(1)(d)(iv). For the sake of ready reference, the said 
provision is extracted below: 


"100. Grounds for declaring election to be void.- 


(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section 

(2) if the High Court is of opinion- 

2 2K मर 

(१) that the result of the election, insofar as it concerns a 


returned candidate, has been materially affected- 


TR KK 


(iv) by any non-compliance with the provisions of the 
Constitution or of this Act or of any rules — or orders made 
under this Act, 


the High Court shall declare the election of the returned 
candidate to be void." 


It is plain that in order to get an election declared as void 
under the said provision, the election petitioner must aver that 
on account of non-compliance with the provisions of the 
Constitution or of this Act or of any rules or orders made 
under the Act, the result of the election, insofar as it concerned 
the returned candidate, was materially affected." 


48. It is surprising as to how the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in Kanimozhi 
Karunanidhi (supra) would be of any assistance to the learned Counsel. All the facts which 
are essential to clothe the petition with complete cause of action must be pleaded and 
failure to plead even a single material fact would amount to disobedience of mandate of 
Section 83 (1) (a). The Election Petition, therefore, can be dismissed as it suffers from such 
vice. The Supreme Court has drawn support from various previous decisions in order to define 
“material facts” and “cause of action” as well as distinction between “material facts” and 
“particulars”. 


49. In the case of Harkirat Singh Vs. Amrinder Singh‘ , the Supreme Court against 
reiterated the distinction between “material facts” and “material particulars”. It would be 
advantageous to extract paragraph 58 of the judgment which reads thus; 


56. There is no definition of "material facts" either in the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 nor in the Code of Civil 
Procedure. In a series of judgments, this Court has laid down that 
all facts necessary to formulate a complete cause of action should 
be termed as "material facts". All basic and primary facts which 
must be proved by a party to establish the existence of cause of 
action or defence are material facts. "Material facts" in other 


words mean the entire bundle of facts which would constitute a 
complete cause of action. This Court in Harkirat Singh case [(2005) 
13 SCC 511: (AIR 2006 SC 713)] tried to give various meanings 
of "material facts". The relevant para 48 of the said judgment is 
reproduced as under: (SCC pp. 526-27) 


4 (2005) 13 SCC 511 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


21 


"48. The expression काद्याटयंता facts' has neither been 
defined in the Act nor in the Code. According to the 
dictionary meaning, 'material' means ‘fundamental ', ‘vital’, 
‘basic’, ‘cardinal’, ‘central’, ‘crucial’, ‘decisive’, 

‘essential’, ‘pivotal’, ‘indispensable’, ‘elementary’ or 
‘primary’. [Burton's Legal Thesaurus (3rd Edn.), p. 349.] 
The phrase ‘material facts', therefore, may be said to be 
those facts upon which a party relies for its claim or 
defence. In other words, ‘material facts' are facts upon 
which the plaintiff's cause of action or the defendant's 
defence depends. What particulars could be said to be 
‘material facts' would depend upon the facts of each case 
and no rule of universal application can be laid down. It is, 
however, absolutely essential that all basic and primary 
facts which must be proved at the trial by the party to 
establish the existence of a cause of action or defence are 
material facts and must be stated in the pleading by the 


party." 


50. On one hand, learned Counsel for the respondent submits that in view of the 
averments in paragraph 3 of the Election Petition, Election Commission of India and the 
Returning Officer have indulged in serious corrupt practice for the benefit of the 
Returned candidate, however, while arguing the matter, he submits that there was a 
breach of duty on the part of the Election Commission of India and the Returning Officer 
which gave rise to a cause of action to file the Election Petition which has nothing to do 
with the alleged corrupt practices. This is incomprehensive. No sane man would accept 
such argument. 


51. Mr. Ambedkar would emphasize that breach of the duty on the part of the Election 
Commission of India and the Returning Officer in not referring the matter to the Election 
Commission itself gave rise to a cause of action. According to him, material fact in this case 
is Electronic Voting Machines (EVM). I have already discussed the aspect herein before and, 
therefore, it is needless to reiterate the same. Merely because the matter has proceeded 
further by recording evidence of Returning Officer who had already admitted certain 
material facts in his affidavit, does not ipso facto mean that the application under Order-VI, 
Rule-11 is filed with an ulterior motive at a belated stage only to stall the proceedings 
further. As already stated, such an application can be made at any stage of the trial. 


52: Learned Counsel for the respondent has invited my attention _ to Section 97 of the 
Act and Rule 9 of the Rules framed by this Court in regard to Election Petition under the 
Act. He would argue that the provisions of Order-VII, Rule-11 of the C.P.C would not 
apply to the Election petitions in view of Rule-9 of the High Court Original Side Rules. 
According to him, this Court has already presumed that there is due compliance of Sections 
83 and 86 of the Act. Provisions of C.P.C would attract only in case there is some _ grey 
area. Since the application under Order-VII, Rule-11 has not been filed within 14 days, the 
same is not tenable. The arguments do not stand to reason in view of the 
decision in the case of Kanimozi (supra) pressed by the learned Counsel for the respondent 
himself. 


53. Mr. Ganbavale, on the other hand, contends that in view of an order passed by this 
Court on 12" July, 2023, the respondent was allowed to file an affidavit of service qua the 
returned candidate. As per the track consignment, date of service was 5" October, 2019. 
He submits that there was non compliance of Section 81 of the R.P. Act. Mr. 
Ganbavale would further contend that even the subsequent verification in green letters is 
not in consonance with Section 81 of the Act. 


54. The present Election Petition appears to be in the nature of a Public Interest 
Litigation rather than an Election Petition. The respondent has predominantly challenged 
the functioning of the Electronic Voting Machine (EVM) and alleged concern about it’s 
efficacy and reliability which is, indeed beyond the scope of an election dispute. This 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii1)] 


Court cannot, in an Election Petition, venture upon functioning and usage of Electronic 
Voting Machines (EVM) in the electoral process. 


55. Mr. Ganbavale has invited my attention to paragraph 32 of the Election Petition 
which is essentially a prayer clause. Prayer clauses read thus; 


“32. (a) The hon’ble court may kindly be pleased to direct the 
Election Commission of India & Returning Officer to explain the 
difference in polled votes and counted votes. 


(b) The returning officer be directed to produce the numerical 
number embossed of each EVM used on the date of polling. 


(० The returning officer be directed to produce the numerical 
number on the EVM produce on the date of counting. 


(da) This Court declare that returning officer has not followed the 
direction laid in 15:30. 


(e) It be declared that once the difference of votes is established 
between polled votes and counted votes, the powers granted to 
declare the result is withdrawn. 


(9) It be declared once the difference of vote is established 
between polled votes and counted votes it is mandatory on returning 
officer to refer the matter to the election commission of India. 


(g) It be declare that till the direction is received from Election 
Commission of India to returning officer in case of difference of vote, the 
returning officer is not empowered to declare the election result. 


(h) It be declare that returning officer has to act according to the 
advice/guidelines, once the matter is referred to Election Commission of 
India. 


(i) It be declare that inspite of difference of votes the Election 
Commission of India failed to act as per sub clause 15.30. 


(9 It be declare that non-reference of Election Commission of India to 
returning officer is illegal. 


(k) _ It be declare that the declaration by returning officer of election of 
respondent is illegal and void and without powers. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


23 


5 
6 
7 


(9 It be declare that the declaration by returning officer of election of 
respondent is illegal and void and without powers. 


(m) In absence of any tangible declare election of the respondent to be 
null and void, for non compliances with the laws, and therefore also 
declare that the certificate issued to the respondent in form 22 u/r 66 to 
be null and void. 


(n) During the pendency and final hearing of this petition, direct 
suspension/withdrawal of the certificate issued to respondent under rules 
66 in form 22 of the rules. 


(0) As tocost”. 


56. A bare look at clauses (a) to (f) would reveal that they are beyond the scope of 
Section 100 of the Act. As already stated hereinabove, Election Petition is sans averments of 
any corrupt practices alleged to have been committed by the returned candidate or his 
election agent or by any other person with the consent of the returned candidate or his 
election agent as provided in clause (b) of Section 100. No doubt, a few defects in the 
verification of the Election Petition are not fatal to it’s maintainability and the Election 
Petition cannot be thrown out solely on that ground as has been held by the Supreme Court 
in case of Saritha S. Nair Vs. Hibi Eden, *wherein the Supreme Court has drawn support 
from a decision of three Member Bench of that Court in F.A. Sapa Vs. Singora.® This is on 
the basis that section 83 is not one of the three provisions mentioned in Section 86 (1) and, 
therefore, it cannot be ordinarily construed as mandatory unless it is shown as an integral 
part of the petition under Section 81 of the said Act. The argument of Mr. Ganbavale to that 
effect cannot be taken as vital and the petition cannot be dismissed on that premise. This 
Court on identical facts in case of Dr. Rameshkumar Bapuraoji Gajbe Vs. Election 
Commission of India, New Delhi and others’ has expounded scope of Sections 81 and 83 
in respect of material facts, cause of action and also as regards essential requirements for 
declaring an election to be void as contemplated in Section 100 of the said Act. In case 
of Dr. Rameshkumar (supra), this Court has also drawn support from the decision in 
case of Samant N. Balkrishna (supra). It is trite law that an Election Petition which is bereft 
of material fact/s would entail dismissal at the threshold on the premise that there are no 
material facts averred in the Election Petition which would lead to incomplete cause of 
action. 


57. Mr. Ambedkar has emphasized on the  guidelines/instructions 15:30 of the 
handbook for the Returning Officer issued by the Election Commission of India. Since this 
Court is considering an application for rejection of the Election Petition in view of Order- 
VU, Rule — 11 (a) and (d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, at this stage the said issue need 
not be gone into as the Petition itself suffers from basic legal requirements provided in the 
Act. 


Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.10678 of 2020 
(1991) 3 SCC 375 
Election Petition No.6 of 2019 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART IIH—SEC. 3(ii1)] 


58. In the case of Dr. Aruna Mohan Mali Vs. Election Commission of India and 
others® facts are almost identical. This Court had rejected the Election Petition under the 
provisions of Order-VII, Rule — 11 (a) of the C.P.C in absence of complete cause of action 
for declaring the election of respondent No.3 to be void under Section 100 (1) (d) (iv) of the 
Act. 


59. Mr. Ganbavale states that the Hon’ble Supreme Court is seized of the issues 
concerning the functioning and efficacy of the Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs). The 
matter consisting the mode of conducting elections, including usage of EVMs’ or ballet 
papers is a prerogative of the Election Commission of India in view of the relevant 
statutory provisions. The contentions in the Election Petition would also reveal that there are 
no specific allegations in respect of election process of 42" Solapur (SC) Loksabha General 
Election, 2019. Essentially, concerns raised by the respondent are in respect of Electronic 
Voting Machines, usage, electoral system without any particular allegations targeted at 
election process of Solapur Constituency. It is apparent that there is no ground as 
contemplated under Section 100 of the Act as to how the result of _ the election as regards the 
returned candidate has been materially affected. 


60. In terms of Section 119 of the Act, returned candidate is entitled to costs incurred by 
him, however, section gives discretion to this Court to impose costs. 


61. In the given set of facts and circumstances, I am exercising my discretion not to 
award costs. 


62. In the result, application is allowed. 


63. Election Petition stands rejected under Order-VII, Rule-11 (a) (d) of the C.P.C. 
Security deposit stands forfeited. 


64. In view of disposal of the Election Petition, pending applications, if any, also stand 
disposed of. 


PRITHVIRAJ K.CHAVAN, J. 


8 2022 SCC Online Bom 6299 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. bra NATH रत by GORARHA 


DAVA Date: 2025.06.09 15:16:59 +05'30' 


