रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल. (एन) 04/0007/2003—05 REGD. NO. D. L. (N) 04/0007/2003—05 


JI = VISTA 


Che Gazette of Jndia 


GH. -3). We. -FT.-4062023-24650 
CG-DL-W-4062023-24650 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


साप्ताहिक 
WEEKLY 


सं. 22] नई दिल्‍ली, मई 28---जून 3, 2023, शनिवार/ज्येष्ठ 7--ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 
No. 22] NEW DELHI, MAY 28—JUNE 3, 2023, SATURDAY/JYAISHTHA 7 —JYAISHTHA 3, 945 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह पृथक संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके 
Separate Paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation 


भाग तर--खण्ड ३----उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART IJ—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 


भारत सरकार के मंत्रालयों (TAT मंत्रालय को छोड़कर) द्वारा जारी किए गए सांविधिक आदेश और अधिसूचनाएं 
Statutory Orders and Notifications Issued by the Ministries of the Government of India 
(Other than the Ministry of Defence) 


वित्त मंत्रालय 
(वित्तीय सेवाएं विभाग) 
नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 855.--राष्ट्रीय अवसंरचना वित्तपोषण और विकास बैंक अधिनियम, 2024 (2024 का 47) की 

धारा 6 की उप-धारा (7) के खंड (घ) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, केन्द्रीय सरकार, एतदद्वारा, श्री पंकज 

जैन के स्थान पर श्री भूषण कुमार सिन्हा, संयुक्त सचिव, वित्तीय सेवाएं विभाग, वित्त मंत्रालय को तत्काल प्रभाव से 

और अगले आदेशों तक, राष्ट्रीय अवसंरचना वित्तपोषण और विकास बैंक के निदेशक मंडल में निदेशक नामित 
करती है। 

[फा. सं. 45/0/2024-आईएफ-] 


कार्तिकेय मिश्र, निदेशक 


3227 GI/2023 ((77) 


78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 4945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Department of Financial Services) 
New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 855.—In exercise of the powers conferred by Clause (d) of sub-section () of Section 6 of the 
National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development Act, 202! ([7 of 202), the Central Government 
hereby nominates Shri Bhushan Kumar Sinha, Joint Secretary, Department of Financial Services, Ministry of 
Finance as Director on the Board of Directors of National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development, 
vice Shri Pankaj Jain, with immediate effect and until further orders. 


[F. No. 5/0/202-IF-T] 
KARTIKEYA MISRA, Director 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


aa. 856.--भारतीय निर्यात-आयात बैंक अधिनियम, 4984 (498 का 28) की धारा 6 की 
उप-धारा (॥) के खंड (ड.) के उप-खंड (|) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, केन्द्रीय सरकार, एतट्दारा, श्रीमती 
रूपा दत्ता के स्थान पर श्रीमती हिमानी पांडे, संयुक्त सचिव, उद्योग संवर्धन और आंतरिक व्यापार विभाग को तत्काल 
प्रभाव से और अगले आदेशों तक, भारतीय निर्यात-आयात बैंक (एक्जिम बैंक) के निदेशक मंडल में निदेशक नामित 

करती है। 
[फा. सं. 9//2022-आईएफ-]] 


कार्तिकेय मिश्र, निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 856.—In exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-Clause (i) of Clause (e) of sub-section () of 
Section 6 of the Export Import Bank of India Act, 98] (28 of 98), the Central Government hereby nominates 
Ms. Himani Pande, Joint Secretary, Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, as Director on the 
Board of Directors of Export Import Bank of India (Exim Bank) vice Ms. Rupa Dutta, with immediate effect 


and until further orders. 
[F. No. 9//2022-IF-]] 


KARTIKEYA MISRA, Director 


वाणिज्य एवं उद्योग मंत्रालय 
(वाणिज्य विभाग) 
नई दिल्‍ली, 24 मई 2023 


का.आ. 857.--केन्द्रीय सरकार, निर्यात (गुणवत्ता नियंत्रण एंव निरीक्षण) अधिनियम, 7963 (963 का 
22) की धारा 7 की उपधारा (॥) के साथ पठित निर्यात (गुणवत्ता नियंत्रण एंव निरीक्षण) नियम, 964 के नियम 
42, के उपनियम (2) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए मैसर्स ar एस.के. प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, हाउस नम्बर- 
9I7, सुकलभटवादी, Ue एंड पोस्ट रेडी,तालुका- वेंगुर्ला, जिला-सिंधुदुर्ग, महाराष्ट्र- 476547, (जिसे 
एतद्पश्चात उक्त अभिकरण कहा जायेगा), को इस अधिसूचना के राजपत्र में प्रकाशन की तारीख से तीन वर्ष के 
लिए, वाणिज्य मंत्रालय की शासकीय राजपत्र में प्रकाशित भारत सरकार की अधिसूचना के साथ अनुसूची में निर्दिष्ट 
दिनांक 20 दिसम्बर, 965 की अधिसूचना की सं.का.आ. 3975 के तहत प्रकाशित अधिसूचना में उपाबद्ध अनुसूची 
में विनिर्दिष्ट खनिज और अयस्क समूह-।, अर्थात लौह अयस्क के निर्यात से पूर्व निम्नलिखित शर्तों के अधीन रेडी पत्तन 
और किरणपानी पत्तन में उक्त खनिज और अयस्क के निरीक्षण करने के लिए एक अभिकरण के रुप में मान्यता देती 


है, अर्थात्‌ : 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 79 


(i) यह अभिकरण, खनिज और अयस्क समूह-। का निर्यात (निरीक्षण) नियम, 965 के नियम 4 के अधीन 
निरीक्षण की पद्धति की जाँच करने के लिये निर्यात निरीक्षण परिषद्‌ द्वारा निमित्त अधिकारियों को पर्याप्त 
सहयोग और सहायता प्रदान करेगी; 


(ii) यह अभिकरण, इस अधिसूचना में यथा विनिर्दिष्ट अपने कार्यो का निष्पादन करने के लिए, निदेशक 
(निरीक्षण और गुणवत्ता नियंत्रण) निर्यात निरीक्षण परिषद द्वारा समय-समय पर, लिखित रूप में, दिए गए 
निर्देशों से आबद्ध होंगी | 


[फा. सं. %-6074/2/2023 - निर्यात निरीक्षण] 
एम. बालाजी, संयुक्त सचिव 


MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
(Department of Commerce) 
New Delhi, the, 24th May, 2023 


S.O. 857.—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section () of section 7 of the Export (Quality 
Control and Inspection) Act, 963 (22 of 963) read with sub-rule (2) of rule 2 of the Export (Quality Control 
and Inspection) Rules, [964, the Central Government now recognizes, M/s Mitra S.K. Private Limited, House 
No.-!9!7, Sukalbhatwadi, At & Post- Redi, Taluka- Vengurla, District-Sindhudurg, Maharashtra - 
4657, (hereinafter referred to as the said agency), as an agency for three years with effect from the date of 
publication of this notification in the Official Gazette, for the inspection of Minerals & Ores, Group - I, namely 
Iron Ore as specified in the Schedule annexed to the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Commerce, published in the Official Gazette vide number S.0.3975 dated 207 December, 965 respectively, 
before export of the said Minerals and Ores at Redi port and Kiranpani port, subject to the following conditions, 
namely: - 


(i) the said agency shall extend adequate cooperation and assistance to the officers nominated by the 
Export Inspection Council on this behalf to carry out the inspection specified under rule 4 of the Export 
of Minerals and Ores — Group I (Inspection) Rules, 965; 


(ii) the said agency, in performance of their function as specified in this notification, shall be bound 
by such directions, as the Director (Inspection and Quality Control), Export Inspection Council may 
give, in writing from time to time. 


[F. No. K-604/2/2023 - Export Inspection] 
M. BALAJI, Jt. Secy. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 24 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 858.--केन्द्रीय सरकार, निर्यात (गुणवत्ता नियंत्रण एंव निरीक्षण) अधिनियम, 4963 (963 का 
22) की धारा 7 की उपधारा (॥) के साथ पठित निर्यात (गुणवत्ता नियंत्रण एंव निरीक्षण) नियम, 964 के नियम 
42, के उपनियम (2) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, मैसर्स इंस्पेक्टोरेट ग्रिफिथ इंडिया प्रा.लि., साईं 
समुथिरा, प्लाट नंबर 4 बी और 47 सी, ग्राउंड फ्लोर उत्तरी चरण, सिडको इंडस्ट्रियल एस्टेट, एक्कटूथंगल, गिंडी, 
चेन्नई - 600032 (जिसे एतद्पश्चात उक्त अभिकरण कहा जायेगा), को इस अधिसूचना के राजपत्र में प्रकाशन की 
तारीख से तीन वर्ष के लिए, वाणिज्य मंत्रालय की शासकीय राजपत्र में प्रकाशित भारत सरकार की अधिसूचना के 
साथ अनुसूची में निर्दिष्ट दिनांक 20 दिसम्बर, 965 की अधिसूचना की सं" का.आ. 3975 और दिनांक 20 
दिसम्बर, (965 की अधिसूचना की सं" का.आ 3978 के तहत प्रकाशित अधिसूचना में उपाबद्ध अनुसूची में विनिर्दिष्ट 
खनिज और अयस्क समूह-।, अर्थात लौह अयस्क, मैंगनीज अयस्क और समूह-॥, अर्थात मैंगनीज डाइऑक्साइड, 
बैराइट्स के निर्यात से पूर्व निम्नलिखित शर्तों के अधीन चेन्नई पत्तन, कामराजार एन्नोर पत्तन तथा अडानी 
कट्टुपलली पत्तन में उक्त खनिज और अयस्क के निरीक्षण करने के लिए एक अभिकरण के रुप में मान्यता देती है, 
अर्थात्‌ : 


720 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(i) यह अभिकरण, खनिज और अयस्क समूह- का निर्यात (निरीक्षण) नियम, 7965 तथा खनिज और 
अयस्क समूह-।॥ का निर्यात (निरीक्षण) नियम, 965 के नियम 4 के अधीन निरीक्षण की पद्धति की जाँच 
करने के लिये निर्यात निरीक्षण परिषद्‌ द्वारा निमित्त अधिकारियों को पर्याप्त सहयोग और सहायता प्रदान 
करेगी; 


(ii) यह अभिकरण, इस अधिसूचना में यथा विनिर्दिष्ट अपने कार्यो का निष्पादन करने के लिए, निदेशक 
(निरीक्षण और गुणवत्ता नियंत्रण) निर्यात निरीक्षण परिषद द्वारा समय-समय पर, लिखित रूप में, दिए गए 
निर्देशों से आबद्ध होंगी | 


[फा. सं. %-6074/4/2023 - निर्यात निरीक्षण] 


एम० बालाजी, संयुक्त सचिव 


New Delhi, the 24th May, 2023 


S.O. 858.—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section () of section 7 of the Export (Quality 
Control and Inspection) Act, 963 (22 of 963) read with sub-rule (2) of rule 2 of the Export (Quality Control 
and Inspection) Rules, 964, the Central Government now recognises M/s. Inspectorate Griffith India Pvt. 
Ltd., Sai Samuthira, Plot No. 4B & 4IC, Ground Floor, North Phase, SIDCO Industrial Estate, Ekkattuthangal, 
Guindy, Chennai — 600 032 (hereinafter referred to as the said agency), as an agency for three years with effect 
from the date of publication of this notification in the Official Gazette, for the inspection of Minerals & Ores, 
Group-I, namely — Iron Ore, Manganese Ore and Group -II, namely- Manganese Dioxide, Barytes, as specified 
in the Schedule annexed to the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Commerce, published 
in the Official Gazette vide number S.0.3975 dated 20" December, 965 and S.0.3978 dated 207 December, 
965 respectively, before export of the said Minerals and Ores at Chennai port, Kamarajar Ennore port and 
Adani Kattupalli port, subject to the following conditions, namely: - 


(i) _ the said agency shall extend adequate cooperation and assistance to the officers nominated by the 
Export Inspection Council in this behalf to carry out the inspection specified under rule 4 of the 
Export of Minerals and Ores — Group I (Inspection) Rules, 965 and Export of Minerals and Ores 
— Group II (Inspection) Rules, 965; 


(ii) ॥6 said agency, in performance of their function as specified in this notification shall be bound by 
such directions, as the Director (Inspection and Quality Control), Export Inspection Council may 
give, in writing from time to time. 


[F. No. K-604/4/2023 - Export Inspection] 
M. BALAJI, Jt. Secy. 


श्रम और रोजगार मंत्रालय 
नई दिल्‍ली, 22 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 859.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 74) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, 
स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 
4/97, विद्युत खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री सूर्य लाल, कामगार,के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 
68/204॥) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के 
साथ 4/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल -42025-07-2023-78 -आईआर(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]72] 


MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
New Delhi, the 22nd May, 2023 

S.O. 859.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 68/20!) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow; M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, !/97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Surya Lal, Worker, 
which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 04/05/2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023-78- IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
Present: JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
LD. No. 68/20I] 
BETWEEN 
Surya Lal, son of Sri Nanhu, 


Resident of 63/54, Ismailganj, Post Chinhat, 
Faizabad Road, District Lucknow. 


AND 


l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, 
Lucknow through its General Manager. 


2. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, 
Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 


3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 
Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


3. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, 
Director Personnel, [/97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 
AWARD 


On 28.02.20l0 the claimant/workman has field the ID case No. 68/20i] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.[990 under Section !0 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, l970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2!.2.200]. 


722 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.2.200 by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than l00 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (II), U-P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.200 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.20l0 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 
their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0.20ll, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, |947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare that 
the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 2/./2.2007 is 
neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to get reinstatement in 
service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages and other service benefits, 
in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 02.05.20l2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


“I. That the aforesaid ID Case ४०. 74/2074 is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
4947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2079) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 2070) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination service as specified in sub section I". 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]723 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise 
reply to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the question 
“whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20I] as per the provisions of section 2A (2) of 
the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.!2.200 is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the 
claimant his services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial 
dispute u/s 2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three 
years, from the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


In rebuttal, reliance has been placed as pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the 
facts as stated hereinabove especially in paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


“27. That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, /947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2070 (No. 
24 of 20I0) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the permission from the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the case and to approach the 
Hon'ble Court on 27.07.2077, which was duly accepted by the Regional Labour Commissioner 
(Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble Tribunal for the 
adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman and the employers.” 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised 
by the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for opposite party/HAL and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28" October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 37 February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency of 
conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings and 
of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under:- 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and growing 
production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in production i.e. 
absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and are in a harmonious 
bent to work. In other words industrial peace is very necessary for the vitality of industry. 


724 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really caused by 
the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of labour struggle is 
nothing but a continuous demand for fair retrun to labour expressed in varied forms e.g. (a) increase in 
wages, (0) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs 
. A. D. Divelkar, AIR 957 SC 27) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organisation also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement 
of industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act !947 is a progressive piece 
of social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, 
(G. Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 7957 Bombay 700) and amelioration of 
the conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. LTribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take u[ an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the 
amendments of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified 
categories of individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an industrial 
dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those workmen 
and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or not to 
join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after I.2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 200 (Act No.24 of 20I0), Section 2A(a), was renumbered 
as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20I0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) have been 
inserted after Section 2A (l) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.20l0, which 
reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


77) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and 
his employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 709, any such workman as is specified 
in sub-Section(!) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 725 


adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the 
date he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate 
Government for conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the 
Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the 
dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply 
in relation to such adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section()." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that admittedly 
the services of applicant was terminated on 2.!2.200I, thereafter he has filed the present case before this 
Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20 on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is maintainable 
or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3). 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in ITC 
Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 304, relevant potion quoted as under: 


#॥9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an irresistible 
conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or the Tribunal as the 
case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, 
dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section (4). 7 Time limit 
for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A does not 
appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) of Section 2A. In any event right 
conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding the date of expiry of three years from 
the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the limitation of three years prescribed under 
sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same cannot be condoned by taking recourse to 
Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes 
Act, /94/. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, the 
same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS SITARAM 
AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is ambiguous. It 
is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it cannot change the 
texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or intention when the language 
of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or subtract the words to a statute or 
read something into it which is not there. It cannot re-write or recast legislation. It is also 
necessary to determine that there exists a presumption that the legislature has not used any 
superfluous words. It is well settled that the real intention of legislature must be gathered 
from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to supra, 
when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that the period of 
limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as directory, then it would not 
have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used the words "at any time" instead of 
using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the words at any time’ is found in Section 
407), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of Section 2A which would clearly depict the 
intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) 
of Section 2A and as such legislature did not employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as 
found in Section /0(4) and in its place, it has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of 
three years’. Hence, to interpret the period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as 
directory and not mandatory would amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision 
by the legislature or it would amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought 
to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/209 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


726 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for adjudication of 
the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub-section (3) provides that 
the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of three years from the date of 
discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified. 


&. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to the 
petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same would have no 
application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the provision under which 
the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the Act, itself was introduced by 
the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and therefore, the provision of limitation 
which was introduced in the year 2079 alongwith the main provision providing for the limitation 
would apply with all force and the submission that the same would have no application to the cause of 
action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action has 
arisen post 2070, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 2070 like in the 
year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would never become 
barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had approached 
the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no limitation and the 
petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the Conciliation Officer the claim 
could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not advance the cause of the petitioner, 
inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of the said position, if the Conciliation Officer 
had sent a failure report to the appropriate Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the 
Labour Court. Merely because the Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, 
which suggestion was accepted by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 79 of 
the Act to the Labour Court. 


409. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. MANU //४/6697 
/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096./9.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As 
such, there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to 
entertain the application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the 
decisions of this Court in the following cases:- 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 03.09,2076 in W.P. 
No. 27579 of 205 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.04.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 2076 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated //.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 20I7 passed by the Madurai Bench of this 
Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 
20.09.20I9 in W.P. No. 843 of 209 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation 
must be excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days 
from the date of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require 
that the conciliation proceedings should have been completed before making that application 
under Section 2-A(2) of the Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the 
limitation has to be reckoned on the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The 
Petitioner in the instant case had made the application for conciliation on /2,94,2077 which had 
also concluded on 27.06.20I7, but the Petitioner had not approached the Labour Court after 45 


[भाग [aves 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 [727 


days either from 72.94.2047 or even from 27.06.2047. As such, the contentions made on behalf of 
the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.” 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. MANU/RN/683/20I9 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal position 
which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise 
termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular thing 
that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (68759) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 7954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”’. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (P) Ltd., (2003) 2 SCC 
II, held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25. Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 
ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court observed as 
under:- 


“9 Jt is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the view:- 


#क2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) I0 SCC 765 has held as under: 


728 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


४॥6. It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party 
but it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to 
extend the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to 
the same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive 
factor to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is 
never an evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress 
resulting from its operation." 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para मर and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma!].) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per the admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2!.2.200 and the same has been challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 
28.02.20. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approved the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his termination, 
because his services were terminated on 2!.2.200 and filed the present case on 28.02.20l u/s 2A (2) of the 
Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3), liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 22 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 860.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 74) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ मंडल, लखनऊ; महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान 
एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ मंडल, लखनऊ; मेसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा -श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, 
504, विमान नगर gests नगर, कानपुर; ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस द्वारा -श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, गोमती 
नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री राम खेलावन, कामगार,के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय 
सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 82/2077) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक 
में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 25/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ 
था। 
[सं., एल-42025-07-2023-408-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 22nd May, 2023 


S.O. 860.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 82/20]) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow ; The General 
Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow ; M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri 
Yogendra Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur M/s Group -4 
Facilities Service, through Shri Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Ram 
Khelawan, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
25/05/2023. 

[No. L-42025-07-2023-08 -IR (DU)] 


D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]729 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT 
LUCKNOW 
Present: JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
LD. No. 82/20]] 


BETWEEN 
Ram Khelawan, Son of Late Sahabdeen, 
Resident of Village Chamraukha, Sector !4, Near Pani ki tanki, 


Ismailganj, Faizabad Road, Lucknow. 
AND 


l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, 
Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General Manager. 


2. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, 
Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 


3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 
Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, 
Director Personnel, /97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 


AWARD 


On 28.02.20l0 the claimant/workman has field the ID case No. 82/20l] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.[990 under Section 0 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2!.2.200]. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.2.200 by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than 400 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


730 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (II), U-P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.200 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.20l0 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 
their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0!.20Il, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare 
that the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 
24./2.20997 is neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to 
get reinstatement in service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages 
and other service benefits, in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20l2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


“I. That the aforesaid ID Case No.82/20I] is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
4947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2079) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 20790) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination service as specified in sub section I". 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise 
reply to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the 
question “whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20I] as per the provisions of section 
2A (2) of the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.2.200] is barred by the 

period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the 
claimant his services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial 
dispute u/s 2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 73] 


years, from the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


“27, That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, /9१47 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 
2079 (No. 24 of 2070) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the 
permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the 
case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.97.2077/, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble 
Tribunal for the adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman 
and the employers.” 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised 
by the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


Ihave heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28" October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 3"! February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March |947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency 
of conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings 
and of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under:- 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and growing 
production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in production i.e. 
absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and are in a harmonious 
bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the vitality of industry. 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really caused by 
the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of labour struggle is 
nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied forms e.g. (a) increase in 
wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. 
A.D.Divelkar, AIR 957 SC 22) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


732 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement 
of industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece 
of social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. LTribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take u[ an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the 
amendments of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified 
categories of individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after .2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20I0 (Act No. 24 of 200), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (l) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


"(l) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and 
his employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 70, any such workman as is specified 
in sub-Section(I) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the 
date he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate 
Government for conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the 
Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the 
dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply 
in relation to such adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 733 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section()." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2.2.200], thereafter he has filed the present case before 
this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20l] on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka ३3047, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


ढ“॥9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an 
irresistible conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or 
the Tribunal as the case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the 
date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in 
sub-Section (4). 7 Time limit for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub- 
Section (3) of Section 2A does not appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) 
of Section 2A. In any event right conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding 
the date of expiry of three years from the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same 
cannot be condoned by taking recourse to Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no 
application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, /947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, 
the same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS 
SITARAM AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is 
ambiguous. It is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it 
cannot change the texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or 
intention when the language of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or 
subtract the words to a statute or read something into it which is not there. It cannot re- 
write or recast legislation. It is also necessary to determine that there exists a 
presumption that the legislature has not used any superfluous words. It is well settled 
that the real intention of legislature must be gathered from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to 
supra, when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that 
the period of limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as 
directory, then it would not have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used 
the words "at any time" instead of using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the 
words at any time’ is found in Section 07), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of 
Section 2A which would clearly depict the intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately 
imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A and as such legislature did not 
employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as found in Section 704) and in its place, it 
has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of three years’. Hence, to interpret the 
period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as directory and not mandatory would 
amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision by the legislature or it would 
amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/20I9 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for 
adjudication of the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub- 
section (3) provides that the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of 
three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified. 


734 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


5. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to 
the petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same 
would have no application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the 
provision under which the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the 
Act, itself was introduced by the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and 
therefore, the provision of limitation which was introduced in the year 2079 alongwith the main 
provision providing for the limitation would apply with all force and the submission that the 
same would have no application to the cause of action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action 
has arisen post 2079, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 2070 
like in the year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would 
never become barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had 
approached the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no 
limitation and the petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the 
Conciliation Officer the claim could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not 
advance the cause of the petitioner, inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of 
the said position, if the Conciliation Officer had sent a failure report to the appropriate 
Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the Labour Court. Merely because the 
Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, which suggestion was accepted 
by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 709 of the Act to the Labour 
Court. 


40. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
MANU/TN/669/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096./9.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As 
such, there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to 
entertain the application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the 
decisions of this Court in the following cases: - 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 93.03, 2076 in W.P. 
No. 27549 of 29735 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.094.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 2076 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated //.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 2077 passed by the Madurai Bench of this 
Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 
20.09.20I9 in W.P. No. 84॥3 of 209 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation 
must be excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days 
from the date of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require 
that the conciliation proceedings should have been completed before making that application 
under Section 2-A(2) of the Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the 
limitation has to be reckoned on the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The 
Petitioner in the instant case had made the application for conciliation on 72,094,2077 which had 
also concluded on 27.06.20I7, but the Petitioner had not approached the Labour Court after 45 
days either from 72,94,.2047 or even from 27.06.2077. As such, the contentions made on behalf of 
the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.”’ 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. ॥/4/.७/१५/८86३7/20/9 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 735 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (8759) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”’. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (2) Ltd., (2003) 
2 SCC I]], held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


235 Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 
ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 
under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court observed as 
under:- 


“9 It is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 
view:- 


#॥2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) 70 SCC 765 has held as under: 


736 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


४॥6, It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but 
it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to extend 
the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the 
same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor 
to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is never an 
evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from 
its operation." 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para उर्ब and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma!].) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per the admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200l and the same has been challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 
28.02.20I. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approved the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his termination, 
because his services were terminated on 2!.l2.200 and filed the present case on 28.02.20I] u/s 2A (2) of the 
Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be 
rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 22 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 864.—siterthiten विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार उप. निदेशक जनरल (कार्यालय प्रमुख), दूरदर्शन केंद्र, 24 अशोक मार्ग, लखनऊ; प्रबंधक, हाईटेक सुरक्षा 
गार्ड सेवाएं, 48/345, दीनदयाल नगर, खदरा, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री प्रेम सागर 
विश्वकर्मा, कामगार,के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के 
पंचाट (संदर्भ संखया 22/2047) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार 
को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ25/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025-07-2023-407-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 22nd May, 2023 

S.O. 86.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 22/207) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The Dy. Director Genedral (Head of Office), Doordarshan Kendra, 24 Ashok Marg, Lucknow ; The 
Manager, Hitech Security Guard Services, 8/345, Deendayal Nagar, Khadra, Lucnow, and Shri Prem Sagar 
Vishwakarma, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
25/05/2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-07 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]737 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
Present: JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
I.D. No. 22/207 
BETWEEN 


Prem Sagar Vishwakarma, S/o Sri Ram Asre 
R/o E 6/N2/25, Sector-N, Aliganj, Lucknow. 


AND 
l. Dy. Director Genedral (Head of Office), Doordarshan Kendra, 24 Ashok Marg, Lucknow. 
2. Manager, Hitech Security Guard Services, 8/345, Deendayal Nagar, Khadra, Lucnow. 


AWARD 


On 2.08.207 the claimant/workman has field the ID case No. 22/20l7 as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), challenging the 
impugned order of termination dated 30.!2.203. On behalf of the respondent a preliminary objection has been 
raised that as services of claimant/workman were terminated on 30.2.20l3; however, he filed present 
adjunction case u/s 2A (2) of the Act on 2.08.203; which is barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 
2A (3) of the Act, as such, the same may be dismissed. 


I have heard learned counsel for parties; on the above said point/preliminary objection. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28" October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 30 February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency 
of conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings 
and of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under:- 


(iii) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and growing 
production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in production i.e. 
absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and are in a harmonious 
bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the vitality of industry. 


(iv) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really caused by 
the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of labour struggle is 
nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied forms e.g. (a) increase in 


738 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. 
A.D.Divelkar, AIR 7957 SC 2]) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement 
of industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece 
of social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, 
(G. Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 7957 Bombay 700) and amelioration of 
the conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. LTribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take u[ an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the 
amendments of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified 
categories of individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after I.2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 20I0), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (l) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


77) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and 
his employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 709, any such workman as is specified 
in sub-Section(!) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 739 


date he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate 
Government for conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the 
Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the 
dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply 
in relation to such adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section(!)." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 30.2.203, thereafter he has filed the present case before 
this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 2.08.20l7 on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 304, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


#॥9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an 
irresistible conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or 
the Tribunal as the case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the 
date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in 
sub-Section (4). 7 Time limit for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub- 
Section (3) of Section 2A does not appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) 
of Section 2A. In any event right conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding 
the date of expiry of three years from the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same 
cannot be condoned by taking recourse to Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no 
application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, /947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, 
the same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS 
SITARAM AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is 
ambiguous. It is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it 
cannot change the texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or 
intention when the language of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or 
subtract the words to a statute or read something into it which is not there. It cannot re- 
write or recast legislation. It is also necessary to determine that there exists a 
presumption that the legislature has not used any superfluous words. It is well settled 
that the real intention of legislature must be gathered from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to 
supra, when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that 
the period of limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as 
directory, then it would not have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used 
the words "at any time" instead of using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the 
words at any time’ is found in Section /0(7), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of 
Section 2A which would clearly depict the intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately 
imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A and as such legislature did not 
employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as found in Section 70[व) and in its place, it 
has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of three years’. Hence, to interpret the 
period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as directory and not mandatory would 
amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision by the legislature or it would 
amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought to be made." 


740 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/209 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for 
adjudication of the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub- 
section (3) provides that the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of 
three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified. 


5. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to 
the petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same 
would have no application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the 
provision under which the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the 
Act, itself was introduced by the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and 
therefore, the provision of limitation which was introduced in the year 2079 alongwith the main 
provision providing for the limitation would apply with all force and the submission that the 
same would have no application to the cause of action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action 
has arisen post 2079, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 20709 
like in the year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would 
never become barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had 
approached the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no 
limitation and the petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the 
Conciliation Officer the claim could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not 
advance the cause of the petitioner, inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of 
the said position, if the Conciliation Officer had sent a failure report to the appropriate 
Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the Labour Court. Merely because the 
Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, which suggestion was accepted 
by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 709 of the Act to the Labour 
Court. 


40. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
MANU/TN/669/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096./9.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As 
such, there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to 
entertain the application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the 
decisions of this Court in the following cases: - 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 93.03.2076 in W.P. 
No. 27579 of 205 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.94.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 2076 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated //.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 20I7 passed by the Madurai Bench of this 
Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 
20.09.20I9 in W.P. No. 84॥3 of 2049 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation 
must be excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days 
from the date of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require 
that the conciliation proceedings should have been completed before making that application 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 [74] 


under Section 2-A(2) of the Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the 
limitation has to be reckoned on the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The 
Petitioner in the instant case had made the application for conciliation on /2,04.2947 which had 
also concluded on 27.06.20I7, but the Petitioner had not approached the Labour Court after 45 
days either from 72.94.2047 or even from 27.06.20I7. As such, the contentions made on behalf of 
the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.”’ 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. ॥/4/.०९०५/८53//20 9 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (8759 LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 7954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (P) Ltd., (2003) 
2 SCC I2], held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25. Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 
ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 
observed as under:- 


“9 Jt is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


742 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 
view:- 


# 2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) 0 SCC 765 has held as under: 


/॥6, It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but 
it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to extend 
the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the 
same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor 
to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is never an 
evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from 
its operation." 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para म and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma!].) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position which emerged out that, the services 
of the workman was terminated on 30.2.20I3, challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 
2.08.207, so, the present case/claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the 
Act, liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected being barred by period of limitation as per section 2A (3) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, |947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before appropriate forum/court as 
per law. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 24 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 862.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 7947 (4947 का 74) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार निदेशक, मैसर्स क़्वालिटी सर्विसेज एंड सॉल्यूशन, गोवा,के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और महासचिव, 
मर्मगोवा वाटरफ्रंट Tht यूनियन, वास्को-द-गामा, गोवा, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-4 मुंबई के Gare (संदर्भ संख्या NTB -2/20 of 20(3) को जैसा कि अनुलम्नक में 
दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., Wear-420/47/20(3-aTearr(e79)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 24th May, 2023 
S.O. 862.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. NTB-!/20 of 203) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court - I Mumbai as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to The Director, M/s Quality Services & Solution,Goa and The General Secretary, 
Marmagoa Waterfront Workers’ Union, Vasco-da-Gama, Goa, which was received along with soft copy of the 
award by the Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L- 420 [/] ॥/203-]२ (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 743 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL १२०., MUMBAI PRESENT 
(JUSTICE K.D.BHUTIA) 
Ref No. CGIT/20 of 203 
Date: 29. 2.2022 


Both sides are found absent when the matter is called. 


Records shows that this reference case is of 203. Unfortunately, even after lapse of more than 9 years, 
the concerned workman Shri Shrikrishna D. Kankonkar or his union has failed to file statement of claim. Record 
shows notice of appearance has been duly served upon the union. From such conduct on the part of union / 
workman it can be safely inferred the union / concerned workman is no more interested to proceed further with 
this present reference case referred under L-420]I/7/203-IR (DU) dated 2.04.204. 


Since there is no statement of claim being filed by the union, it is presumed that there is no cause of action to the 
alleged dispute. Therefore, this reference case is disposed of. 


Award is passed accordingly. 
Send copy of this order to be Ministry of Labour for doing needful as per law. 
Justice K.D BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 24 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 863.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 7947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 

सरकार निदेशक/पंजीकृत, राष्ट्रीय औद्योगिक अभियांत्रिकी संस्थान,विहार लेक रोड, मुंबई,के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध 
नियोजकों और श्री कमलाकर रघुनाथ पाटिल, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्यायालय-2 मुंबई के पंचाट (संदर्भ संखया CGIT -2/6 of 209) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में 
दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 
[सं. एल-42025-07-2023-92-आईआर/(डीयू)] 

डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 24th May, 2023 


S.O. 863.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. CGIT -2/6 of 209) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court - If Mumbai as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to The Director/Registered, National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Vihar Lake Road, 
Mumbai, and Shri Kamlakar Raghunath Patil, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by 
the Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-92 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO. 2, MUMBAI 


The Director/Registered,National Institute of Industrial Engineering, 
(NITIE Campus), Vihar Lake Road, Mumbai — 400 087. ...First Party. 


AND 


Kamlakar Raghunath Patil, C/o. Shramjivi Kamgar Union, 
Near Panchal Steel Industries, Next to Eco Space, 
Mogra village road, Andheri (E), Mumbai — 400 069. ...second Party. 


744 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Dated: 27.02.2023 
AWARD 


Present: Mr. Kamlakar Raghunath Patil, Second Party Workman in 
person. 
None for the First Party Management. 
The present application under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is pending before this 
Court for 25.04.2023. 


However, the workman Mr. Kamlakar Raghunath Patil has come present in person and filed an 
application for withdrawal of the present application. In view of his prayer for preponment, the next date is 
preponed to today. His statement has been recorded to the following effect: 


“Tt is stated that I have settled my grievance with the First Party management out of court and, 
therefore, my present application under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 may be 
dismissed as withdrawn.” 


In view of the above statement, the present application under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947, is dismissed as withdrawn and ‘no dispute’ award is passed. 


File be consigned to record room. 


LAXMI NARAIN JINDAL, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 24 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 864.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार निदेशक/पंजीकृत, राष्ट्रीय औद्योगिक अभियांत्रिकी संस्थान,विहार लेक रोड, मुंबई,के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध 
नियोजकों और श्री अशोक जाधव, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम 
न्‍्यायालय-2 मुंबई के पंचाट (संदर्भ संखया CGIT -2/5 of 2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को 
प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025-07-2023-94-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 24th May, 2023 


S.O. 864.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. CGIT -2/5 of 209) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court - If Mumbai as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to The Director/Registered, National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Vihar Lake Road, 
Mumbai, and ShriAshok Jadhav, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central 
Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-9! -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.2, MUMBAI 


The Director/Registered,National Institute of Industrial Engineering, 
(NITIE Campus), Vihar Lake Road, Mumbai — 400 087. ...First Party. 


AND 


Ashok Jadhav, C/o. Shramjivi Kamgar Union, 
Near Panchal Steel Industries, Next to Eco Space, 
Mogra village road, Andheri (E), Mumbai — 400 069. ...second Party. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]745 


Dated: 27.02.2023 
AWARD 


Present: Mr. Ashok Jadhav, Second Party Workman in 
person. 
None for the First Party Management. 


The present application under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is pending before this 
Court for 25.04.2023. 


However, the workman Mr. Ashok Jadhav has come present in person and filed an application for 
withdrawal of the present application. In view of his prayer for preponment, the next date is preponed to today. 
His statement has been recorded to the following effect: 


“Tt is stated that I have settled my grievance with the First Party management out of court and, 
therefore, my present application under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 may be 
dismissed as withdrawn.” 


In view of the above statement, the present application under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947, is dismissed as withdrawn and ‘no dispute’ award is passed. 


File be consigned to record room. 


LAXMI NARAIN JINDAL, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 24 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 865.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (947 का 74) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-4 मुंबई के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या NTB-07 of 
2020) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. WaA-7404 /22/206--arear(79)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 24th May, 2023 


S.O. 865.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. NTB-0l of 2020) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court - I Mumbai as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to Hindustant Aeronautics Ltd. and Their Workmen, which was received along with soft 
copy of the award by the Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L- 40/22/206-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL, MUMBAI 
Present: Justice K.D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 
REFERENCE No. NTB- 0 of 2020 
PARTIES:- 
HINDUSTANT AERONAUTICS LTD. : MANAGEMENT 
Vis. 


THEIR WORKMEN : SECOND PARTY 


746 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


APPEARANCES: 
FOR THE MANAGEMENT : Ms. Geeta Raju 
Advocate 
FOR THE SECOND PARTY : Absent 
Mumbai, dated the 297 December, 2022. 
AWARD 


Management is present through its learned counsel Ms. Geeta Raju. 
None appear on behalf of the union when the matter is called for hearing. 


Record shows union has stopped appearing and taking part in the hearing of the present reference case 
since 08.0.202. Such conduct on the part of the union shows that union is no more interested to proceed with 
the hearing of the case or conduct this reference case. 


Therefore, invoking Rule 22 of I.D. (Central) Rules, !957, this tribunal decided to proceed with the 
hearing of this case. 


The Govt. of India, Ministry of Labour has initially referred this reference case for adjudication of the 
issue “Is the management of HAL justified in unilaterally modifying the leave encashment rules provided in the 
mutually agreed settlement, which will adversely affect the workman vide its letter No. L-!40/22/206-IR 
(DU) dated 07.07.20I7. Subsequently, Ministry issued a corrigendum reference order vide its letter No. L- 
40I/22/206-IR (DU) dated 24.0.207 and corrected the issue for adjudication as follow: 


“Whether the action of management of HAL, to unilaterally modify the leave encashment rules, 988 provided 
for in the mutually agreed settlement in respect of calculation of leave encashment considering 30 days in a 
month instead of 26 days a month?” 


On receiving such reference, parties were duly notified. The union has filed its statement of claim and 
management has filed its written statement. 


The union in its claim statement has alleged that the workmen who are working for HAL is governed 
by the revised Leave Rules of 988 which was framed as per the settlement that was arrived in the course of 
conciliation proceedings between the management and union. Appendix — I, clause 7 provides for encashment of 
vacation leave and the manner of computation of leave encashment amount and which read as “For the purposes 
of computing the encashment amount, the rate of encashment per day of leave shall be first arrived at. For this 
purpose, the monthly rate of basic pay (including special pay, personal pay, if any) and Dearness Allowance 
shall be added and the sum so arrived at shall then be divided by 26. The resultant figure shall be the rate of 
encashment per day of leave. The number of days of leave to be encashed should then be multiplied by this ratio 
of encashment per day for arriving at the encashment amount payable.” 


By espousing the present dispute, it has alleged the management wants to change the method of 
calculations. The management while calculating wages for encashment of leave wants to take 30 days for 
division instead of 26 days as stipulated in the revised Leave Rules of 988. 


On the other hand, the management in its W.S. has admitted that as per settlement dated 4.06.988 between 
management and its workmen, it was settled for encashment of vacation leave; basic pay and dearness 
allowance are added and the total of the same is divided by 26 to arrive per day wage for the calculation of 
encashment. 


It has also admitted that the management had issued a notice under section 9A of the I.D. Act, 947, 
being No. BC/A/2038/l093 dated 6.05.2007 by giving 2 months notice to terminate the settlement under 
section l9 (2) of the Act, so the day’s wage can be arrived by dividing basic and D.A. with 30 instead of 26 
days. But at the same time it has contended that such notice cannot take away the benefit granted under the 
settlement dated 4.06.988 as in order to modify the settlement dated 988, a new settlement is required to be 
arrived between the management and the unions of the workmen. 


It has also been contended that different trade unions raised industrial disputes immediately upon 
issuance of notice under section 9A on 6.05.2007 and as such the management withdrew the disputed notice 
dated 2007 from its all Divisions located across India and terminated the memorandum of settlement which it 
had with various Divisions in the year 2009. Therefore, it has alleged no more there exist the disputed notice 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 [747 


under section 9A of the Act dated 6.05.2007 or any settlement it had with its different Divisions in the year 
2009 on the basis of such notice, the claim and case of the unions is not maintainable as there exist no cause of 
action to raise the dispute under reference. 


At the time of hearing learned counsel Ms. Geeta Raju submitted that Leave Rules 988 for its 
workmen issued under Personnel Circular No. 582 dated I5.07.988 still in existence as there is no fresh 
settlement between the management and workmen / unions for modification of the same. The workmen who are 
governed by the HAL Leave Rules, 988 are still enjoying the leave encashment benefit as provided therein. 
Thereby, she prays for passing no dispute award. 


Since the authorized representative of the management who was present along with the learned counsel 
Ms. Raju submit that Leave Rules [986 is still in force and no modification as intended by the management in 
the year 2007 had taken place till date, this tribunal holds the reference is not maintainable as there exist no 
cause for raising the dispute as referred by the Ministry of Labour to this tribunal for adjudication. 


Accordingly, no dispute award is passed. 
The Ref. No. NTB — 0! of 2020 is disposed of. 
Send copy of this order to the Ministry of Labour for doing needful. 
Justice K.D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 
का.आ. 866.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम i947 (4947 का 44 ) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार sea बैंक के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध afer 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रमन्यायालय, चेन्नई के पंचाट (48/20I9) प्रकाशित 
करती है। 


[a. एल-42042/49/2049 -आई are(Ht-II)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 866.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.48/209) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Chennai as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Andhra Bank and 
their workmen. 


[No. L- 202/9/209 -IR (B-ID] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CGIT-CUM-LABOUR COURT & EPF APPELLATE TRIBUAL CHENNAI 


Monday, the 27" June, 2022 


Present: DIPTI MOHAPATRA, LL.M. Presiding Officer 
ID No. 48/209 


BETWEEN 


Sri Dinesh Kumar 

S/o A. Ranganathan 

72, A-Block, Munuswamy Pillai Street 

Dr. Ambedkar Bridge 

Mylapore 

Chennai-600004 : [7 Party/Petitioner 


748 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


AND 
The Chief Manager 
Andhra Bank, Zonal Office 
Linghi Chetty Street 
Chennai-60000 : 2™ Party/I‘' Respondent 


AWARD 


The Central Government, Ministry of Labour & Employment vide its Order No. L-202/9/209-IR 
(B.II) dtd. 2!.05.209 referred the following Industrial Dispute of this Tribunal for adjudication. 
The schedule mentioned in that order is: 


“Whether the demand of Sri R. Dinesh Kumar Sub-Staff of Andhra Bank for reinstatement 
into service w.e.f. 07.2.208, the date of termination (stated to be working since 28.04.206 
to 07.2.208) with all attendant benefits is legal and justified? If not, to what relief is the 
workman entitled to?” 
2: A little reference to the backdrop of the case needs mention that the Petitioner moved the Tribunal 
vide 2A Application on dtd. l4.03.209 which was registered as ID 48/209 and on dtd. 02.04.20l9 order 
was passed for issuance of notice listing the case to 30.09.20I9. In between the above reference from the 
Appropriate Government was received on 03.06.20l9. Accordingly, the matter was listed to 5.07.209 for 
hearing vide note dtd. 2.06.209. It reveals that after hearing of the parties the 2A Application was clubbed 
with the Reference unchanging the ID Number as already registered vide Order dtd. 05.08.20l9 and_ the 2A 
Application since considered as Claim Statement, the Respondent was directed to file Counter Statement fixing 
the case to 30.09.20l9. On that day, the Respondent filed the Counter Statement. The case is listed to 
05..209 for filing of affidavit evidence of the Petitioner. The Petitioner failed to file the same resulting to 
several adjournments (i3 dates) till 30..202!. The Petitioner nor the Authorized Representative appeared on 
any of the date to file the Affidavit Evidence. However, without resorting to any coercive action against the 
Petitioner, the Tribunal viewed sympathetically and suo-moto afforded so many adjournments considering the 
prevailed tough situation of Pandemic COVID-9. The Petitioner did not turn up.Not a single petition was filed 
for adjournment. However, for the ends of justice the First party Petitioner was afforded with some more 
opportunities by re-listing the case on 05.0!.2022and to 04.02.2022. Neither the Petitioner nor his Authorized 
Representative appeared or filed the Claim Statement. 


3. As such in view of the discussion held in preceding paragraphs it appears the Petitioner is not 
interested to proceed with the case. The case is simply dragged to an extend of almost 3 years only due to non- 
cooperation of the Petitioner in appearing and participating in the proceeding. This Tribunal is constrained to 
conclude the proceeding as it deems there exists no dispute in between the parties for adjudication as per the 
reference. 


In the result the ID case stands dismissed. 
An award is passed accordingly. 


DIPTI MOHAPATRA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 867.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44 ) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार sara बैंक के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध मनिर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रमन्यायालय, चेन्नई के Fare (46/209) प्रकाशित 
करती है। 


[a. एल-42042/47/2049 -आईआर(बी-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 867.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.46/209) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]749 


Chennai as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Andhra Bank and 
their workmen. 
[No. L- 20i2/7/209-IR (B-ID] 


SALONI, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 


Monday, the 27" June, 2022 
Present: DIPTI MOHAPATRA, LL.M., Presiding Officer 


ID No. 46/209 
BETWEEN 
Sri S. Prasanth 
S/o Sigamani 
No. 8/2, Gurusamy Nagar 
4" Street, Pulianthope 
Chenai-60002 : [7 Party/Petitioner 
AND 
l. The Chief Manager 
Andhra Bank, Zonal Office 
Linghi Chetty Street 
Chennai-60000 : 2707 Party/I‘t Respondent 
2. The Senior Manager (HR) 
Andhra Bank, Zonal Office 
Linghi Chetty Street 
Chennai-60000I : 2704 Party/2™ Respondent 
AWARD 


The Central Government, Ministry of Labour & Employment vide its Order No. L-202/7/209-IR 
(B.IL) dtd. 20.05.209 referred the following Industrial Dispute of this Tribunal for adjudication. 


The schedule mentioned in that order is: 


“Whether the demand of Sri S. Prasanth, Sub-Staff of Andhra Bank for reinstatement into 
service w.e.f. 3.0.207 (stated to be working since 9.2.20] to 3.0.207) with all attendant 
benefits is legal and justified? If not, to what relief is the workman entitled to?” 


2. A little reference to the backdrop of the case needs mention that the Petitioner moved the Tribunal vide 
2A Application (S.R. No. 209/9) dtd. 4.03.209 raising the dispute. The above reference dtd. 20.05.20l9 was 
received on 03.06.20l9 from the Appropriate Government, the dispute on reference is registered as ID No. 
46/209. The Application since was not registered as ID case, due order was passed to club up with the 
reference under ID 46/20l9. The 2A Application was considered as the Claim Statement and accordingly 
Respondent filed Counter statement without any delay. 


3. The notices were issued to both the parties for their appearance fixing the case to 30.04.209. None of 
the parties appeared. The case was posted to several dates in the year 20I9 i.e. to .06.20I9, 5.07.209, 
05.08.20i9, 26.08.209, 30.09.20I9 and 05.!.20l9. More opportunities wee afforded as adjournments in the 
year 2020 i.e. 03.0I.2020, 06.02.2020 and 06.02.2020. The Petitioner nor his Authorized Representative 
appeared on those days. However, owing to Pandemic COVID-9 few more adjournments were afforded to the 
Petitioner for appearance i.e. on 5.04.2020, 04.08.2020 and 26.0.2020. The Petitioner nor the Authorized 


750 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Representative appeared. Without resorting to any coercive action against the First Party Petitioner, the Tribunal 
viewed sympathetically and suo-moto afforded 5 adjournments in the year 202] considering the prevailed tough 
situation of | Pandemic COVID-l9. The Petitioner did not turn up. Not a single petitioner was filed for 
adjournment. However, for the ends of justice the First party Petitioner was afforded with some more 
opportunities by re-listing the case on 04.0.2020 and 02.02.2022. Neither the Petitioner nor his Authorized 
Representative appeared or filed the Claim Statement. 


4. As such in view of the discussion held in preceding paragraphs it appears the Petitioner is not 
interested to proceed with the case. The case is simply dragged to an extend of almost 3 years only due to non- 
cooperation of the Petitioner in appearing and participating in the proceeding. This Tribunal is constrained to 
conclude the proceeding as it deems there exists no dispute in between the parties for adjudication as per the 
reference. 


In the result the ID case stands dismissed. 
An award is passed accordingly. 


DIPTI MOHAPATRA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 868.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 7947 (4947 का 4) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार केंद्रीय माध्यमिक शिक्षा बोर्ड, शिक्षा केंद्र, 2- सामुदायिक केंद्र, प्रीत विहार, दिल्‍ली; ठेकेदार मैसर्स बी. के. 
एंटरप्राइजेज, मादीपुर, दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और महासचिव, दिल्‍ली कार्यालय और स्थापना 
कर्मचारी संघ, आईटीओ, नई दिलली,के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम 
न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 20/206) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित 
करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., Wear-420/49/20/6-arearz(e79)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 868.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 20/206) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court - IT New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Central Board of Secondary Education, Sikha Kendra, 2- Community Centre, Preet Vihar, Delhi ; 
The Contractor M/s B. K Enterprises, Madi Pur, Delhi, and The General Secretary, Delhi Offices And 
Establishment Employees Union, ITO,New Delhi, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the 
Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L-420/9/206 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI 
Present: Smt. Pranita Mohanty, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 20/206 
Date of Passing Award- 80 May, 2023 


Between: 


The General Secretary, 

Delhi Offices And Establishment Employees Union, 

3-A, Rouse Avenue, ITO, 

New Delhi-i0002. ... Workman 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 75] 


Versus 


l. Central Board of Secondary Education, 
Sikha Kendra, 2- Community Centre, Preet Vihar, 
Delhi-0092. 


2. Contractor 
M/s B. K Enterprises, 
B-578, Madi Pur, 
Delhi-0063. ... Managements 


Appearances:- 
Shri B.K Prasad, Ld .A/R for the claimant. 
Shri M.A Niyazi, Ld. A/R for the management CBSE 


AWARD 


The Government of India in Ministry of Labour & Employment has referred the present dispute 
existing between employer i.e. the management of Central Board of Secondary Education, Sikha Kendra, 2- 
Community Centre, Preet Vihar, Delhi-!0092 and the Contractor M/s B.K Enterprises,B-578, Madi Pur,Delhi- 
0063 and its workman/claimant herein, under clause (d) of sub section (l)and sub section (2A) of section 0 
of the Industrial Dispute Act 947 vide letter No. L-420/9/206 (IR(DU)) dated 30.03.206 to this tribunal 
for adjudication to the following effect. 


“Whether termination of Sh. Inderjeet Singh S/o Sh. Digamber Singh by the 
management of Central Board of Secondary Education/ B. K Enterprises, w.e.f 
6.04.205 without complying with the provisions of ID Act, 947 is just, fair and legal? 
If not what relief the workman concerned is entitled to?” 


In the claim petition the claimant has stated that he started working for the mgt no. | in the year 20]] 
in the post of pump operator and his last drawn salary was 7400/- p.m. When he was discharging his work 
with dedication and continuously the mgt was treating him with unfairness as no letter of appointment, wage 
slip , leave book etc were granted to him. The benefit of EPF and ESI was not extended to him. Suddenly, the 
mgt no. | outsourced the service of the claimant and the persons like him by introducing a contractor who is the 
mgt no. 2. The contract between the mgt no. | and 2 was sham and intended to camouflage the right of the 
claimant. Against the will of the claimant his name was shown in the record of mgt no. 2 even though he was 
working under the supervision and control of mgt no. |. When he raised objection, his service was verbally 
terminated on !5.04.20I5. The claimant raised a dispute through the union against this arbitrary order of 
termination. The conciliation officer though tried for conciliation, the same failed and the appropriate 
government referred the matter for adjudication. In the claim petition the claimant has prayed for a direction to 
the management to reinstatement him into the service and grants the legal benefits. 


The mgt no. | appeared and filed written statement denying his relationship with the claimant as its 
employer. It has been stated that the claimant was working through the contractor and getting the payment from 
the contractor. Any person appointed on temporary basis for a contractual work and not through a proper 
selection process cannot claim regularization and reinstatement. 


The mgt no. 2 did not appear and was proceeded ex-parte. On the rivals pleading issues were framed by 
order dated 5.03.208 in the following manner: 


l. Whether the claim is not legally tenable in view of the various preliminary objections taken by the 
management? 


2. In terms of reference. 


When the matter was adjourned to workman evidence. The claimant workman filed an application on 
5..2022 stating therein that w.p no. !2994 of 202] and other connected writ petition are pending before the 
Hon’ble High Court of Delhi in which the dispute which is the subject matter of this dispute is to be decided as 
ordered by the High Court . Copy of the order dated 2.08.202 and 7..202! have been filed. In the petition 
has stated that the dispute being pending before the Hon’ble High Court does not want pursue the matter before 
this tribunal and thus wanted to withdraw . The mgt raised no objection. Hence, this award is being passed. 


752 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ORDER 


The reference be and the same is answered against the claimant since he has no dispute raised against 
the mgt in this proceeding. 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 7 
of the ID act 947. 


The reference is accordingly answered. 
Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 869.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (947 का 74) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार मुख्य कार्यकारी अभियंता सीपीडब्ल्यूडी, प्रेममंडल-4 निर्माण भवन, नई दिल्ली; कार्यकारी अभियंता, 
सीपीडब्ल्यूडी, प्रेममंडल-, इंद्रप्रसथ भवन, नई दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री तरुण कुमार झा, 
कामगार,के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्ली के 
पंचाट(संदर्भ संखया 426/2024) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय 
सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025-07-2023-99-आईआर (डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 869.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 26/202) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court - IT New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Chief Executive Engineer CPWD, Premandal-! Nirman Bhawan New Delhi ;The Executive 
Engineer, CPWD,Premandal-!, Indraprastha Bhawan, New Delhi, and Shri Tarun Kumar Jha,Worker, which 
was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023-99-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI. 
Present: Smt. PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 26/202 
Date of Passing Award- 0 May, 2023 
Between: 


Shri Tarun Kumar Jha, S/o Late Sh. Sadanand Jha, 
R/o K. N 82 Amrit vihar, Gali No. 05, 
b-Block, Buradi, Delhi-0084.. ... Workman 


Versus 


l. The Chief Executive Engineer CPWD, 
Premandal-l Nirman Bhawan New Delhi-!000. 


2. The Executive Engineer, CPWD, 
Premandal-|, Indraprastha Bhawan, New Delhi-|0002. ... Managements 


Appearances:- 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 753 


Claimant in person. 


None for the management. 


AWARD 


This is an application filed u/s 2A of the Id. Act by the claimant wherein he has alleged illegal 
termination with a prayer for reinstatement in service with full back wages and consequential benefits. Notice 
being served. When the matter was pending for appearance and written statement by the mgt , a proposal was 
advanced by the parties for amicable settlement and the matter was adjourned for settlement. On .!2.2022, the 
claimant gave a statement to the effect that he has settled the dispute with the mgt and does not have any 
grievance against the mgt for which he wants to withdraw the proceeding. 


Hence, this no dispute award is passed. Hence ordered . 
ORDER 


The claim be and the same is dismissed as the claimant has no dispute against the mgt and this no 
dispute award is accordingly passed. 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 7 
of the ID act 947. 


Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 870.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (947 का 74) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार केंद्रीय माध्यमिक शिक्षा बोर्ड, शिक्षा केंद्र, 2- सामुदायिक केंद्र, प्रीत विहार, दिल्‍ली; प्रबंध निदेशक, मेसर्स न्यू 
ग्रोन सॉफ्टवेयर सॉल्यूशन (पी) लिमिटेड, मोती नगर, नई दिल्‍ली; प्रबंध निदेशक, मेसर्स नेहा एविएशन मैनेजमेंट प्रा. 
लिमिटेड ,महिपालपुर एक्सटेंशन, नई दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्रीमती चित्रा, कामगार,के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 
03/206 arising in ID. No. 23/2046) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो 
केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025/07/2023-403-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 870.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 03/206 arising in ID. No. 23/20l6) of the Central 
Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court - If New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial 
dispute between the employers in relation to Central Board of Secondary Education, Sikha Kendra, 
2- Community Centre, Preet Vihar, Delhi ;The Managing Director, M/s New Grown Software Solution (p) Ltd., 
Moti Nagar, New Delhi; The Managing Director, M/s Neha Aviation Management Pvt. Ltd.,Mahipalpur 
Extension, New Delhi, and Smt Chitra, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the 
Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L- 42025/07/2023-03-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI. 
Present: Smt. Pranita Mohanty, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi. 


754 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE Comp.no. 03/206 arising in ID. No. 23/206 
Date of Passing Award- 8 May, 2023 
Between: 


Smt Chitra, 

W/o Sh. Prakash Kanti, 

C/o Sh. Balvir Saini, 

R/o 3/4, Street No. 6, 

Bhikam Singh Colony, 

Vishwas Nagar, Shahdara, 

Delhi-0032. ....Workman 


Versus 


l. Central Board of Secondary Education, 
Sikha Kendra, 2- Community Centre, Preet Vihar, 
Delhi. 


2. M/s New Grown Software Solution (p) Ltd. 
Through its Managing Director, 
DLF Tower -34, Moti Nagar, 
Third Floor, New Delhi. 


3. M/s Neha Aviation Management Pvt. Ltd. 
Through Its managing Director, 
RZA-83 Road No. 4, Gali No.6, 
Mahipalpur Extension, New Delhi ..... Management 


Appearances:- 


Shri B.K Prasad, Ld .A/R for the claimant. 
Shri M.A Niyazi, Ld. A/R for the management. (CBCE) 


AWARD 


This is an application filed by the complainant invoking the provision of section 33 A of the Id. Act for 
violation of the provisions of 33 of the ID. Act during the pendency of ID. No. 23/206 . 


The fact mentioned in the application is that the applicant had been employed by mgt no. | w.e.f 
4.06.20i2 as a computer assistant. Subsequently, on 9.!.203 she appeared in the walk in interview conducted 
by the mgt no. | and was selected. Thereafter, she was appointed on a monthly wage of २६. ।0000/- on contract 
basis for a period of 6 months. This appointment was renewed from time to time . The mgt no. | had barred the 
claimant from taking any employment outside during the tenure of the contract. She was assured by the mgt no. 
that her service would be regularized . Suddenly the mgt engaged a contractor who is the mgt no. 2 of this 
proceeding and the service of the applicant was placed under the said contractor. That contractor was changed 
after May, 205 and a new contractor i.e mgt no. 3 was brought in. Though, the contractors were changed, the 
claimant continued to serve the mgt uninterruptedly . But the claimant was insisting for regularization of her 
service. Her last drawn wage was |3000/- p.m when the mgt asked her to deposit Rs. 3000/- for their 
registration under the contractor. The claimant refused to do so. At that time she became pregnant and 
expecting to deliver a baby in September 20l6. Having ESI no. she was visiting the ESI hospital and as per the 
advice of the doctor she remained on leave till 8.!.206 . On 9..206 though she was to join , that was a 
holiday being Saturday . On 2I.!.206 when she reported for duty, the mgt no. | did not allow. By marking her 
attendance in biometric system she left the office. At that time she was verbally informed about termination of 
her service. All the efforts made by her to convince the mgt for joining became futile. As there was a dispute 
pending for regularization of her service the order of termination was illegal and the claimant filed the present 
application invoking the provision of Section 33 of the ID. Act. In the claim a prayer has been made to declare 
the order of the termination as illegal and a direction for her reinstatement. 


The mgt no. | appears and filed written statement denying employer employee relationship and 
maintainability of the proceeding. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 755 


The mgt no. 2 and 3 did not appear and proceeded ex-parte. On the rivals pleading issues were framed 
by order dated 5.03.208 in the following manner: 


l. Whether there is no relationship of employer and employee between the claimant and management no. | 
CBSE? 


2. Whether termination of the claimant is against the provisions of the ID and against the principles of 
natural justice? 


3. Relief. 


When the matter was adjourned to workman evidence. The claimant workman filed an application on 
5..2022 stating therein that w.p.c no. 2994 of 202] and other connected writ petition are pending before 
the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi in which the dispute which is the subject matter of this dispute is to be decided 
as ordered by the High Court . Copy of the order dated 2.08.202l and 7.!.202l have been filed. In the 
petition has stated that the dispute being pending before the Hon’ble High Court does not want pursue the matter 
before this tribunal and thus wanted to withdraw . The mgt raised no objection. Hence, this award is being 
passed. 


ORDER 


The reference be and the same is answered against the claimant since he has no dispute raised against 
the mgt in this proceeding. 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section |7 
of the ID act 947. 


The reference is accordingly answered. 
Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 874.—sirearthrs विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महानिदेशक, गृह मंत्रालय, नॉर्थ ब्लॉक, नई दिल्‍ली; किरण एंटरप्राइजेज, प्लॉट नंबर 67-ए, शिव कॉलोनी, बी 
टोंक रोड सांगानेर, जयपुर, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री विपिन, कामगार , द्वारा - अध्यक्ष श्री हुकम चंद, 
सीपीडब्ल्यूडी, कर्मचारी संघ, गुड़गांव हरियाणा, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- 
श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्ली के Tare (संदर्भ संख्या 80/2020) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, को 
प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025-07-2023-94-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 87i.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 80/2020) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court - वी New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Director General, Ministry of Home Affairs, North Block, New Delhi; Kiran Enterprises, Plot 
No. 67-A, Shiv Colony, B Tonk Road Sanganer, Jaipur, and Shri Vipin, Worker, Through- The President Shri 
Hukum Chand, CPWD, Karamchari Union, Gurgoan Harayana, which was received along with soft copy of the 
award by the Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023-94-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI. 
Present: Smt. Pranita Mohanty, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi. 


756 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE No. 80/2020 
Date of Passing Award- 0 May,2023 
Between: 

Shri Vipin 
Through, The President Sh. Hukum Chand, 
CPWD, Karamchari Union, Babu Lal Ji Complex, 
Shop No. 04, Gurgoan Road, Opposite Bus Stand, 
Gurgoan Harayana-!2200I. ...Workman 

Versus 


l. The Director General, Ministry of Home Affairs, 
North Block, New Delhi-!000]. 


2. Kiran Enterprises, 
Plot No. 67-A, Shiv Colony, 
B Tonk Road Sanganer, Jaipur-302029. ... Managements 


Appearances:- 
None for the Claimant 
None for the Management 
AWARD 


This is an application u/s 2-A of the ID. Act, 947 filed by the claimant against the management 
alleging illegal termination of his service. 


Notice served on the claimant and the management. 


The claimant filed the claim statement praying a direction to the management to reinstatement him with 
full back wages. 


The management did not appear nor filed w/s and thus issues were not framed. 


When the claimant was called upon to adduce evidence, he did not appear and the matter was reserved 
for passing no dispute award. 


The stand taken in the claim petition is not proved and substantiated for want of oral and documentary 
evidence adduced by the claimant. Hence this no dispute award is passed. 


ORDER 


The claim be and the same is dismissed as not proved and accordingly answered against the claimant. 
This no dispute award is passed and forwarded to the parties. 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 47 
of the ID act 947. 


The application u/s 2-A of the ID. Act, !947 is accordingly answered. 
Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]757 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 
का.आ. 872.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 7947 (4947 का 4) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महानिदेशक, गृह मंत्रालय, नॉर्थ ब्लॉक, नई दिल्‍ली; किरण एंटरप्राइजेज, प्लॉट नंबर 67-ए, शिव कॉलोनी, 
बी टोंक रोड सांगानेर, जयपुर, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री रमेश कुमार, कामगार , द्वारा - अध्यक्ष श्री 
हकम चंद, सीपीडब्ल्यूडी, कर्मचारी संघ, गुड़गांव हरियाणा,के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 8/2020) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया 
गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025-07-2023-93-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 872.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 8/2020) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court - Il New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers 
in relation to The Director General, Ministry of Home Affairs, North Block, New Delhi; Kiran Enterprises, 
Plot No. 67-A, Shiv Colony, B Tonk Road Sanganer, Jaipur, and Shri Ramesh Kumar, Worker, Through- The 
President Shri Hukum Chand, CPWD, Karamchari Union, Gurgoan Harayana, which was received along with 
soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023-93-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI. 
Present: Smt. PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 8/2020 
Date of Passing Award- 0 May,2023 
Between: 


Shri Ramesh Kumar, 

Through, The President Sh. Hukum Chand, 

CPWD, Karamchari Union, Babu Lal Ji Complex, 

Shop No. 04, Gurgoan Road, Opposite Bus Stand, 

Gurgoan Harayana-2200]. ...Workman 


Versus 


l. The Director General, Ministry of Home Affairs, 
North Block, New Delhi-l000]. 


2. Kiran Enterprises, 
Plot No. 67-A, Shiv Colony, 
B Tonk Road Sanganer, Jaipur-302029. .... Managements 


Appearances:- 
None for the Claimant 


None for the Management 


758 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 


This is an application u/s 2-A of the ID. Act, 947 filed by the claimant against the management 
alleging illegal termination of his service. 


Notice served on the claimant and the management. 


The claimant filed the claim statement praying a direction to the management to reinstatement him with 
full back wages. 


The management did not appear nor filed w/s and thus issues were not framed. 


When the claimant was called upon to adduce evidence, he did not appear and the matter was reserved 
for passing no dispute award. 


The stand taken in the claim petition is not proved and substantiated for want of oral and documentary 
evidence adduced by the claimant. Hence this no dispute award is passed. 


ORDER 


The claim be and the same is dismissed as not proved and accordingly answered against the claimant. 
This no dispute award is passed and forwarded to the parties. 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 47 
of the ID act 947. 


The application u/s 2-A of the ID. Act, 947 is accordingly answered. 
Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 873.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महानिदेशक, गृह मंत्रालय, नॉर्थ ब्लॉक, नई दिल्ली; किरण एंटरप्राइजेज, प्लॉट नंबर 67-ए, शिव कॉलोनी, बी 
टोंक रोड सांगानेर, जयपुर, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री राजेश कुमार, कामगार , द्वारा - अध्यक्ष श्री हुकम 
चंद, सीपीडब्ल्यूडी, कर्मचारी संघ, गुड़गांव हरियाणा,के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- 
सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (संदर्भ संखया 82/2020) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को 
प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025-07-2023-95-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 873.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 82/2020) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court - वी New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Director General, Ministry of Home Affairs, North Block, New Delhi; Kiran Enterprises, Plot 
No. 67-A, Shiv Colony, B Tonk Road Sanganer, Jaipur, and Shri Rajesh Kumar, Worker, Through- The 
President Shri Hukum Chand, CPWD, Karamchari Union, Gurgoan Harayana, which was received along with 
soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-95 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI. 
Present: Smt. Pranita Mohanty, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 82/2020 
Date of Passing Award- 0 May, 2023 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 759 


Between: 


Shri Rajesh Kumar 

Through, The President Sh. Hukum Chand, 

CPWD, Karamchari Union, Babu Lal Ji Complex, 

Shop No. 04, Gurgoan Road, Opposite Bus Stand, 

Gurgoan Harayana-2200]. .... Workman 


Versus 


l. The Director General, Ministry of Home Affairs, 
North Block, New Delhi-!000I. 


2. Kiran Enterprises, 
Plot No. 67-A, Shiv Colony, 
B Tonk Road Sanganer, Jaipur-302029. ... Managements 
Appearances:- 


None for the Claimant 
None for the Management 
AWARD 


This is an application u/s 2-A of the ID. Act, 947 filed by the claimant against the management 
alleging illegal termination of his service. 
Notice served on the claimant and the management. 
The claimant filed the claim statement praying a direction to the management to reinstatement him with 
full back wages. 
The management did not appear nor filed w/s and thus issues were not framed. 
When the claimant was called upon to adduce evidence, he did not appear and the matter was reserved 
for passing no dispute award. 
The stand taken in the claim petition is not proved and substantiated for want of oral and documentary 
evidence adduced by the claimant. Hence this no dispute award is passed. 
ORDER 
The claim be and the same is dismissed as not proved and accordingly answered against the claimant. 
This no dispute award is passed and forwarded to the parties. 
Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 
7 of the ID act 947. 
The application u/s 2-A of the ID. Act, !947 is accordingly answered. 
Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 874.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार विधि और न्याय मंत्रालय, न्याय विभाग, सर्वोच्च न्यायालय विधिक सेवा समिति, द्वारा -सचिव, उच्चतम 
न्यायालय परिसर, नई दिल्ली; निदेशक, मिराज सुविधाएं प्रबंधन सेवाएं प्रा. लिमिटेड भाकाजी कामा प्लेस, नई 
दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री हरेंद्र ठाकरान, कामगार,अरविंद कुमार लीगल एयर काउंसिल, संत 
नगर दिलली,के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली के 
पंचाट (संदर्भ संखया 280/2022) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार 
को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025-07-2023-97-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


760 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 874.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 280/2022) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court - IT New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Ministry of Law and Justice , Department of Justice, Supreme Court Legal Services Committee, 
Through -Secretary, Supreme Court Compound, New Delhi ; The Director, Miraz Facilities Management 
Services Pvt. Ltd. Bhakaji Cama Place, New Delhi, and Shri Harender Thakran Worker, Through — Shri Arvind 
Kumar, Legal Air Counsel, Sant Nagar Delhi which was received along with soft copy of the award by the 
Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023-97-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI 


Present: Smt. PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 280/2022 


Date of Passing Award- 0 May, 2023 
Between: 


Shri Harender Thakran S/o Sh. Bijender Thakran, 
R/o 275 , Nangal Thakran, Delhi-!0039. 


Through Arvind Kumar Legal Air Counsel, 
Office-DSKA legal LLP, 34 LGF Pragati Enclave, 
Sant Nagar Delhi-0084. ... Workman 


Versus 


l. Ministry of Law and Justice , Department of Justice, 
Supreme Court Legal Services Committee, 
Through Its Secretary, 
Supreme Court Compound, New Delhi-!000I. 


2. The Director, 
Miraz Facilities Management Services Pvt. Ltd. 
38, Mohammad Pur, Bhakaji Cama Place, New Delhi-!0066 . 
Managements 


Appearances:- 
Claimant in person. 
None for the management. . 


AWARD 


This is an application filed u/s 2A of the Id. Act by the claimant wherein he has alleged illegal 
termination with a prayer for reinstatement in service with full back wages and consequential benefits. 
Notice being served on management no.! and 2. When the matter was pending for filing of written 
statement by the managements, a proposal was advanced by the parties for amicable settlement. The matter 
was adjourned to .02.2023 for settlement during the National Lok Adalat. Prior to that date on 57 
December , 2022 the claimant gave a statement to the effect that he has settled the dispute with the mgt and 
does not have any grievance against the mgt for which he wants to withdraw the proceeding. In view of the 
said statement the matter was decided during the National Lok Adalat held on !.02.2023 and this no 
dispute award has been passed. Hence, ordered. 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]76] 


ORDER 
The claim petition is dismissed for want of dispute raised by the claimant and this award is accordingly 
passed. 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 7 
of the ID act 947. 


Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 875.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 7947 (4947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, भारतीय राष्ट्रीय साइकिल निगम, हिंद नगर, गाजियाद (उ.प्र.); प्रबंध निदेशक, भारतीय राष्ट्रीय 
साइकिल निगम, 250, वर्ली, मुंबई, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री सुखपाल सिंह, कामगार,के बीच अनुबंध 
में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली के Gare (संदर्भ संखया 78/202) 
को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, Wet-4204 /462/204 -arearz(Sta)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 
S.O. 875.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 78/202) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court - वी New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The General Manager, National Bicycle Corporation of India, Hind Nagar, Ghaziaad (U.P); The 
Managing Director, National Bicycle Corporation of India, 250, Worli, Mumbai, and Shri Sukhpal Singh, 
Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


(No. L-420/62/20 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI 
Present: Smt. PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 78/202 
Date of Passing Award- 80 May, 2023 
Between: 

Sh. Sukhpal Singh, 

S/o. Sh. Avtar Singh, 

R/o: Village-Sadarpur, 


PO: Khas, Ghaziabad, (UP) .... Workman 
Versus 


l. The General Manager, 
National Bicycle Corporation of India, 
Hind Nagar, 
Ghaziaad (UP) 


2. The Managing Director, 
National Bicycle Corporation of India, 
250, Worli, 
Mumbai ... Managements 


762 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Appearances:- 


Shri Narender Singh , Ld .A/R for the claimant. 
Shri Praveen Sharma, Ld. A/R for the management. 


AWARD 


The Government of India in Ministry of Labour & Employment has referred the present dispute 
existing between employer i.e. the management of (i) The General Manager, National Bicycle Corporation of 
India, (ii) The Managing Director, National Bicycle Corporation of India, and its workman/claimant herein, 
under clause (d) of sub section (])and sub section (2A) of section 0 of the Industrial Dispute Act 947 vide 
letter No. L-420/62/20! (R(DU)) dated 5.02.202 to this tribunal for adjudication to the following effect. 


“Whether the action of the management of National Bycycle Corporation of India, 
Ghaziabad in terminating the services of Shri Sukhpal Singh S/o Shri Avtar Singh 
without complying with Section 25 F,O, of the ID Act, is legal and justified? What relief 
the workman is entitled to?” 


As disclosed in the claim statement the claimant Sukhpal Singh was in the employment of the mgt 
M/s National Bicycle Corporation of India Ltd. Ghaziabad U.P. since July 979 in the post of Power Press 
Operator. His last drawn salary was Rs. 800/- per month. Though he was working honestly and sincerely, the 
mgt was not extending the legal benefits to him. On 22.05.!989 he was arrested and forwarded to the Jail in 
Meerut on some false allegations and in connection with a criminal case. He was detained in jail till 04.06.990. 
He being unable to join duty, inform the mgt about the same in writing through his co-workers Chander Pal 
Singh, requesting to grant him the leave for the period of his detention in Jail. On 04.06.990 he was released 
from jail and on the next day that is on 05.06.990 he went to the factory of the mgt to resume duty. But he was 
not allowed to perform duty and was asked to file an affidavit stating about his detention in jail. The workman 
complied the direction by filing the affidavit on 02.07.990. On that day, the mgt verbally informed him that his 
service has been terminated and his name has been struck off from the muster rule with effect from .09.989. 
But no order of termination was served on him. Before termination of his service, no notice pay or termination 
compensation was paid, not only that a domestic enquiry was also conducted against him before termination. 
Having no other alternate employment he kept on visiting the office of the mgt hoping that he would be 
reinstated into service. When all his efforts failed, he served demand notices on the mgt on 29.06.989, 
23.0.990 and 2.0.99. But none of his notices were replied by the mgt. The claimant then raised a dispute 
before the Assistant Labour Commissioner Ghaziabad and for failure of conciliation the dispute was referred to 
the Labour Court Ghaziabad and registered as ID no 7I/l992. Before the said Labour Court the mgt filed 
application challenging the jurisdiction and accordingly the Labor Court Ghaziabad passed an order closing 
further proceeding of the matter. Left with no other option, the workman raised a dispute before the Assistant 
Labour Commissioner (Central Dehradun) and steps were taken for conciliation. But for the non cooperation of 
the mgt the conciliation failed and the appropriate Govt. referred the matter to this tribunal. Describing the order 
of termination as illegal and contrary to the provisions of ID Act, the claimant has made a prayer that an award 
may be passed directing the mgt to pay full arrear back wages, and compensation including other benefits to 
which he is entitled. 


Being noticed the mgt appeared and filed written statement challenging the maintainability of the 
proceeding as barred by limitation. It has been stated that there is delay of 20 years and the claimant has not 
given out or explained the sufficient legal cause for the same. It has been stated that the National Bicycle 
Corporation was referred to BIFR u/s I5 of the Act as a sick industrial company and an order was passed 
proposing winding up of the company and recommendation to that effect was sent to the Hon’ble High Court of 
Bombay. Furthermore, as per the permission granted by Govt. of India Ministry of Labour, this company was 
finally closed with effect from 2!.07.200l. Hence, no liability of any nature can be levied against a closed 
company. So far as the claim of the claimant is concerned, it has been stated that he was a habitually irregular 
person and on many occasions, found involved in the acts of misconduct. Many warnings were issued to him 
asking him to mend his behavior. From 20.05.989 the claimant remained unauthorizedly absent from duty. 
Notices by registered post with A.D were sent to him on 05.06.989 and 20.07.989. But he managed to evade 
the service. Thus on 20.07.989 a show cause notice was issued to him. But the claimant did not submit any 
explanation and thus his service was terminated by order dated !.09.989. Thus the action of the mgt cannot be 
found with fault. Moreover, as per the entry in his service record the claimant had attained the age of 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 763 


superannuation on |8 .02.200. Hence, no order of reinstatement or compensation with back wages can also be 
passed. 


The claimant field rejoinder denying the stand taken by the mgt. It has been stated that delay in this 
proceeding was not intentional but for the wrong forum chosen by him due to mistake. He has further stated that 
when the reference was made the claimant had not attained the age of superannuation. 


On theses rival pleadings the following issue are framed. 
l. Whether delay of 2 years in raising the dispute frustrates his relief? 


2. Whether closure of business activities of the mgt with effect from 2!.07.200 comes in the way of the 
claimant for seeking relief? 


3. Whether order dated .09.989 amounts to retrenchment? 
4. As in terms of reference. 


The claimant examined himself as ww! and filed a number of documents as exhibit wwl/l to wwl/2. He 
also examined his coworkers Chander pal as WW2. The documents filed by the claimants include the photocopy 
of the demand notices sent to the mgt, the order passed by the Labour Court Ghaziabad photocopies of the 
attendance register the representations made by him to the mgt and the written application dated 5.05.989 
submitted by him praying for grant of leave with effect from l3.05.989. On behalf of the mgt one of it’s 
ex-employee testified as mwl who proved the documents marked in a series of mwl/l to mwl/7. These 
documents include the correspondence made by the company with the claimant calling him to explain the 
misconducts committed by him and the photocopy of the police report dated 4.04.985, photo copy of the latter 
written to the Superintendent of Police and several show cause noticed issues to the claimant in the year 980. 
Both the witness were cross examined at length by their adversaries. 


Findings 
Issue No. | 


The mgt has raised serious objection with regard to the delay in raising the dispute. Relying upon 
various pronouncements the Id. A/R for the mgt submitted that delay in initiation of proceeding causes prejudice 
to the mgt, since the later misses the opportunities of producing the documents in proof of its stand. But in this 
case the objection raised by the mgt does not sound convincing since the claimant has properly explained the 
delay in raising the dispute. From the oral and documentary evidence adduced by the claimant including the 
order of the Labour Court Ghaziabad it clearly appears that the stand of the mgt with regard to the delay is not 
acceptable as it was for a situation beyond the control of the claimant. This issue is accordingly answered in 
favour of claimant and it is held that the delay in filing of the dispute shall not affect the reliefs sought for. 


Issue no. 2,3 4 


These issues being interconnected are taken up for consideration together. The claimant has stated that 
he was appointed in the mgt in July !979 and continued to work as such till his service was illegally terminated 
on [.09.989. It has been stated that has last drawn salary was Rs. 800 per month. Though the mgt while filing 
the W.s has stated that the claimant was not appointed in 979 as claimed by him, no evidence to that effect has 
been filed. The mgt witness ताज] has admitted during cross examination that the claimant was a regular 
employee of the mgt. The mgt has not disputed the last drawn salary as stated by the claimant. Now, it is to be 
seen if the claimant’s service was illegally terminated or not. The claimant has stated that on 22.05.989 he was 
arrested and remanded to jail in connection with a criminal case falsely registered against him. Due to such 
detention, he could not report for duty and through a co-worker Chander Pal ww2, sent intimation to the mgt. 
Chanderpal examined as ww? has corroborated the statement of the claimant in this regard. The said ww2 has 
further added that the wife of the claimant obtained the signed leave application of the claimant from Jail and 
handed over to him. He then produced the same in the office of the mgt which was accepted. The representation 
of the claimant after release from the jail has been filed by the mgt which reveals that the claimant had intimated 
this fact of absences to the mgt. The workman has further stated that after his release from jail on 04.06.990, he 
reported for duty on 05.06.990. But mgt did not allow him. On the contrary, asked him to file an affidavit 
which was complied. The witness examined on behalf of the mgt has stated that for the unauthorized absence 
the mgt had issued show cause notice to the claimant by registered post with A.D. But the same were not 
received and returned unserved. During cross examination of the claimant it came out that the residential 
address of the claimant available with the mgt was never changed. This leads to a conclusion that the mgt 
having knowledge about the detention of the claimant in Jail custody went on issuing show cause notices and for 
non receipt of reply, terminated his service with effect from .09.l989 when the claimant was in jail custody. 


764 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Evidence on record clearly establishes that the mgt, in a haste, took action against the claimant when he was in 
jail custody by termination his service. Before doing so no domestic inquiry for unauthorized absent was held 
nor the provisions of 25 F of the ID Act were complied. The said action of the mgt amounts to unfair labour 
practice. 


The admitted position is that the national bicycle company has been completely closed and the claimant 
has attained the age of superannuation. In such a situation, it is not felt proper and legal to issue a direction to 
the mgt for his reinstatement. But for the unfair legal practice meted to the claimant, who is litigating since 32 
years to get justice, he deserved to be compensated for the loss sustained by him along with 50% of the back 
wages based on the principle that during this period he has not discharged any kind of duty. These issues are 
accordingly answered in favour of the claimant. Hence ordered. 


ORDER 


The reference be and the same is answered in favour of the claimant it is held that the service of the 
claimant was illegally terminated by the mgt in gross violation of the provisions of ID Act. The claimant since 
has attained the age of superannuation it is directed that the mgt shall grant 50 % of the back wage in 
accordance to his last drawn salary for the period from .09.989 till 8.02.200, when he attained the age of 
superannuation. This amount shall be paid without interest along with | Lakh towards litigation expanses within 
2 months from the date of publication of the award failing the amount so accrued shall carry interest at the rate 
of 6% per annum form the date of accrual and till the final payment is made. 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 7 of the ID 
act 947. 


The reference is accordingly answered. 
Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 876.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 7947 (947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार लेडी हार्डिंग मेडिकल कॉलेज, कनॉट प्लेस, नई दिल्‍ली; एम/एस आकाश फायर इंजीनियर्स, मयूर विहार, 
फेज -04, नई दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री विनोद, कामगार, द्वारा - प्रोग्रेसिव नेशनल लेबर 
यूनियन, शाहदरा, eect. बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 
नई दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या (53/2048) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो 
केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, एल-42025/07/2023-400-आईआर(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 876.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 53/208) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court - IT New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Lady Harding Medical College , Connaught Place, New Delhi ; M/s Akash Fire Engineers, Mayur 
Vihar, Phase-0l, New Delhi, and Shri Vinod, Worker, Through- Progressive National Labour Union, Shahdara, 
Delhi, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L-42025/07/2023-00 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 765 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI. 
Present: Smt. Pranita Mohanty, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 53/208 
Date of Passing Award- 0 May, 2023 


Between: 


Shri Vinod, S/o Sh Ram Chander, 

Through, Progressive National Labour Union, 

205, Pratap Khand, Vishwakarma Nagar, Shahdara, 

Delhi-!0095. ...Workman 


Versus 


l. Lady Harding Medical College 
604 , Shaheed Bhagat Singh, Marg, Connaught Place, 
New Delhi-0002. 


2. M/s Akash Fire Engineers, 
Address-42, Village Chilla, Mayur Vihar, 
Phase -0, New Delhi-!0037. 
Managements 


Appearances:- 


Claimant in person. 
Lady Harding Medical College i.e mgt no. | has already been ex-parte. 
Ms. Komalpreet Ld. Proxy A/R for the management. 
AWARD 
This is an application filed u/s 2A of the Id. Act by the claimant wherein he has alleged illegal 
termination with a prayer for reinstatement in service with full back wages and consequential benefits. Notice 
being served, the mgt appeared through it’s A/R and on completion of pleadings issues were framed by order 
dated 05.07.20I9. When the matter was pending for evidence to be adduced by the claimant, a proposal was 
advanced by the parties for amicable settlement. The matter was adjourned to |.02.2023 for settlement during 
the National Lok Adalat. Prior to that date on 02.0.2023 the claimant gave a statement to the effect that he has 
settled the dispute with the mgt and does not have any grievance against the mgt for which he wants to withdraw 
the proceeding. In view of the said statement the matter was decided during the National Lok Adalat held on 
.02.2023 and this no dispute award has been passed. Hence, ordered. 
ORDER 
The claim petition is dismissed for want of dispute raised by the claimant and this award is accordingly 
passed. 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section |7 of the 
ID act 947. 


Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 
का.आ. 877.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44:) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार इंडियन बैंक के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध मनिर्दिष्ट 
औघध्ोगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, चेन्नई के पंचाट (5/2022) प्रकाशित 
करती है। 


[सं. एल-42042/403/2005 -आईआर(बी-)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


766 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 877.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 5/2022) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Chennai as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Indian Bank and 
their workmen. 


[No. L- 202/03/2005-IR (B-ID] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CGIT-CUM-LABOUR COURT & EPF APPELLATE TRIBUNAL CHENNAI 
ID No. 5/2022 
Present: DIPTI MOHAPATRA, LL.M. Presiding Officer 
Date: 0.2.2022 


Sri T. Subramaniyam 

S/o Sri Thangavel 

Sithazhi Village 

Kunnam Taluk 

Perambalur District 

Tamil Nadu i [7 Party/Petitioner 


AND 


The Assistant General Manager 
Indian Bank, Circle Office 
Jennie Plaza, 5-F, Bharathiyar Salai 


Cantonment 
Trichy-| : 2™ Party/Respondent 
Appearance: 

For the * Party/Petitioner : Advocate, Sri V. Ajoy Khose 

For the 2" Party/Respondent : Advocate, M/s Aiyar & Dolia 


AWARD 


The Central Government, Ministry of Labour & Employment vide its Order No. L-!202/ 03/2005- 
IR(B.ID (Part File) dtd. 28.0.2022 referred the following Industrial Dispute to this Tribunal for adjudication. 


The schedule mentioned in that order is: 


“Whether the dispute raised on 02.03.2005 by T. Subramaniyam S/o Thangavel, Ex-Jewel 
Appraiser engaged in Indian Bank, Keelapuliyur Perambalur District, over oral 
termination of his service w.e.f. 30.व.2004 by the Management of Indian Bank, 
Keelapuliyur, Kunnam Taluk, Perambalur District, Tamilnadu is justified and legal? If 
yes, to what relief the concerned workman is entitled to?” 


2 On receipt of the above reference from the appropriate Government, the dispute on reference is 
registered as ID No. 5/2022 and notices were issued to both the parties for their appearance fixing the case to 
25.04.2022. Petitioner appeared along with the Counsel who filed Vakalat. Later the Respondent Counsel is 
also present and file Vakalatnama. The case was listed to 3.06.2022 directing the Petitioner to file Claim 
Statement and documents. The case was again re-listed to 27.07.2022 and the parties were directed to appear. As 
such, it is simply dragged till 8.0.2022 intervening three adjournments, for the same purpose. The Petitioner 
nor the Counsel / Authorized Representative appeared on any of those days. It appears even if for the interest of 
justice the Tribunal suo-moto afforded sufficient opportunities to the Petitioner, there was no progress in the 
proceeding due to the non-cooperation of the Petitioner. The non-appearance and non-participation in the 
proceeding by the Petitioner constrained the Tribunal not to repost the proceeding to any other date for the same 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]767 


purpose as much as it deems the petitioner has no interest to proceed with the case. Thus, the case is liable for 
dismissal in accordance to Law. 


In view of the discussion held in preceding paragraph, it deems there exists no dispute for adjudication 
as referred by the Appropriate Government. 


In the result the reference is answered against the Petitioner. 
The ID case stands dismissed. 
An Award is passed accordingly. 
DIPTI MOHAPATRA, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 
का.आ. 878.-.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय. सरकार कोल इंडिया लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध 
में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता के पंचाट 
(संदर्भ संख्या 33/2005) को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ 
था। 


[सं, एल-22042/23/2004-आईआर (at. 7a-ID)] 


मणिकंदन. एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 878.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 33/2005) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management Coal 
India Limited and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 24/05/2023 


[No. L-2202/23/2004 - IR (CM-ID)] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present: Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer 
REF. NO. 33 OF 2005 
Parties: Employers in relation to the management of 


Coal India Limited, Northern Coalfields Limited 


AND 
Their Workmen 
Appearance : 
On behalf of Management : Mr. Buddhadeb Ghosh, Ld. Counsel/ Advocate. 
On behalf of the Workmen : None 
Dated 2377 March, 2023 


768 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 


Today too Union is found absent, when the matter is called. None appears on behalf of the Union. In 
fact from the Order dated 27.0.2022, it appears the notice of appearance sent to the Union, after I took charge 
of this Tribunal on |9.08.2022 has returned undelivered with postal endorsement “Refused to accept” and which 
tantamount to good service. 


Such attitude and conduct of the Union reflect that it is not interested to acknowledge the dispute 
espoused by it and on the basis of its complaint, the Govt. of India through Ministry of Labour had referred the 
following issues for adjudication by this Tribunal vide Order No. L-2202/23/2004 — IR (CM-I) dated 
29.06.2005. 


“Whether the action of the management by not converting Shri Subal Chandra Das, Driver 
Posted at Northern Coalfields Limited, Kolkata from daily rated to the monthly rated 
driver/workman in the line of Shri Ganesh Chandra Das, Driver of the same organization is 
legal and justified? If not, to what relief the workman is entitled?” 


On the other hand, the Management of Coal India Limited is represented by its newly appointed lawyer 
Mr. Buddhadeb Ghosh and who files fresh Vakalatnama. Let it be taken on record. 


Record shows, the concerned workman Shri Subal Chandra Das has filed his evidence in chief on 
Affidavit on 04.08.2008 and neither the Union nor their lawyer bothered to tender his such evidence on 
affidavit. 


Therefore, there is nothing on record to substantiate or corroborate the claim of the Union or workman 
that inspite of rendering service as a daily rated driver to the establishment since June, [992, he has not been 
given benefits of a monthly rated driver. Whereas, the Management had given such benefits to one Ganesh 
Chandra Das, a daily rated driver on 0.I2.987 and had also regularize the service of Gopal Sen Gupta, a 
general Mazdoor as a peon on 2!.!2.200l. The Management has adopted unfair labour practice by regularizing 
the service of certain employees in arbitrator manner. 


The present reference is of the Year 2005 and today is 2023, in the last l8 years the concerned 
workman might have received the benefit of regularization and as such, neither he nor the Union which has 
espoused the dispute is interested to pursue with the present dispute. 


In view of the above, there is no dispute to adjudicate. Accordingly, the present Reference Case No. 33 
of 2005 is disposed of “No Dispute Award” is passed. 


Send copy of this Award/Order to the Ministry for doing needful. 
Justice K.D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 879.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय. सरकार कोल इंडिया लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध 
में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता के पंचाट 
(संदर्भ संख्या 45/2008) को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त 
हुआ था। 


[a. एल-22042/357/2007-आईआर(सी.एम-)] 


मणिकंदन. एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 879.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 5/2008) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management Coal 
India Limited and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 24/05/2023 


[No. L- 2202/357/2007 -IR (CM-ID)] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 769 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 


Present: Justice K. D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 
REF. ७०.।5 OF 2008 
Parties: Employers in relation to the management of Coal India Ltd. 


AND 
Their Workmen 


Appearance : 


On behalf of Management : None 
On behalf of the Workmen : None 


Dated 6" January, 2023 


AWARD 


None appears on behalf of the Management, Coal India Ltd. inspite of due service of notice of 
appearance as per A.D. Card. 


Similarly, Authorize Representative of all those Unions namely Coal Mines Authority Ltd. Employees 
Union, Rashtriya Coal Mazdoor Sangh, Coal Employees Union and National Coal Organization Employees’ 
Association fail to appear inspite of service of notice upon some of them. There is no alternative address of 
party no. five and six to send notice of appearance through notice of appearance was duly served upon Union/ 
party No. 4, and Union / party No. 3 has refused to accept the same. The record shows on 07.!.209 the 
Unions have abandoned to pursue the case which is already fixed for hearing argument. 


Keeping in view the above facts, this Tribunal decide to proceed with the present reference case in 
view of Rule 22 of LD. Act 957 as if both side are present. 


The Govt. of India, Ministry of Labour in exercise of the powers conferred by Section l0() (9) & 2(A) 
of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 has referred the following issues for adjudication vide its Office Order No. 
L-2202/357/2007-IR (CM-II) dated 0.07.2008. 


(i) Whether the demand of the Unions for arrears of HRA i.e. 30% of revised basic pay as per 
National Coal Wages Agreement — VII (NCWA-VID w.e.f 0.07.200 is legal and justified? 


(ii) Whether the action of the management of M/s Coal India Limited in deducting the arrears of 
HRA already paid to the employees concerned from their last instalment of wage arrears is 
legal and justified? 


(ili) To what reliefs are the employees concerned entitled for? 


The facts of the case leading to this reference as gathered from the material on record i.e. pleadings of 
the parties, the evidence of witnesses is that as per direction of the Govt. of India the Employer Coal India Ltd. 
with five Central Trade Unions formed a Joint Bipartite Committee to settle National Coal Wages Agreement — 
VII (NCWA-VII) for the Workmen of Coal Industries on 7.!2.2003. The representative of the Management 
and Representative of these Central Trade Unions executed a memorandum of agreement on !5.07.2005. 


The agreement provides the wage revision and other fringe benefits including House Rent Allowance. 
The period of agreement was from 0.07.200] to 30.06.2006. It was agreed the HRA for employees in Urban 
area will be followed as provided in the previous agreement and other related issues will be discussed in the 
standardization Committee within three month. 


Accordingly, Standardization Committee of J.D.C.C. held a meeting on 06.09.2005 and where ceiling limit 
of H.R.A. of non-executive employees in Urban Area was revised w.e.f 0!.07.2004 with maximum limit of 
H.R.A. is different reclassified city / town as follows: 


() A-I Class cities = 30% of Revised Basic Pay subject to maximum of Rs.4572.60 P. 


770 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(2) A Class cities = 25% of Revised Basic Pay subject to maximum of Rs. 380.50 P. 
(3) B-I Class cities = 20% of Revised Basic Pay subject to maximum of Rs.3048.40 P . 
(4) B Class cities = 5% of Revised Basic Pay subject to maximum of Rs. 2286.30 P. 
(5) C Class cities = 0% of Revised Basic Pay subject to maximum of Rs. 524.20 P. 


However, previous ceiling limit as agreed in National Coal Wages Agreement —VI (N.C.W.A-VI) remained 
in force till 30.06.2004. 


It has been alleged by the Unions since (N.C.W.A-VI]) was signed on 5.07.2005 and workmen were 
entitled to arrears on revision of their pay from 0.07.200 to 30.06.2004. 


As per agreement, the workers were entitled to draw 50% of arrears as per N.C.W.A—VII before May, 2006 
and balance in two instalments of 25% each. 


Accordingly, arrear was calculated taking into consideration H.R.A. on the Revised Basic Pay subject to the 
maximum ceiling of Rs.2820/- from 0.07.200l to 30.06.2004 as per ceiling fixed under N.C.W.A —VI and 
from 0.07.2004 onwards subject to the maximum ceiling of Rs.4572.60 Paisa. 


Unions have also alleged the employees of Urban Area was paid arrear calculated on the above formula, but 
at the time of payment of third and final instalment in the month of March, 2007, the Management arbitrarily 
and unilaterally deducted a portion of H.R.A. already paid to the employees in the earlier two instalments on the 
ground of overpayment and alleged it is in violation of N.C.W.A—-VII Clause 8::3 with II No. 0 dated 
23.09.2005. 


The Management could not recover such excess paid to thousands of workers who retired in the meantime 
after taking the benefits. 


They have also alleged that N.C.W.A-VI was replaced by N.C.W.A-VII w.e.f 0.07.200I in view of the 
N.C.W.A-VII was signed on 5.07.2005. Accordingly, the workmen are entitled to get the arrears on wages, 
H.R.A w.e.f 0.07.200I to 30.06.2004. Therefore, computation of arrear on H.R.A taking maximum ceiling 
limit of Rs.2820/- from 0.07.200! to 30.06.2004 was proper and correct as ceiling fixed in N.C.W.A-VI will 
continue till it replaced by N.C.W.A-VIIL. 


Thus, Union has prayed for payment of H.R.A @ 30% of Revised Basic Pay as per ceiling of Rs.2820/- as 
contained in N.C.W.A-VI from 0.07.200l to 30.06.2004 and refund of H.R.A deducted from the third 
instalment of arrear. On the other hand, the Management, in its written statement as alleged that there was a 
meeting of Joint Bipartite Committee for the Coal Industry on 02.2.2004 and where decision was taken for 
revision of H.R.A and other allowances w.e.f 0.07.2004. 


In such meeting the existing H.R.A of Rs.75/- p.m. was revised to Rs.l00/- p.m. w.e.f 0.07.2004 in respect 
of those employees who have not been provided quarters of the company in the Coal Field Area. 


Similarly, H.R.A for Urban area was also revised w.e.f 0.07.2004 as per discussion held on 06.09.2005 in 
the Standardization Committee of J.B.C.C.I-VIL. 


Payment of H.R.A up to ceiling of Rs.2820/- was applicable with reference to pre-revised pay up to 
30.06.2004 and not with reference to Revised Pay w.e.f 0.07.200]. 


H.R.A for the period from 0.07.996 to 3.06.999 was made on the basis of N.C.W.A-V. The Revised 
Wages of N.C.W.A-VI was made effective for payment of H.R.A was only from 0.07.999. 


That while payment of arrears in [7 and 20 instalment wrongly arrears on H.R.A was calculated taking 
ceiling of Rs.2820/- w.e.f 0.07.200l to 30.06.2004. That as per agreement arrear of H.R.A Revised Basic 
Wages was payable w.e.f 0!.07.2004 only and not from 0.07.200I to 30.06.2004. Consequently, such excess 
payment made on wrong calculation for the period from 0.07.200I to 30.06.2004 was adjusted and recovered 
from the payment of 3" arrear instalment. 


Therefore, it has prayed for dismissal of the present reference. 


The Unions to prove their claim and case have examined Mr. Sandip Kumar Bhowmik, General Secretary, 
Coal Mine Authority Ltd. as W.W No. |. 


Dilip Kumar Majumder, President of Rastriya Coal Mazdoor Sangh as W.W No. 2. 


While management has examined Sri R. Gobinda Warriar, Ex Deputy Chief Personnel Manager of Coal 
India Ltd. as M.W I. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 हिह॥। 


Manoj Kumar, a Senior Manager as M.W No. 2 and another Senior Manager Sri Rajarshi Dhar as M.W 
No.3. 


Unions have produced as many as [4 documents and Management has produced 5 documents and which 
have been marked as exhibit. 


It is admitted facts that service conditions of Non-Executive Employees of Coal India Limited are decided 
through various agreements which are popularly known as “National Coal Wages Agreement”. The agreements 
are entered in between Management and Joint Body of Management and Unions by formation of a body called 
as “Joint Bipartite Committee for the Coal Industry (JBCCI)”. 


The present reference case is concerned with N.C.W.A —VII which was finalised by J.B.C.C.I on 
5.07.2005 particularly in respect of H.R.A. 


Matter relating to House Rent Allowance is dealt in Chapter VII of such N.C.W.A-VII and which provides 
that “existing H.R.A of Rs.75/- per month will be increased to Rs.l00 p.m. w.e.f 0.07.2004and will be paid to 
those employees who have not been provided with residential accommodation”. 


It has further provided for payment of H.R.A to those workmen who are in occupation of quarter provided 
by the company, but subject to type of quarters, nature and manner of their possession or occupancy and extent 
of their occupation in those company’s quarter. 


However, H.R.A for employees in Urban Area was not decided and left it for further deliberation in the 
Standardization Committee within a period of 3 months and till final decision, the employees in Urban Area was 
provided to draw the H.R Allowance as per previous agreements. 


Ext. M-l, shows that in pursuance of Memorandum of agreement dated !5.07.2005, Standardization 
Committee on different service matter of employees of Coal India was held on 06.09.2005. 


In such meeting for employees in Urban Area was settled that they would be entitled to draw the H.R.A on 
Revised Rate w.e.f. 0!.07.2004 like Workmen working in Coal Field Areas are paid H.R.A under N.C.W.A-VII 
w.e.f. 0.07.2004 and not from 0!.07.200I as demanded by the Unions. 


Further, maximum limit of H.R.A for Urban Area employees have been fixed on the basis of Class of 
Cities. 
From Issue No. | of Reference Order, it appears that Unions have demanded 30% of Revised Basic Pay as 


H.R.A for all Urban Areas employees of Coal India irrespective of the different class of cities. 


Such demand for uniform rate of H.R.A for all Urban Areas employees of Coal India, posted in different 
classes of cities appear in proper and unjust. 


Ext. 5 N.C.W.A-VI dated 4.06.200I too shows that employees getting H.R.A in Urban Area were paid at 
different rates as per classification of the cities by the Govt. 


Ext. -। and Ext. W-4 show that it was agreed between the Managements & Unions H.R.A to Non- 
Executive Employees working in different Urban Areas was fixed at the rates as per classification of cities and 
towns. Like N.C.W.A—VI in N.C.W.A-VIL too. 


() For Class A- Cities rate of H.R.A was fixed @ 30% of Revised Basic pay, but this time subject to 
maximum limits of Rs.4572.60 Paisa. 


(2) For Class A Cities H.R.A was fixed @ 25% of R.B.P subject to maximum limits of Rs.380.50 Paisa. 


(3) For Class B-l Cities H.R.A was fixed @ 20% of R.B.P subject to maximum limits of Rs.3048.40 
Paisa. 


(4) For Class 3 Cities H.R.A was fixed @ 5% of R.B.P subject to maximum limits of Rs.2286.30 Paisa. 
(5) For Class C Cities H.R.A was fixed @ 0% of R.B.P subject to maximum limits of २६. 524.20 Paisa. 


Therefore, from N.C.W.A —VI and it is seen that Standardization Committee formed under N.C.W.A-VII 
for H.R.A and other service matter the same pattern was adopted which was followed earlier, but only changes 
that was brought in the maximum limit. 


Therefore, this Tribunal of view for purpose of payment of H.R.A to employees in Urban Areas Govt. 
classification is followed and same rate was adopted which was followed or adopted in N.C.W.A —VI. Thus, 
demand of the Union for uniform payment of H.R.A @ 30% for all Urban Areas employee irrespective of 
different classification of cities appear to be unjust and not proper. 


772 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


As per Chapter XIII Clause 3::l of N.C.W.A-VII of the agreement including the wage structure shall 
come into force and will be implemented w.e.f 0.07.200, unless otherwise specified. 


Therefore, the Tribunal is of view the all financial benefits enumerated in N.C.W.A-VII on Revision of Pay 
should be effective from the date of its implementation i.e 0!.07.200]. 


Surprisingly, separate date has been fixed for implementation of H.R.A ie. 0.07.2004. Therefore, 
selection of different date for payment of H.R.A to all employees posted and working in Urban or Non-Urban 
Areas appeared to be arbitrary and illegal. 


When there is revision of wages and other allowances in N.C.W.A-VII in the year 2005 there cannot be two 
separate or different dates for implementation of different financial benefits or allowance. 


Thus, Management is bound to pay arrears on H.R.A for both the Urban and Non-Urban Areas employee on 
the revised rate from the day the N.C.W.A-VII was implemented i.e. from 0.07.200I and not from date desired 
by it i.e from 0.07.2004. 


Now, let me see whether the Management is justified in recovering the alleged excess amount paid under 
H.R.A from its employees? 


Nothing has come on record to show before Management took decision to recover the alleged excess paid 
to its employees under H.R.A on revision of their pay in view of N.C.W.A-VII or Standardization Committee 
meeting it had discussion with the Union or it brought to the notice of all the employee by issuing circulars or 
notice. It appears that the Management without giving any opportunity to the Unions had taken unilateral 
decision to recover the alleged excess payment towards H.R.A from the 3rd instalment of arrear payable to the 
employees. 


Therefore, this Tribunal is of view excess amount, if any, paid towards H.R.A by the Management to its 
employee cannot be permitted to be recovered as the employees were not at their fault in the matter and it would 
have adverse monetary consequences upon the employees and when they were not put in notice of excess 
payment or being heard them or their unions on the issue of excess payment. 


Thus, in view of the discussion made above, the issue under reference are disposed of as follows:- 


Issue No. |. The union is not justified in demanding uniform H.R.A @ 30% of all Non-executive 
employees and Coal India Ltd. Such demand for uniform H.R.A @ 30% for both the Urban and Non-Urban 
Areas employees regardless of classification of cities is found to be illegal and not proper. However, the 
selection of separate date i.e 0!.07.2004 for implementation of only H.R.A on Revised Basic Pay is held to be 
illegal. The decision of the Management to implement Pay Revision Agreement by adopting two different date 
i.e. 0.07.200l for implementation of Revised Basic Pay along with other allowance and a special date for 
implementation of Revised H.R.A on and from 0!.07.2004 is hereby declared as arbitrary and illegal. 


The Management is bound to give effect to N.C.W.A-VII as per 3::lto its entirety from 0.07.200I. 


Issue No. 2. The unilateral decision of the Management without giving opportunity to the Union to place 
their submission or giving them opportunity to place them objection to deduct the alleged excess payment is 
held to be illegal and unjustified. Therefore, Management is directed to refund the alleged excess payment 
received by it from the 3rd instalment of arrear paid to the employees while giving effect to N.C.W.A —VII but 
without interest. 


Issue No. 3. Therefore, the Union / employee of Coal India Ltd. are entitled to get H.R.A on the Revised 
Basic Pay at the rate to which they are entitled from 0.07.200I and not from 0.07.2004. The Management is 
hereby directed to refund the alleged excess payment made towards H.R.A and of which it has recovered from 
the employees from their last instalment arrear but without any interest. 


Management is directed to comply the above directions within six months from the date hereof failing 
which the Union shall be at liberty to execute the award as per law. 


Accordingly, an award is passed Reference Case No. |5 of 2008 is disposed of against the Management 
without cost. 


Send copy of this award to the Ministries for doing the needful. 
Supply copy to the parties. 
For Class 3-] Cities H.R.A was fixed @ 20% of R.B.P. 
Justice K. D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 773 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 
का.आ. 880.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार मुख्यालय तकनीकी समूह ईएमई, चित्राल लाइन्स, दिल्ली कैंट, नई दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों 
और श्री पप्पू, द्वारा -इंडस्ट्रियल वर्कर्स यूनियन, मेन सागरपुर, नई दिल्ली,के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार 
औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (संदर्भ संखया 208/2048) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में 
दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025-07-2023-98-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 880.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 208/208) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court - IT New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Headquarter Technical Group EME, Chitral lines, Delhi Cantt, New Delhi, and Shri Pappu, Through— 
Industrial Workers Union, Main Sagarpur, New Delhi, which was received along with soft copy of the award by 
the Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023-98-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI. 
Present: Smt. PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 208/208 
Date of Passing Award- 0 May, 2023 
Between: 


Shri Pappu S/o Sh. Mam Chand, 
R/o 64/, Manekshah Marg, 
Delhi Cantt, 

New Delhi-!000. 


Through —Industrial Workers Union, 
Rz-l6C/7 Uppar Floor, Gali No. 3, 


Main Sagarpur, 
New Delhi-0046. ....Workman 
Versus 
l. Headquarter Technical Group EME, 
Chitral lines, Delhi Cantt, New Delhi-000. .... Management 


Appearances:- 


Claimant in person. 
Sh. Pratap Singh, Ld.A/R for the management. 
AWARD 


This is an application filed u/s 2A of the Id. Act, wherein the claimant represented through the union 
had alleged illegal termination of his service by the management. A Prayer has also been made for reinstatement 
with full back wages. On notice, the mgt appeared and challenged the claim advanced by the claimant. The mgt 
also denied the employer and employee relationship. By order dated 07.0.2020 issues were framed. When the 


774 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


claimant was called upon to adduce evidence he did not appear on the date fixed. However, on |‘! Feb, 2023 he 
appeared and made a request for recording his statement. His statement is accordingly recorded on * Feb, 2023 
and the matter was taken up on |!.2.2023 during the National Lok Adalat, after conciliation the parties agreed 
for disposal of the matter in terms of the settlement arrived between them. The claimant stated to have received 
25000/- from the mgt towards full and final settlement of his claim. 


In view of the settlement arrived this no dispute award is being passed. Hence ordered. 
ORDER 


The claim petition is dismissed for want of dispute raised by the claimant and this award is accordingly 
passed. 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 7 of the 
ID act 947. 


Dictated & Corrected by me. 


PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 884.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (947 का 74) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार उप निदेशक (सीजीआईटी), नई दिल्‍ली नगरपालिका परिषद, पालिका केंद्र, नई दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के 
संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री रंजीत कुमार शर्मा, कामगार,के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (संदर्भ AeA 36/208) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया 
गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025/07/2023-404-आईआर(डीयू)| 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 88.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 36/208) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court - I] New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Depty Director(CGIT), New Delhi Municipal Council, Palika Kendra, New Delhi, and Shri 
Ranjeet Kumar Sharma,Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central 
Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L- 42025/07/2023-0-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI. 
Present: Smt. Pranita Mohanty, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-I, New Delhi. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 36/208 
Date of Passing Award- 5" May, 2023 
Between: 


Shri Ranjeet Kumar Sharma, 

S/o Rama Shankar Sharma, 

R/o H. No. 35 Sainik Enclave, Sector-5, 

Mohan Garden, Uttam Nagar, 

New Delhi-!!0059 ....Workman 
Versus 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 775 


New Delhi Municipal Council 

Through Depty Director(CGIT) 

Palika Kendra, 

New Delhi-i000! ... Management. 


Appearances:- 


Shri A. Dingra, Ld. A/R for the Claimant. 
Shri Raghvendra Upadhaya, Ld. A/R for the management 


AWARD 


This is an application filed u/s 2- A of the ID Act by the workman against the managements praying a 
direction to the managements to reinstate the workman into service with full back wages and all other 
consequential benefits. 


As stated in the claim petition, the claimant workman was engaged in the management in Feb 200 as a 
temporary mustor roll employee (TMR). On 4 .08.20i4 he was posted as a Regular Mustor Roll Employee 
(RMR) and posted and joined at the Connaught Place Division under EE(CP). He is a native of the state of Bihar 
and from 27. 06.207 to 08.07.207 , he was on leave and had proceeded to his home state in the evening of 
24.06.207 as 257 and 26" were holidays. On 09.07207, which was a Sunday, he returned to Delhi, and on the 
following Monday i.e on !0.07.207, joined his duty as usual. In the evening of 2.07.207, he was called by 
police to P.S Sagarpur New Delhi. On his arrival there, he was suddenly arrested by police on the allegation that 
one Bacchi Kumari has lodged one FIR against him and on the basis of the same a case has been registered. 
Without giving him opportunity of informing his relatives, police produced him in the Patiala House Court and 
the Magistrate remanded him to jail custody. His relatives having come to know about the same arranged the 
assistance of an advocate and on 29.07.20I7, he was released on bail. After release from custody, on 
0.08.207, he reported joining to the Junior Engineer of the Division he was working describing in detail the 
cause of his absence from duty. But he was not allowed to join. On the same day a show cause notice was issued 
to him calling him to explain within three days as to why he failed to intimate about his detention in police 
custody and as to why a police case has been registered against him, and why his service shall not be terminated. 
The claimant received the notice on 03.08.20l7 and on the next day i.e on 04.08.207, submitted his reply 
explaining that he has been falsely implicated in the police case and the complainant has not explained as to why 
she had not alleged this earlier. It was also explained that he was on leave from 26.07.20I7 to 09.07.20l7 and 
reported for duty on 0.07.20I7. suddenly he was arrested on 2.07.20I7 and remanded to judicial custody. 
Hence he had no scope of informing this fact to the management. Soon after his release from jail, on 0!.08.207 
though he reported to the Junior Engineer, his joining was not accepted. On the contrary the show cause notice 
was served. Despite submitting proper explanation, the management in a hasty manner terminated his service. 
Finding no other way, he raised a dispute before the labour commissioner and on issue of a failure Report filed 
the application u/s 2A of the ID Act. In this claim petition the claimant has prayed for a direction to the 
management to reinstate him in service holding his termination illegal and the period of his absence be treated 
as leave. 


The management filed written statement admitting that the claimant was working as a RMR since 
4.08.20i4 and his service was terminated on 8.08.20l7 entirely on the basis of gross indiscipline and 
unauthorized absence from duty. The claimant had never informed the employer about his arrest and detention 
in judicial custody on the allegation of another female employee for causing sexual harassment to her and giving 
out threatenings. He had also suppressed that a criminal case on the charges u/s 354, 354B , 506 and 509 IPC 
was registered against him. It is further pleaded by the management that the claimant was working as a RMR 
which is a status of casual employee and the CCS Rule as applicable to permanent employees of central Govt. is 
not applicable to him. Hence there was no necessacity of framing a charge or conducting a domestic inquiry 
against him. Hence the management after due consideration of facts took the decision for termination of his 
service. No illegality was committed in doing so. There by the management took a stand that the claim advanced 
by the claimant is not maintainable. 


The claimant filed replication denying the stand of the management and added that the allegation 
leveled against him by the informant Bachhi Kumari is all false and the management without waiting for a 
decision of the court on that allegation took a hasty decision and he had intimated about his detention in judicial 
custody at the earliest opportunity. 


On these rival pleadings these issues were framed for adjudication. 


776 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ISSUES 
l- whether the present proceeding before the Tribunal is maintainable? 


2- Whether the termination of service of the claimant by order dt 8.08.20]8 is illegal and without 
following the procedure and Rule. 


3- Whether the claimant/workman is entitled to reinstatement in to service with back wages.. 
4- To what other relief the claimant is entitled to. 


The claimant examined himself as फैफ] and produced several documents as documentary evidence. 
Those documents include the copy of the FIR lodged at P S Sagarpur by Bachhi Kumari, the show cause notice 
served on the claimant, the reply to the same by the claimant, the order dt!8.08.207 terminating his service, the 
representation of Bachhi Kumari addressed to the chairman of NDMC requesting removal of the claimant from 
service and the joining report submitted by the claimant on release from judicial custody. The management 
examined one of it’s section officer as MWI. She also filed documents marked as ७७४।/| to MW |॥३3. These 
documents are the office order appointing the claimant and others as RMRs containing the terms and conditions 
of their service, the Resolution dt 23.!.l989 adopting CCA Rules to the employees of NDMC excluding the 
casual workers, the intimation received from the Jt Director Vigilance regarding the complaint made against the 
claimant and that he has been remanded to Tihar Jail, copy of the leave application submitted by the claimant on 
23.06.207, requesting leave from 27.06.207 to 08.07.20I7 and the attendance register of the RM Rs. both the 
witnesses were cross examined at length. 


FINDINGS 
Issue No 2 


This being the most important issue and decisive for other issues is taken up for consideration at the 
first instance. Admitted position is that the claimant was absent from duty for the period 27.07.20l7 to 
09.07.20i7 and again from 2. 07.20!7 to 29.07.20I7.the claimant has stared that from 27.07.207 to 09.07. 
207, he was on leave after intimating his reporting officer the JE and had proceeded to his native place on 
24.07 evening as 25" and 26" were public holidays. He returned from leave and reached Delhi on 08.07.207. 
but 9" being Sunday joined his duty on 0. To support the claim and the oral statement the claimant has filed 
the photo copy of the leave application dt 23.06.20Il7, marked X which appears to have contained the 
endorsement of receipt of the JE on the same day. In the said application the claimant had informed his 
reporting officer about his proposed leave. There is no endorsement on the said document about refusal of leave. 
This document can not be said to be a self serving document as it contains the signature of the JE. Though the 
management witness during cross examination stated that there is no provision for the RMRs taking pre 
approved leave, no Rule or order to that effect has been proved. The management not even examined the JE 
concerned to state that the claimant had not intimated him before proceeding on leave. The other document filed 
by the claimant is the train ticket dt23.06.207 and the medical prescription of the doctor at his home town to 
prove that from 23.06.207 to 08.07.207, he was on leave and absent from Delhi. The claimant had called for 
the attendance register of the RMRs for the month of July 20l7. The management witness produced the same. It 
is observed from the said register maintained on daily basis that the claimant had attended his duty on 0™ and 
™ of July 207 and thereafter remained absent. 


The claimant has stated that suddenly he was arrested on 2.07.207 and remanded to jail custody by 
the order of the Magistrate as a case was registered against him at PS Sagarpur Delhi on the FIR lodged by one 
Bachhi kumari, his land lady alleging certain things falsely. It is the stand of the claimant that the opportunity to 
contact the family members was denied to him before remand to judicial custody. In such a situation it was 
beyond his capability to inform the employer about his detention in judicial custody. However soon after release 
on 29" July, he reported in writing for joining duty explaining the cause of his absence. The respondent instead 
of taking him on duty served the show cause notice calling him to explain his unauthorized absence. He replied 
the same. But the respondent did not accept the same and terminated his employment. The report for joining, 
show cause notice, reply to the same and the order of termination of employment has been placed on record by 
the claimant as Exts फै४७।/।३,४४५७४७।/ध७, WWI/lland ४४५७४/।/। 2. The credibility of these documents have not 
been disputed by the respondent. 


The only argument advanced by the management is that the RMRs are not entitled to approve leave and 
the claimant had failed to inform about his arrest and the RMRs not being covered under the CCA Rules there 
was no necessacity of initiating inquiry against him. The resolution by which application of CCA rules has been 
denied to the casual workers has been filed and the same has not been disputed by the claimant. The document 
filed by the claimant clearly shows that he was released from jail custody on 29" July 20I7 and on 0.08.207 
he gave the joining report explaining the absence, which was not accepted and a show cause notice was handed 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 [777 


over to him. It is not understood how the respondent fixed the liability on the claimant detained in custody for 
not reporting the detention, which was the duty of the prosecuting and investigating agency to do so, when the 
said two agencies had the information about the employment status of the claimant. Hence it is concluded that 
the claimant cannot be held liable for not informing the employer about his detention in judicial custody which 
he did soon after his release on bail. 


Now coming to the action taken by the employer against the claimant, it is found from the documents 
relied upon by both the parties that on 04.07.20!7 one FIR was registered at PS Sagarpur on the complaint of 
one Bachhi Kumari against the claimant under section 354, 354B 506 and 509 IPC. Pursuant thereto, the 
claimant was arrested and remanded to jail custody which is evident from the report of the Deputy Director 
Vigilance filed by the mgt and admitted by the claimant. The claimant was released from jail on 29.07.207. On 
0.08.207 he filed a written application to the Junior Engineer Drainage Service Centre CP Division NDMC 
seeking permission to join. The document contains the endorsement of different departments of the mgt. But the 
mgt, instead of allowing him to join served a show cause notice on the same day. The show cause notice has 
been filed as ww/l0. In the said show cause notice there is allegation that Bachhi Kumari a teacher employed 
in the school of NDMC has alleged sexual harassment by the claimant and on the basis of her report a case was 
registered and the claimant was arrested. But he failed to report his absence or account of the arrest. The reply of 
the claimant to this show cause notice has been field as ww!/l!. The claimant gave a detail explanation stating 
that being in jail custody he could not intimate the office about his detention and soon after the release on bail, 
he informed the office about the situation by writing a written letter to the JE. This reply was given by the 
claimant on 04.08.207. But the respondent did not find the same satisfactory and by office order dated 
8.08.207, which has been marked as wwl/2, terminated his service. 


On behalf of the workmen it was argued that the decision was taken unilaterally without any enquiry 
being held. When the claimant was pleading about the false implication by Bachhi Kumari, at least she should 
have been called for a statement and an opportunity of questioning her should have been granted to the claimant. 
But nothing of that kind happened and the mgt in as haste, passed the order on 8.08.20l7 terminating his 
service. The reply of the mgt in this regard is that the claimant was a Muster Roll Employee and the CCA Rule 
not being applicable, there was no need of conducting any inquiry. It is surprising to note that in the w/s the mgt 
has taken a stand that the claimant that for the police complaint made by Bachhi Kumari, the claimant was 
found to have committed mis-conduct and hence the mgt took a decision for termination of his service for such 
gross mis-conduct. This pleading of the mgt stands far away from the reasoning given in the termination order 
dated 8.08.207. This order also stands in a different footing than the contents of the show cause notice. 
Though in the w/s and show cause noticereference has been made to the police complaint of Bachhi Kumari, 
leading to a conclusion of gross mis-conduct committed by the claimant, the order of termination nowhere refers 
to the same. Rather in the termination order it has been specifically stated that a complaint has been forwarded 
by Bachhi Kumari regarding disobedience, irregular timing and irresponsible behavior during office hours for 
which his service stands terminated. Neither any show cause notice was issued to the claimant for the alleged 
disobedience, irregular timing or irresponsible behavior nor any evidence was shown substantiating the same. 
But the mgt. in a hurried manner passed the order of termination. 


It will not be out of place to say that the mgt in the pleading has taken a stand that for the sexual 
harassment allegation made by one Bachhi Kumari against the claimant his service was terminated. But the mgt 
never waited for the outcome of the police investigation or criminal trial. Merely because one FIR was lodged 
and the investigation ensued, the mgt, perhaps came to a conclusion about the proof of the alleged sexual 
harassment and thus terminated the service, which appears to be the illegal action amounting to unfair labour 
practice and victimization meted out to the claimant.. 


The mgt has taken a further stand that the claimant being a casual worker and RMR CCA Rule is not 
applicable. A resolution to that effect has been filed. It is not disputed that CCA rule is not applicable to the 
causal workers. But the provisions of section 25F of the ID Act clearly envisages the conditions precedent to the 
retrenchment of a workman who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer. 
According to this provision, the claimant was to be given one month notice indicating the reason for 
retrenchment or one month pay in lieu of notice and retrenchment compensation which shall be equivalent to I5 
days average pay for every completed years of continuous service. In this case as admitted by both the parties 
the claimantwas appointed as RMR on 3.08.20]4. Prior to that he was working as TMR since the year 200. It 
is also admitted that the mgt while terminating the service of the claimant had not complied the provisions of 
section 25F of the ID Act. On behalf of the claimant reliance has been placed in the case of NDMC vs Sunil 
Sharma decided by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi by order dated 07.05.202! in WPC no. 0946/2020 in 
which it has been held in the following manner 


778 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


“it is not longer res integra that if the termination of a workman, employed as a casual or daily wager 
is termination simplecitor, procedure laid under Section 25-F of the Act has to be followed and if the foundation 
is a misconduct, then an inquiry must precede the penalty”. 


In the said judgmenct the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi have referred to the earlier judgment titled as 
MCD vs Naresh kumar and ors. (2007SCC unlying, Delhi 44), wherein the Hon’ble High Court whiling 
dealing with the case of a workman employed as a Chowkidar with the MCD in the capacity of daily 
wager/casual/muster role worker, whose service was terminated on the allegation of misconduct, without 
serving any charge sheet or conducting any domestic enquiry, while uphelding the award of the labour court, 
observed that the action of MCD in not conducting any inquiry prior to issuance of termination order is illegal 
and nonest. The fact of the said case squarely applies to the case in hand. Since the mgt, in a haste terminated 
the service of the claimant by order dated 8.08.20!7 without inquiry on the allegation of disobedience, 
irregular timing and irresponsible behavior which was not established at all by the mgt the order of termination 
is illegal. The mgt even omitted to mention the reason of termination as the reasons shown in the show cause 
notice. All these aspects taken together, leads to a conclusion that the service of the claimant was illegally 
terminated by the mgt in gross violation of the provisions of the ID act and the principle of natural justice were 
not followed. At least the mgt could have waited for the termination of the criminal case. That having not been 
done, the one and only conclusion is that the claimant was subjected to unfair labour practice by way of 
harassment and his service was illegally terminated. 


Issue no. 3 and 4 


In view of the finding arrived in respect of issue no.2, it is held that the claimant is entitled to the relief 
of reinstatement into service with continuity of service. But he will not be entitled to back wages on the 
principle of no work no pay. Hence ordered. 


ORDER 


The claim petition be and the same is allowed on contest. It is held that the service of the claimant was 
illegally terminated by the mgt with effect from !8.08.20l7. The mgt is directed to reinstate the claimant in 
service within one month from the date of publication of this award and grant him continuity of service failing 
which the claimant would be at liberty of getting the order executed. But no order is passed with regard to the 
prayer for back wages. 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 47 
of the ID act 947. 


Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 882.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार निदेशक, राष्ट्रीय बागवानी अनुसंधान एवं विकास प्रतिष्ठान, सागरपुर मोर, नई दिल्ली; निदेशक, राष्ट्रीय 
बागवानी अनुसंधान एवं विकास फाउंडेशन, चितेगाँव, नासिक महाराष्ट्र, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री 
कुलदीप सिंह, श्रीमती नारायणी देवी, कामगार, द्वारा- श्री मार्कण्डेय शुक्ल, महासचिव, जागृति मजदूर 
संघ,वजीराबाद, दिल्‍ली, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-2 नई 
दिल्ली के पंचाट (संदर्भ Hear 9/2076) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय 
सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, Wet-42025/07/2023-04-aréarx (डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 882.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 9/206) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court - वी New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Director, National Horticulture Research & Development Foundation,Sagarpur Mor, New Delhi 
; The Director, National Horticulture Research & Development Foundation,Chitegaon, Nashik Maharashtra, and 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]779 


Shri Kuldeep Singh, Smt Narayani Devi, Worker, Through —Sh. Markandey Shukla, The General Secretary, 
Jagriti Labour Union, Wazirabad, Delhi, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the 
Central Government on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L- 42025/07/2023-04-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI. 
Present: Smt. PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. हट (४4 | ॥ | 
Date of Passing Award- 0 May, 2023 
Between: 


Sh. Kuldeep Singh, S/o Late Surjan Singh, 

substituted by LR Smt Narayani Devi, W/o Late Sh. Kuldeep Singh, 

Through —Sh. Markandey Shukla, , 

General Secretary, Jagriti Labour Union, 05/5, 

Sangam Vihar, 

Wazirabad, Delhi-!0084. .... Workman 


Versus 


l. The Director, 
National Horticulture Research & Development Foundation, 
Horticulture Bhawan, Institutional Area, Pankha Road, 
Sagarpur Mor, New Delhi-0058. 


2. The Director, 
National Horticulture Research & Development Foundation, 
Chitegaon, Nashik Maharashtra-42220]. .... Management 


Appearances:- 


Sh. M. Shukla, Ld. A/R for the claimant. 
Ms. Deepti Singh, Ld.A/R for the management. 


ORDER 


This is an application filed u/s 2A of the ID. Act wherein the claimant had alleged illegal termination 
and reinstatement to service with back wages and consequential benefits. 


Notice being served. The mgt appeared and filed written statement denying the claim advanced by the 
claimant. On completion of the pleadings issues were framed by order dated 3.04.207. Thereafter the claimant 
adduced his evidence and the same was closed, the mgt had also adduced evidence by examining one witness 
R. K Yadav, who was the enquiry officer in the domestic enquiry conducted against the claimant. While the 
matter was pending for argument the claimant died and an application was filed for substitution of the LRs. By 
order dated 23"! 05.2022 the LRs were added and the matter was adjourned for argument on preliminary issue. 


While the matter was stood thus one LCA was filed by the LRs of the deceased claimant which was 
registered as LCA NO. 4.of 2022 . During the pendency of that LCA a compromise was effected between the 
parties and the management paid the legal dues of the deceased claimant to his LRs . Thus, the LRs made a 
statement expressing that they have no dispute against the management. 


Hence, this no dispute award is passed. Hence ordered 


780 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


ORDER 
The claim be and the same is dismissed as the claimant has no dispute against the mgt 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 47 
of the ID act 947. 


Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 
का.आ. 883.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय. सरकार इंडियन इंस्टीट्यूट ऑफ कैपिटल मारकीट प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों 
के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण नं. 4 मुम्बई के 
Gare संदर्भ PEI (09/20i6) को प्रकाशित करती है। 
[सं. Wet-6025/3/206-aTs Ae (ATI) 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 883.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 09/206) of the Cent.Govt. Indus. Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
No.l Mumbai as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Indian Institute 
of Capital Markets and their workmen. 


[No. L-6025/3/206 -IR (B-ID] 


SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.I 
MUMBAI 
Present: Smt. PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 
REFERENCE NO.CGIT-/09 OF 206 
Parties: Employers in relation to the management of 
Indian Institute of Capital Markets 
And 


Their workmen 


Appearances: 
For the first party No.] Management : Absent. 
For the second party workman : Absent. 
State : Maharashtra 


Mumbai, dated the 07th day of September, 2022 
AWARD 


l. The present reference has been made by the Central Government by its order dated 24/28/8/20I5 
passed in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947. The terms of reference as per the schedule to the said order are as under: 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 
(9) 


[भाग [aves 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]78 


(l) “Whether the establishment of UTI-ICM known as Indian Institute of Capital 
Markets (IICM) and M/s. National Institute of Securities Markets (NISM) are 
industry considering the systematic activities carried out by the said establishment is 
an industry under the definition of Section 2(j) of I.D.Act 947? 


(2) If so, whether the action of the management in discontinuing certain facilities extended to 
the workmen on various occasions viz. DA, Medical OPD, Transport Allowance, Sodexo 
Coupons, Conveyance, HRA, Leave Fare concession, Book Allowances, Children Education 
Allowance, Reimbursement of Hospitalizaton Charges etc. vide administrative circular No. 
॥099 of 2079-77 dated 97.02.20709, administrative circular No. /23 of 2073-74 dated 
42.09.20473, administrative circular ०, //7 of 2072-॥3 dated 76.04.2072 and administrative 
circular No. /22 of 20I3-4 dated 72.09.2043 without compliance of Section 9A of I.D.Act 
4947 is just & proper? If not , what relief to the workmen concerned? 


(3) Further, whether the action of the management of M/s UTI-(IICM) in issuing administrative 
circular No. /409 of 2074-73 dated 92.03,2073 addressed to all the employees during the 
pendency of conciliation proceedings, intimating the decision of the Governing Council of 
IICM to amalgamate IICM with NISM after closing hours on 3/.03.2073 and indirectly 
discontinuing the services of all the existing employees and notified that they will 
automatically become employees of NISM, who will be offering employment to the said 
employees on contractual basis and on suitability basis is just and proper and whether such 
action of the management is amounting to illegal termination of services of all the workmen 
of IICM? If so, what relief to the workmen concerned? 


By the order dated 22.9.206, notices were directed to be issued to the parties. Accordingly, notices were 
issued to the parties by Registered Post AD. 


Notices issued to the first party / Management as well as the second party / Union were duly served on the 
respective parties. Acknowledgement cards were received back. 


Perusal of the record reveals that neither the first party management nor the second party union were 
present before this Tribunal for filing the statement of claim till date. 


The case is taken up today. None is present for the first party management and none is present for the 
second party union. 


No Statement of Claim has been filed on behalf of the second party / Union. 


From the above narration of facts, it is evident that despite repeated dates having been fixed, none has 
appeared on behalf of the first party management and second party/Union. No Statement of Claim has 
been filed on behalf of the second party / Union. There is thus, no pleading or evidence filed on behalf of 
the second party / Union in support of its claim as contained in the Reference made to this Tribunal. No 
relief, therefore, can be granted to the second party / Union. 


(l0) Reference is consequently answered by stating that no relief can be granted to the second party / Union. 


(l) Award is passed accordingly. 


PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 
का.आ. 884.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 7947 (947 का 4) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 


सरकार मैसर्स इंडस टॉवर लिमिटेड; मैसर्स नरूला इंफ्रास्ट्रक्चर प्रा. लिमिटेड, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों 
gaara जिला मोबाइल टॉवर स्थायी कर्मचारी संघ (आईएनटीयूसी),के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार 
औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय- आसनसोल के पंचाट (संदर्भ संखया 06 OF 2046) को जैसा कि 
अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 78.04.2023 को 
प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., Teat-400/04/20(6-aTeare(e79)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


782 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 884.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 06 OF 206) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court - Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to M/s. Indus Tower Limited ; M/s. Narula Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd, and Burdwan Zilla Mobile Tower 
Permanent Karmachari Union (INTTUC), which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central 
Government on 25.05.2023. 


[No. L- 400/0/206-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 


BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM- LABOUR COURT, 
ASANSOL. 


Present: Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T-cum-L.C., Asansol. 
REFERENCE CASE NO. 06 OF 206 
PARTIES: Burdwan Zilla Mobile Tower Permanent Karmachari Union (INTTUC). 


Vs. 
(.) Management of M/s. Indus Tower Limited, 


(2) Management of M/s. Narula Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. 


REPRESENTATIVES: 
For the Union/Workmen: None. 
For the Management : Mr. S. K. Singh, learned advocate .... for opposite party No. l. 
Mr. S. H. Qadir, learned advocate .... for opposite party No. 2. 
INDUSTRY: Telecommunication. 
STATE: West Bengal. 
Dated: 27.04.2023 
AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section () and Sub-section (2A) of Section 0 
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), Govt. of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-400/0/20I6-IR(DU) dated 03.02.206/04.02.206 has been pleased to refer the following dispute 
between the employer, that is the Managements of () M/s. Indus Tower Limited and (2) M/s. Narula 
Infrastructure Private Limited and their workmen for adjudication by this Tribunal. 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the implementation of State Minimum Wages notification by the 
employer and sole employer is justified without a valid State Government Minimum 
Wages notificate? If not what relief the workmen is entitled to? ” 


I. On receiving Order No. L-400/0I/206-IR(DU) dated 03.02.206/04.02.20l6 from the Govt. of 
India, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, a Reference case No. 06 of 20I6 was 
registered on 22.02.206 and an order was passed issuing notice to the parties through registered post, directing 
them to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant documents in support of their claims and 
a list of witnesses. Both parties appeared before the Tribunal through their authorized representatives. 


2. The case was fixed up on 24.04.2023 for evidence of workman witness. Mr. S. K. Singh, learned 
advocate appeared for Indus Tower Limited. Mr. S. H. Qadir, learned advocate appeared for Narula 
Infrastructure Private Limited. On repeated calls at 02:!0 PM none appeared for Burdwan Zilla Mobile Tower 
Permanent Karmachari Union (INTTUC). As per order dated 3.02.2023 Notice under registered post was 


[भाग I]-—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 783 
issued to the union directing to appear and take proper steps. Track Consignment Report reveals that Notice was 
served upon the addressee on 28.03.2023. 


3. In this case initially the General Secretary, Burdwan Zilla Mobile Tower Permanent Karmachari Union 
(INTTUC) appeared and filed written statement but subsequently none appeared for workmen to purse this case. 
Ample opportunities were provided to the workers’ union to represent the case but they did not take any step 
after service of Notices. Under such circumstance the Industrial Dispute is disposed of in the form of a No 
Dispute Award. 


Hence, 
ORDERED 


that a No Dispute Award be drawn up in respect of the above Reference. Let copies of the Award in 
duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India, New Delhi for information 
and Notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERIEE, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 22 मई, 2023 
का.आ. 885.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय. सरकार मुंबई पोर्ट ट्रस्ट प्रबंध तंत्र के सबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय औद्योगिक अधिकरण नं. 4 मुम्बई के पंचाट संदर्भ संख्या (26/20I2) 
को प्रकाशित करती है। 
[a. Wa-340/8/20/-argarz(A-I)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 885.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 26/202) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
No.l Mumbai as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Mumbai Port 
Trust and their workmen 


[No. L- 30/8/20-IR (B-ID] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL ७०.।, MUMBAI 
Present: Justice K.D. BHUTIA, PRESIDING OFFICER 
REFERENCE NO. CGIT-/26 OF 202 


Mumbai Port Trust ....L* Party 
V/s. 
Their Workmen ....2™ Party 
Presence: 
For the Management : Umesh Nabar, Adv. 
For the Union : Absent 


Mumbai dated the 2 day of April, 2023. 


784 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 
The Management is present through its learned counsel. 


None appear from the side of Union inspite of due service of notice upon it. Record reveals since 
2020, the union who has espoused the present dispute has stopped appearing before the Tribunal to proceed with 
the hearing. 


Therefore, it can be early assumed that union is no more interested to pursue the dispute. 


Be that as it may, the Govt. of India on the strength of power conferred u/s 0(i)(d)(2A) of the I.D. 
Act, 947 and vide order No. L-30/8/20ll(0IR(B-ID dated 24.05.202, has referred the following issue for 
adjudication by this Tribunal. 


“Whether the action of management of Mumbai Port Trust, Mumbai in giving notice of change 
in service conditions dated 2..200 proposing to reduce the working hours of the crew 
members of dredging flotilla including floating Crain crew from 2 hours to 8 hours is legal, just 
and proper? To what relief the workmen concerned are entitled? 


Unfortunately, there is no materials in record apart from uncorroborated statement of claim of the 
union, to decide the above issue. 


That apart record shows the union has not been taking any step to proceed with the hearing of the case 
since 2020. 


Therefore, it can be presumed union has no more dispute with the management or grievance against the 
Management, for reducing the working hours from |2 to 8 hours. 


More so, as per Indian Labour daily working hours may range from 8-l0 hr. Weekly working hours can 
not exceed 48 hrs. Weekly limits is capped at 50-60 hrs. including overtime. 


Prima facie it appear the Management perhaps in adherence to Labour Law, might have reduced the 
working hours from !2 hrs. to 8 hrs. in a day. 


Anyway, in view of the above “No Dispute Award” is passed. 
Accordingly, Reference No. CGIT-26 of 202 is disposed of. 
Justice K.D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 886.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 7947 (7947 का 74) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, दूरसंचार, भारत संचार निगम लिमिटेड टेलीफोन एक्सचेंज, फिरोजपुर, पंजाब; मंडल 
अभियंता, दूरसंचार भारत संचार निगम लिमिटेड टेलीफोन एक्सचेंज, फाजिल्का, पंजाब;|सब डिविजनल इंजीनियर, 
Tel, बीएसएनएल, फाजिल्का, पंजाब; जेटीओ श्री संजय रेवारिया, सी/ओ महाप्रबंधक, टेलीकॉम, भारत संचार 
निगम लिमिटेड टेलीफोन एक्सचेंज, फिरोजपुर, पंजाब; मेसर्स ए.एस. टेलीमैटिक्स प्रा. लिमिटेड जिला केंद्र 
जनकपुरी, नई दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री ger सिंह, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-4 चंडीगढ़ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 
48/2020) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के 
साथ 25/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025/07/2023/-405-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 886.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 48/2020) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court —l,Chandigarh, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation The General manager, Telecom, Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. Telephone Exchange, Ferozepur, Punjab; 
Divisional Engineer, Telecom Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. Telephone Exchange, Fazilka, Punjab; Sub 
Divisional Engineer, Group-II], BSNL, Fazilka, Punjab; JTO Sh. Sanjay Rewaria, C/o General manager, 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 785 


Telecom, Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. Telephone Exchange, Ferozepur, Punjab; M/s A.S. Telematics Pvt. Ltd., 
District Center Janakpuri, New Delhi, and Shri Buta Singh ,Worker,which was received along with soft copy of 
the award by the Central Government on 05/04/2023. 


[No. L- 42025/07/2023/-05-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-I, CHANDIGARH. 
Present: Sh. J.K. TRIPATHI, Presiding Officer 
ID No. 48/2020 
Registered On:-22.03.202] 


Buta Singh S/o Sh. Jeet Singh, R/o House No.82I/D, 
Mohalla Anandpur, Kacha Abha Road, 
Fazilka, Distt. Fazilka (Punjab). .... Workman 


Versus 
l. The General manager, Telecom, Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. Telephone Exchange, Ferozepur, Punjab. 
Divisional Engineer, Telecom Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. Telephone Exchange, Fazilka, Punjab. 


Sub Divisional Engineer, Group-II, BSNL, Fazilka, Punjab. 


eS 


JTO Sh. Sanjay Rewaria, C/o General manager, Telecom, Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. Telephone Exchange, 
Ferozepur, Punjab. 


5. M/s A.S. Telematics Pvt. Ltd. 808, AIC Jaina Tower-II, Plot No.6, 
District Center Janakpuri, 
New Delhi-0058. .... Respondents/Managements 


Award 
Passed On:-20.04.2023 


l. The workman Buta Singh has directly filed this claim petition under Section 2-A of the Industrial 
Dispute Act 947(hereinafter called the Act) for his illegal termination by the management. 


2. The brief facts relevant for deciding this claim petition is that the workman joined his duty in the office 
of General Manager, Telecom, Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. Telephone Exchange, Ferozepur, Punjab in l997 but 
the workman joined his duty in 997 in Fazilka town and he continuously worked upto 30.I.20I9 Le. 
approximately for a period of 23 years without any break with the respondents/managements. The workman 
during the initial years directly worked with the management and the management used to pay him salary in 
cash by SDO. At that time Sh. Sandeep Chalana was working as JTO and the workman worked with him for a 
period of one year. The workman was assured by the management at the time of the initial engagement that he 
will be regularized against the regular vacancy. The workman worked with SDO Group-II Fazilka and Sh. 
Sanjay Rewaria was working as J.E. and Sh. Babu Lal was serving as SDO. The workman was working under 
the direct control and supervision of the management of respondent nos.! to 4. The workman worked in 
Arniwala Telephone Exchange for a period of three years. The workman also worked in Mandi Laduka, Teh. 
Kalandar and Bajewala till 30.!.20l9 and also worked for a period of three years in Group-II Fazilka. The 
workman also worked repairing of telephone lines in village Chatirwala, Bareka, Roopnagar, Bakanwala, 
Jhandwala, Mira Sagla upto 6 years. The workman also performed duties of cable jointing, welding as well as 
digging of hole 4’x3’. The workman was not paid his salary for the last |! months i.e. from January 209 to 
November 209 and when the service of the workman was terminated Sh. Sukhwinder Singh was working as 
JTO in Ferozepur, Punjab. From the date of joining i.e. from 997 to 2009 salary was paid to the workman by 
the SDO. After 2009 the contractor Sh. Roshan Lal started deducting EPF from the salary of the workman and 
the workman never met to any contractor for performing his official duties. All of sudden without any rhyme 
and reason on 07.05.2020 the workman was not allowed to perform his official duty by the SDO BSNL and the 
services of the workman were terminated by the management illegally, arbitrarily, unlawfully and against the 


786 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 947. Before the termination of the services of the workman no notice or 
one month pay in lieu thereof was even given to the workman despite the fact that the workman completed more 
than 23 years approx. and no retrenchment compensation was offered rather fresh workmen were engaged by 
the management. The services of the workman was terminated by Sh. Sukhwinder Singh JTO and Sh. Sandeep 
Chalana was working as SDE Group-II in Fazilka. The mandatory provisions of Section 25-F, G and H of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 have grossly been violated by the management by terminating the services of 
workman and therefore, the action of the management amounts to unfair labour practice. In view of the 
averments made above, it is therefore prayed that the management be directed to reinstate the workman into 
service with full back wages w.e.f. 0!.2.209 with continuity of service along with 8% interest in the interest 
of justice. 


3. The management has filed its written statement, alleging therein that there is no master and servant 
relationship between the workman and management nor the workman was engaged by the management nor paid 
any wages nor there is any supervision and control over the workman by the BNSL as alleged by the workman 
in his statement of claim. The work of petty nature was got performed through various contractors from time to 
time as per the policy of the Government and contract agreements had been executed with them. The contract 
agreements for the relevant period are attached as Annexure M-I! to M-29. It is denied that the workman had 
joined the duties in the O/o GMT, BSNL Ferozepur in 997 and the workman worked with the BSNL upto 
30..209. It is further denied that the workman initially worked directly with BSNL and any salary was being 
paid by the SDO, BSNL in cash. It is further denied that the workman worked with SDO Group-II Fazilka in 
998 when Sh. Sanjay Rewaria was working as JE and Sh. Babu Lal was serving as SDO. It is further denied 
that the workman was working under the direct control and supervision of the management of respondent no.| 
to 4 and payment of salary was being made by SDO concerned and worked in Arniwala Telephone Exchange 
for a period of three years or further in Mandi Laduka or Kalandar and Bajewala till 30.!.20l9. The BSNL is 
duty bound to maintain the line, wire and connections provided to its customers for which there is due procedure 
to maintain the same. The Indian Telegraph Act, 985 governs the same. Whenever the complaints are 
registered online or received otherwise, the same are to be attended by the Lineman followed by hierarchy 
which includes JTO and SDO who are regular employees working in respective cadres. It is denied that the 
workman has not been paid salary for last ll months i.e. from January, 20l9 to November, 209. It is denied 
that the workman was terminated and Mrs. Sukhwinder Singh may be working as JTO but he had no concern 
with the workman as the workman may have been engaged by the contractors. The workman is making the false 
averments without any substance or evidence of his working continuously or regarding the payment. The 
workman has himself admitted that he worked with contractor Sh. Roshan Lal who started deducting EPF from 
his salary. It is specifically denied that the workman was terminated by the management illegally, arbitrarily and 
unlawfully whereas the facts are that the workman was never engaged by the BSNL nor paid him any wages nor 
he worked under the supervision and control of BSNL as the workman himself has not placed on record any 
evidence to prove his engagement or payment or supervision or control. Since the workman was not engaged by 
BSNL so the question of placing other employees in his place by BSNL does not arise. Since the workman was 
not the workman of BSNL nor his services were terminated by BSNL therefore, serving of notice of one month 
or pay in lieu thereof does not arise. The management has not violated the provisions contained in Section 25-F, 
G & H of the ID Act as alleged. In view of the position stated above, it is therefore, prayed that the claim of the 
workman may kindly be dismissed with cost as the workman is not entitled to the relief as prayed for in the 
interest of justice, equity and fair play. 


During the pendency of the proceedings before this Tribunal on 20.04.2023, the workman Sh. Buta 
Singh has made a statement that he has amicably settled the matter with the management and he do not want to 
pursue the matter and prayed for withdrawal of the same. Since a settlement has been arrived at between the 
parties, there is no need to proceed with the matter further. 


It is now well settled position in law that any settlement arrived at between the parties is legally 
binding upon both the parties in terms of the provisions of Section 8 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947. 


In view of the statement made by the workman Sh. Buta Singh, the present claim petition is dismissed 
as settled. The statement made by the workman Sh. Buta Singh shall remain the integral part of the Award. 


Let copy of the award be sent to the Central Government for publication of the same as required under 
Section |7(2) of the Act. 


J. K. TRIPATHI, Presiding Officer 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]787 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 887.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 7947 (4947 का 4) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार मुख्य महाप्रबंधक, विज्ञान इंडस्ट्रीज लिमिटेड, तरिकेरे, कर्नाटक; महाप्रबंधक (आईआर), भारत अर्थ मूवर्स 
लिमिटेड, बीईएमएल सौधा, बेंगलुरू, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और सचिव, विज्ञान उद्योग मजदूर संघ, 
तरिकेरे, कर्नाटक,के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय- बेंगलुरु, के 
पंचाट (संदर्भ सं. 34/207) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 
सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42044-04-2047-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2023 


S.O. 887.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 34/207) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court - Bangalore,as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The Chief General Manager, Vignyan Industries Limited, Tarikere, Karnataka ; The General Manager (IR), 
Bharat Earth Movers Limited, BEML Soudha, BengaLuru , and The Secretary, Vignyan Industries Mazdoor 
Sangh, Tarikere, Karnataka, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government 
on 24.05.2023. 


[No. L-420-0-207 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT BENGALURU 
CAMP At HYDERABAD 
Present : Shri IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 
C RNo. 34/207 
I Party I Party 
The Secretary, l. The Chief General Manager, Vignyan 
Vignyan Industries Mazdoor Sangh, epee Eamets Tanker, RARNOT ARS 


Tarikere, 

ner: 2. The General Manager (IR), Bharat Earth 
Movers Limited, BEML Soudha, 
BANGALORE - 560 027. 


Appearances 
I Party : Muralidhara 
Advocate 
II Party : . Sh. N S Narasimha Swamy 
Advocate 
2. Sh. T Rajaram 
Advocate 


l. The Government of India, Ministry of Labour vide order No. L-40/0I/20i7-IR(DU) dated 
24.0.20I7 in exercise of the power conferred by clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section 
0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred as “The Act”) (4 of 947) referred the following 
Industrial Dispute to this Tribunal for adjudication: 


788 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether Vignyan Industries Mazdoor Sangh is justified in demanding Wages and allowance 
to the workers of Vignyan Industries Ltd., a holding Company of BEML at par with workers 
of Bharath Earth Movers Limited? If not, to what relief the workers are entitled, from which 
date and what directions are necessary in this regard?” 


2. After Registering the matter notices were issued to parties who appeared. During the pendency of 
Industrial Dispute parties filed Joint Memorandum of Settlement wherein they have agreed that they have signed 
voluntarily and approached the tribunal to accept the settlement. Therefore, prayed to pass consent award in the 
interest of justice. 


3. Perused the record, parties have filed Joint Memorandum of Settlement dated 29.09.202] in the present 
matter voluntarily and prayed to pass consent Award in terms of the settlement. The Settlement has been duly 
signed by both the parties. Therefore, in view of the above settlement is allowed and the consent award in terms 
of the settlement is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


(Dictated to Secretary to Court at Camp Court, transcribed by him, corrected and signed by me on 3 March 
2023) 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 मई, 2023 
का.आ. 888.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार बैंक ऑफ महाराष्ट्र के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में औद्योगिक अधिकरण» श्रम न्यायालय पुने के पंचाट (48/2022) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[a. Wa-720/44/2022-aTg ark (al-I])] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 26th May, 2023 


S.O. 888.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 8/2022) of the Industrial. Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Pune as 
shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Bank of Maharashtra and their 
workmen. 


[No. L- 20/4/2022-IR (B-ID] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 
IN THE INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL MAHARASHTRA AT PUNE 
Reference (IT) No. 8 of 2022 


The Chairman and Managing Director, 

Bank of Maharashtra 

Lokmangal, Shivajinagar, 

Pune 4 005 ....First Party 
Versus 


The President C/o Mahabank Navnirman Sena 

Yashoda co-op. Housing society, Ranade Road, 

Extension, Dadar, Mumbai 400028 ....second Party 
CORAM : Shri K.N. Gautam, Presiding Officer. 


AWARD 
( Dated : 5.04.2023 ) 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 789 


This is a reference forwarded by Shram Mantralaya, Government of India, New Delhi vide order dated 
22/04/2022 in exercise of the powers conferred under sub section (2A) of section 0 of Industrial Disputes Act, 
947 in respect of whether the Bank of Maharashtra indulged in unfair labour practices and whether the 
demand of Mahabank Navnirman Sena before the management of bank for regularization / permanency of 69 
part time sweepers is legal and justified. 


However, both the parties even after receipt of notices remained absent and failed to contest the 
Reference by filing their statement of claim and written statement. It seems that the parties have not interested 
in persuing matter which is the subject matter of the present reference. 


Hence the following award :- 
AWARD 
l. The Reference is dismissed in default for want of prosecution. 
2. No order as to costs. 
3. Copies of this Award be sent to the Government 
Authority as per rules. 
K.N. GAUTAM, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 26 मई, 2023 
का.आ. 889.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 44) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
मुख्य महाप्रबंधक, दूरसंचार, बीएसएनएल, एबिड्स, हैदराबाद; सहायक महाप्रबंधक (प्रशासन), ओ/ओ सीजीएमटी, 
ए.पी. सर्किल, हैदराबाद, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री वेपचेदु रामेश्वर राव, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-श्रम न्यायालय-हैदराबाद के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 
L.C. ४०.4/2042) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट 
कॉपी के साथ 7.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025-07-2023-88-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 26th May, 2023 


S.O. 889.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. L.C.No.No. 4/20!2) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court — Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to The Chief General Manager, Telecommunications, BSNL, Abids, Hyderabad ;The 
Assistant General Manager (Admn.),O/o CGMT, A.P. Circle, Hyderabad, and Shri Vepachedu Rameswara Rao, 
Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on !7.05.2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-88 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL- CUM- LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar, Presiding Officer 


Dated the 377 day of March, 2023 


INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 4/202 
Between: 


Sri Vepachedu Rameswara Rao 
S/o Anjaneyulu, 


790 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


R/o H. No.3-5-303/I/A, 
Pillichinnakrishna Thota, 
Khammam. ......Petitioner 


AND 


l. The Chief General Manager, 
Telecommunications, BSNL, 
Abids, Hyderabad. 


2. The Assistant General Manager (Admn.) 
O/o CGMT, A.P. Circle, 
Hyderabad — I. ....Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner: M/s. M.V. Hanumantha Rao, Advocates 


For the Respondent: — Sri S. Prabhakar Reddy, Advocate 


AWARD 


Sri Vepachedu Rameswara Rao, who worked as Mazdoor (who will be referred to as the workman) has 
filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents, Railway 
Electrification Project (REF), BSNL, Secunderabad seeking for declaring the proceeding No. TA/STB/20- 
2/REP/06-0/42 dated 8.6.200 issued by the Respondent as illegal, arbitrary, discriminatory, violative of 
principles of natural justice and to set aside the same consequently directing the Respondents to regularize or re- 
engage the Petitioner into service duly granting all the consequential benefits and such other reliefs as this court 
may deems fit. 


2. _The averments made in the petition in brief are as follows: 


It is submitted that the Petitioner has worked as Mazdoor in Railway Electrification Project(REF) 
Secunderabad to Nagpur from |..994 to 30.9.996 for 004 days along with others. The Petitioner submitted 
that thereafter he along with others continued on voucher payment basis for some time and thereafter on contract 
basis. Petitioner along with others have been requesting for regularization or to provide regular work still no 
action has been taken by the department, though they have worked for a considerable period. Further, petitioner 
came to know that by proceedings dated 2..2000 similarly situated 79 persons have been regularized by 
giving them "temporary status" by the respondent, in fact those persons are juniors to the petitioner and other 
similarly situated persons. Petitioner hails from poor family and have been pursuing the authorities since long 
time with a hope that the department would consider her claim in a positive manner. Petitioner submits that, as 
there was no action taken by the respondents he along with others approached Hon'ble Central Administrative 
Tribunal, Hyderabad Bench, at Hyderabad by filing OA. Nos. l00/0 and !0/l0 and the Hon'ble Tribunal after 
hearing both the parties disposed of the OAs, on 0.2.20l0 with specific directions "since the applicants in the 
OA also have similar claims as the applicants in the ४०.४०. ।2672/08, I consider it appropriate to dispose of this 
Original Application by giving a direction to the applicants to file individual representations to the respondents 
giving full details namely, their addresses, places at which they were engaged, the period for which they were 
engaged etc., within a period of 4 weeks and on receipt of such representations, the respondents shall examine 
their applications with reference to the records and the scheme that was in force and pass orders within a period 
of 3 months from the date of receipt of such representation.” It is submitted that, as per the orders of the 
Hon'ble Tribunal the petitioner and others have submitted elaborate representations to the Respondent No.| 
along with order passed by Hon'ble Tribunal and also attendance book etc. on 3.3.20l0 the Respondent No.| 
instead of appreciating the circumstances and without proper verification of records and without providing 
opportunity of being heard, Respondent has issued the impugned letter dt.8.6.200 stating, 


“ i) With reference to the representation, pursuant to the directions of the Hon'ble Tribunal dated 0.2.200 in 
OA. No.i00/l0 it is informed that the same has been duly considered having regard to the policy and 
availability of records and it is regretted that it is not open to re-engage you as casual labours or grant of 
temporary status under the scheme dt.7.l0.989 which has exclusive application to casual labour who have 
engaged prior to 3i.0.985 up to 22.6.988 and continued as such. The following have duly taken into 
consideration for the aforesaid decision. All the casual labors who were eligible as per letter dt.29.9.2000 of 
DOT were regularized as one time measure. 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 79] 


(ii) Records pertaining to Railway electrification Project are not available for due verification of information 
furnished by you as they were weeded out as per the retention schedule. The letter of appointment and payment 
thereof is requisite record to verify your engagement from |.!.!994 to 30.9.996 and the basis for the same 
while DOT, New Delhi letter No.270-6/84-STN dt.22.6.988 imposed ban on engagement of casual labours 
including project circle. 


(iii) The certification by the Divisional Engineer about such engagement is not acceptable in the absence of 
records as indicated above. 


(iv) It is stated that you have been disengaged as casual labour and also thereafter continued with contractor and 

thus there is no employer-employee relationship at any point of time thereafter and as such there is no scope to 
re-engage you as casual labour and also in view of the complete ban as per DOT, New Delhi letter no.269-4/93 
STN-II dt. !2.2.999 and further affirmed vide letter no.269-4/93/STN II dt.l5.6.999 and the said policy is 
continuing. 


v) The violation of provisions of Sec.25F of ID Act, 947 having questioned in the appropriate forum at any 
time and as such disengagement has become final for all purposes. 


vi) This disposes of your representation and it is hereby clarified that no further correspondence will be 
entertained on this subject.” 


Petitioner submitted that the proceedings dated 8.6.20l0 are ex.facie illegal, arbitrary, discriminatory and 
contrary to record and violative of principles of natural justice and violative of Art. !4 and [6 of Constitution of 
India. It is submitted when similarly situated persons were regularized the respondent ought to have extended 
the same benefit to the petitioner also. Further, the reasoning recorded by the respondent as mentioned in the 
clause-(i) of the impugned order stating that benefit of extension of temporary status under scheme dated 
7.0.989 is only for casual labours who have engaged prior to 3.0.985 up to 22.6.988 is not tenable and 
when the department had extended similar benefit to similarly situated persons and having extracted work from 
the petitioner during subsequent period, denial of said benefit amounts discrimination. The contention of the 
respondents as mentioned in clause-(ii), records pertaining to Railway Electrification Project are not available 
as have weeded out as per the retention schedule is also not tenable. It is submitted non-availability of the 
records in the department cannot be attributed to the petitioner and respondent ought to have accepted the 
records produced by the petitioner. It is submitted regarding para no (4) of the impugned order that when 
similarly situated persons were engaged and records shows the services rendered by the petitioner the contention 
that there is no relationship as employer and employee is also not tenable. Clause (5) of the order is not 
maintainable in respect of the claims of petitioner as he has been pursuing with the department to re-engage him 
in the respondent department in view of their past experience. The petitioner is having record and also the 
department had considered similarly situated persons as such the petitioner is entitled for relief. It is submitted 
that the impugned order is not only illegal but also contrary to earlier directions issued by the Hon'ble Central 
Administrative Tribunal as such as a last resort the petitioner is approaching this Hon'ble court. The petitioner, 
along with others approached Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal Hyderabad Bench at Hyderabad and 
filed OA. No. !229/200 and after hearing both the sides the Hon'ble Tribunal has directed the applicants 
therein to approach concerned Labour court under Industrial Dispute Act, 947 and hence, this petition. It is 
submitted the petitioner and others have filed their concerned days book duly signed by the employer on every 
month ending, identity card, etc., the days book clearly postulates all the relevant information of the petitioner 
with regard to work i.e. MRPTS work, cable work, or alignment, store work, etc., and Petitioner was paid 
Rs.60/- per day. It is therefore prayed that this Hon'ble Tribunal may be pleased to i) Declare the impugned 
letter No.TA/STB/20-2/REP/06-0/42 dated 8.6.20l0 issued by the respondent as illegal arbitrary, 
discriminatory and violative of principles of natural justice and consequently set aside the said letter. 


3. The Respondents filed counter denying the averments made in the petition, with the averments in 
brief which runs as follows: 


The Respondent submitted that the claim petition is misconceived and is barred by limitation. There is no 
engagement of casual labour in BSNL, after .0.2000 and the casual labour who have been engaged as _ such 
before the imposition of ban vide letter No.270/6/84-STN, New Delhi dated 30.3.985 and letter No.270-6/84- 
STN dated 22.6.988 for the project circles and the line dismantling in the Electrification project circles have 
been continued in BSNL as a matter of policy and the Petitioner having been engaged in the project after the 
imposition of ban vide letter dated 22.6.988 is not covered by the policy thereof and it is not open for the 
Petitioner to assert for reengagement or regularization under the said policy. The claimant is confusing the 
Hon'ble Tribunal with regard to the letter No. TA/STB/20-2/REP/06-0/22 dated 27.4.20l0 pursuant to the 
directions of the Hon'ble Central Administrative Tribunal dated 0.2.200, in OA No.l00/20]0 filed in 
continuation of WP No.l2872/2008 in the High Court seeking for the identical relief and the communication 


792 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


dated 27.4.200 based on the directions dt.0.2.20l0 in O.A.No.l00/20l0 to comply with a judicial order 
notwithstanding the fact that the said O.A.No.00/200 is misconceived and not maintainable having regard to 
the definition of employee in Rule 3(8) of BSNL & CDA Rules, 2006 implemented as such from 0..2006 
thereby leaving no scope to exercise any jurisdiction by the Hon'ble Tribunal and on 28.2.20il in 
O0.A.No.229/200. It is not open for the claimant to assail the same before this Hon'ble Court in any manner for 
any purpose. The Railway Electrification project for line dismantling is distinct and different and the said 
project is out side jurisdiction of the respondent thereby leaving no scope to reengage any casual labour engaged 
by the said projects organization after the imposition of the ban and disengaging thereafter and entrustment of 
the work to a contractor thereby leaving no scope for reengagement and regularization as per the settled law. 
The Petitioner is relying on the documents which do not form part of the record of the respondent without any 
letters of engagement and payment particulars while the maintenance of the records in not the administrative 
concern of the answering respondent and no records as such are maintained after the expiry of three years 
relating to muster roll as per the retention schedule. It is therefore prayed that this Hon'ble Tribunal may be 
pleased to dismiss the claim petition. 


4. Petitioner filed chief examination affidavit and examined himself as ४५७] reiterating the facts stated in 
claim petition stated that, he has worked as Mazdoor (casual labour) in Railway Electrification Project (REF) 
Secunderabad to Nagpur from |..994 to 30.9.9996 for l004 days along with others. Thereafter, he, along 
with others continued on voucher payment basis for some time and thereafter on contract basis requesting for 
regularization and no action has been taken by the department, though they have worked for a considerable 
period. 


5. Respondent did not adduce any evidence on their behalf. Both parties filed written arguments as well 
as submitted oral arguments. 


6. Heard. Perused the pleadings of both the parties. 
7. The following points arise for consideration:- 
I. Whether the Petitioner is eligible to be regularized as temporary status with Respondent employment 


under the scheme Casual Labourers (Grant of Temporary Status and Regularization) Scheme [989? 


Il. Whether order dated 8.6.200 passed by Respondent on Petitioner’s representation is just? 

II. To what relief if any, the Petitioner is entitled? 

Finding: 

8. Points No.I & II: Before proceeding to determination on points, it would be relevant to narrate the 


facts in the back drop of the matter. As pleaded by Petitioner workman Sri V. Rammeshwara Rao, he has 
worked as mazdoor (casual labour) in Railway Electrification Project, Secunderabad to Nagpur from |.!.994 
to 30.9.996 for 004 days along with others. The Petitioner along with others continued on voucher payment 
basis for some time and thereafter on contract basis. He along with others have been requesting for 
regularization and to provide the regular work. Still no action has been taken by the Department, though they 
have worked for a considerable period. Itis also pleaded that Petitioner came to know that by proceedings 
dated 2.!.2000 similarly situated 79 persons have been regularized by giving them temporary status by the 
Respondents. Since no action was taken by the Respondents he along with others approached Hon’ble Central 
Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad Bench at Hyderabad by filing OA No.l00/0 and 0I/l0 and the Hon’ble 
Tribunal after hearing both the parties disposed of the OAs, on l0.2.20l0 with specific direction which reads 
as follows: “since the applicants in the OA also have similar claims as the applicants in the WP 
No.2872/08, I consider it appropriate to dispose of this OA by giving a direction to the applicants to file 
individual representations to the respondents giving full details namely, their addresses, places at which they 
were engaged, the period for which they were engaged etc., within a period of 4 weeks and on receipt of such 
representations, the respondents shall examine their applications with reference to the records and the scheme 
that was in force and pass orders within a period of 3 months from the date of receipt of such representation.” 
The Petitioner in compliance of the above order moved representation dated 3.3.20l0 to the Respondent 
authority and Respondent rejected the representation by passing impugned order dated 8.6.20l0. Against this 
impugned order present industrial dispute petition has been filed by the workman before the Tribunal. It is also 
submitted that the Petitioner along with others have challenged impugned order dated 8.6.200 rejecting the 
representation of Petitioner and filed OA No.!229/200 and after hearing both the sides Hon’ble Tribunal has 
directed the applicant to approach the labour court under I.D. Act, 947. The copy of the order dated 28.2.20I] 
passed in OA No.l229/20l0, G. Pentaiah and others Vs. Union of India has been filed wherein Hon’ble 
Tribunal has observed as below: 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 793 


“8.Admittedly, the applicants were engaged between ..994 and 30.9.996 and they do not come 
under the scope of the scheme. However, a direction was given by this Tribunal earlier to examine 
their cases since the applicants claimed that some juniors who were appointed subsequently had been 
regularized. I now find that the Respondents have rejected the claim on the ground that relevant 
records have been weeded out. the matter raised disputed questions of fact viz., whether the applicants 
were employed as casual labourers for more than l000 days and whether they are eligible for 
temporary status, etc. In the absence of records, it is not possible for this Tribunal to adjudicate this 
matter. 


9. I, therefore, dispose of this application with a direction to the applicants to approach the 
labour authorities under the Industrial Disptues Act, 947, if they are so advised, with all the relevant 
material so that a decision on their eligibility for temporary status or otherwise can be taken by the 
Respondent authorities. The Learned Counsel for the applicants has no objection to such a direction 
being given.” 


Therefore, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, we proceed to decide to 
determine the question whether the applicant was engaged as casual mazdoor for more than 000 days and they 
are eligible for temporary status. 


9. In this regard, the Petitioner has pleaded that he has got engaged as mazdoor(casual labour) in 
Railway Electrification Project, Secunderabad to Nagpur form ..994 to 30.9.996 for 004 days along with 
others. It is also submitted that he along with others continued as such on voucher payment basis and later on 
contract basis. 


0. On the other hand the Respondent has filed counter stating therein that there is no engagement of 
casual labour in BSNL after l0.0.2000 and the casual labour who have been engaged as such before the 
imposition of ban vide letter No.270/6/84-STN, New Delhi dated 30.3.985 and letter No.270-6/84-STN dated 
22.6.988 for the project circles and the line dismantling in the Electrification project circles have been 
continued in BSNL as a matter of policy and the Petitioner having been engaged in Railway Electrification 
Project after the imposition of ban in project circles vide letter dated 22.6.988 is not covered by the policy 
thereof and it is not open for the Petitioner to assert for reengagement or regularization under the said policy. It 
is submitted that the Petitioner is not covered under the definition of employee with Rule 3 sub clause 8 of 
BSNL & CDA Rules, 2006. Therefore, it is not open for the claimant to assail the same in any manner for any 
purpose. It is also submitted that Railway Electrification Project for line dismantling is distinct and different 
and the said projects is out side jurisdiction of the answering Respondent thereby leaving no scope to reengage 
any casual labour engaged by the said projects organization after the imposition of the ban and disengaging 
thereafter and entrustment of the work to a contractor thereby leaving no scope for reengagement and 
regularization as per the settled law. It is clear from pleadings of the parties that the Petitioner had worked as a 
mazdoor in Railway Electrification Project of the Respondent on contract basis. The Petitioner has submitted 
the documents in support of his allegation which are: Ex.WI is photocopy of order dated 8.6.200 which the 
Respondent authority has rejected the representation of the Petitioner by assigning reasons therein. Ex.W2 is a 
copy of representation dated 3.3.200. The last para of the representation reveals that Petitioner has prayed for 
relief from Respondent to provide him employment, whereas in petition he has sought relief of regularization in 
the Respondent employment. Document Ex.W3 and W4 are photocopies of the orders of Hon’ble Central 
Administrative Tribunal passed in OA 229/20I0 and 00/20i0. Other document Ex.W5S is photocopy of order 
passed in OA No.l0/200 dated 0.2.200. The documents Ex.W6 to W9 are photocopies of the proceedings 
which were supplied by the Respondent to the Petitioner which contains list of casual labour. Ex.W0 is 
photocopy of letter regarding temporary status and Ex.W] is the attendance sheets of the workman Petitioner 
which has been signed by Divisional Engineer, Telecom, Secunderabad which reveals that the Petitioner has 
worked as mazdoor from |.!.994 to 30.9.996 in Railway Electrification Project. 


l]. It would be relevant to reproduce the provision of Sec.2(00)(bb) of I.D. Act, 947 which 
provide that, 


“ (00) “retrenchment” means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason 
whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action but does not include:- 


(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of 
employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being 
terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; “ 


2. The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of S.M. Nilajkar and ors. Vs. Telecom, District Manager 
has held: “ the termination of the service of workman engaged in a scheme or project amounts to retrenchment 
within the meaning of sub-clause (bb) subject to the following provision being satisfied: 


794 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


i) That the workman was employed in a project or scheme of temporary duration; 


ii) |The employment was on contract and not as a daily wager simplicitor, which provided inter alia that 
the employment shall come to an end on the expiry of the scheme or project; and 


iii) |The employment came to an end simultaneously with the termination of the scheme or project and 
consistently with the terms of the contract. 


iv) The workman ought to have been apprised or made aware of the above said terms by the employer at 
the commencement of employment. 


3. Since the Petitioner has alleged that he has worked as mazdoor from ..994 to 30.9.|996 in the 
Railway Electrification Project as contract labour. It goes to show that Petitioner has worked in the 
Respondent employment on a project which is open for a limited time and after completion of the project the 
Petitioner cannot claim any employment or regularization in the service of the Respondent. As far as the 
contention of the Petitioner is concerned that he should be regularized as other casual workers regularized under 
the scheme, it is settled law that any contract workman has no right to seek regularization of employment from 
employer, since it is a matter of discretion of the employer. Even otherwise, if a fresh contract contemplated to 
secure employee appointment with higher qualification or seek a fresh job on contractual employment having 
more skills, the employer will always have an authority to decide what is best for improving its functioning and 
which can be depend on work requirements. 


4. Petitioner contended that Respondent has mentioned that in the impugned order the record pertaining 
to Railway Electrification Project are not available for due verification of the information furnished by the 
Petitioner. As they have weeded out as per retention schedule. The letter of appointment and payment thereof 
is requisite record to verify the engagement from |.!.994 to 30.9.996. It is the duty of the authority to protect 
official files and record, it would be worthy to mention here that Petitioner had worked as Mazdoor in 
Respondent project for the period !994-996 as contract labour and he raised present industrial dispute by 
filing the petition u/s 2A(2) of the I.D. Act, 947 in July, 20l2. Long span of time more than |5 years have 
elapsed. Respondent in his counter has stated that no record as such are maintained after the expiry of three 
years relating to the muster roll as per the retention schedule. Since there was gross latches of inordinate 
delay on the part of Petitioner in raising present industrial dispute. Respondent is not supposed to maintain 
record of contractual labour beyond retention schedule. Therefore, in the case of non-production of the record 
by the Respondent, no adverse inference can be drawn against him in this case. 


5. Respondent submitted that there is no engagement of casual labour in BSNL after .0.2000 and the 
casual labour who have been engaged before the imposition of the ban vide letter No.270/6/84-STN dated 
30.3.985 and letter No.270-6/84-STN dated 22.6.988 for the project circles and the line dismantling in the 
Electrification project circles have been continued in BSNL as a matter of policy and the Petitioner having 
been engaged in Railway Electrification Project after the imposition of ban in project circles vide letter dated 
22.6.988 is not covered by the policy thereof and it is not open for the Petitioner to assert for reengagement 
or for regularization under the said policy. The Respondent has submitted the copy of letter No.270/6/84-STN 
dated 30.3.985 wherein it is mentioned that the Telecom Department has directed to stop the recruitment or 
employment of casual labour of any kind, any type of work. Further, copy of letter No.270-6/84-STN dated 
22.6.988 which is regarding casual labour recruitment wherein it is mentioned (para 2) that, there shall be no 
recruitment of casual labour even for specific period and it was directed to Respondent Department to engage 
from neighbouring divisions, employed for the project or electrification work. Further, the copy of the letter of 
DG Telecom, New Delhi dated 7.l.989 has been filed wherein it is mentioned that the casual labourers 
could be engaged after 30.3.985 in projects and Electrification Circles only for specific works and on 
completion of the work the casual labourers so engaged were required to be retrenched. It is also mentioned 
that as per the direction in letter dated 22.6.988 fresh recruitment of casual labourers even for specific works 
for specific periods in Projects and Electrification Circles also should not be resorted to. Therefore, in view of 
the ban on engagement of casual labourers the claim of the Petitioner is not maintainable. Since the Petitioner 
was engaged through contractor in the Railway Electrification Project which was meant for a specific period 
and after completion of the project work his employment is terminated and he is not eligible to claim for 
regularization in view of above letters and his status as contract labour. 


6. Now the question arises whether there existed employee and employer relationship between the 
claimant and Respondent. Petitioner has admitted the fact that he was doing the work as a contract labourer in 
the Respondent Department. Further, to prove the employment there has to be a strict evidence to show some 
nexus between the claimant and the Respondent. This can be any kind such as appointment letter, monthly 
payment slip, deduction of Provident Fund, payment of any dues, which can show that he was in the 
employment of the Respondent. In the case of Automobile Association of Upper India vs. Presiding 
Officer Labour Court-II, 2006 LLR page 85l wherein the Hon’ble Delhi High Court held, “ Engagement 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 795 


and appointment in service can be established directly by the existence and production of appointment letter, a 
written agreement or by circumstantial evidence of incidental and ancillary records which would be in the 
nature of attendance register, salary registers, leave records, deposit of Provident Fund contribution and 
employees state insurance contribution etc.. The same can be produced and proved by the workers or he can 
call upon and caused the same to be produced and proved by calling for witnesses who are required to produce 
and prove these records.” 


7. But in the present case the claimant Petitioner has not produced any single piece of evidence showing 
that he was issued appointment letter by the Respondent. In fact, he has not disclosed date of actual joining of 
the employment as casual labour of the Respondent. Therefore, the contention of the Petitioner that he was 
casual labourer is not found to be proved by his evidence. Hence, he was not covered under Regularization 
Scheme rather he was contract labour as he has admitted in petition. 


Thus, Points No.I & II are answered accordingly. 


8. Point No.III: In view of the above discussion, it is clear that the Petitioner was not a casual labourer, 
rather had worked as contract labour for the period from 994 to 996. Therefore, Petitioner is not eligible to 
be regularized as a casual labour in the Respondent employment. The impugned order dated 8.6.20l0 passed 
by Respondent needs no interference and petition is liable to be dismissed. In view of the finding given in 
Points No.I & II, the Petitioner is not entitled to any relief as prayed for regularization or reengagement. 
However, the Respondent has submitted that this Tribunal has disposed of LC No.8/20I2 vide its order dated 
29.2.2020 and granted relief of compensation to the Petitioner. Therefore, in view of the above, Petitioner is 
liable for getting the compensation of Rs.50,000/. 


Thus, Point No.III is answered accordingly. 
ORDER 


In view of the findings given above, it is hereby ordered: The petition of the Petitioner is allowed in 
part. The Respondents are directed to pay a sum of Rs.50000/- (Fifty thousand rupees) to the Petitioner towards 
compensation within four months from the receipt of this order, failing which the Petitioner is at liberty to take 
appropriate steps according to Law. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. P. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant and corrected by me on this the 
3" day of March, 2023. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Vepachedu Rameshwar Rao MWI: Nil 

Documents marked for the Petitioner 
१४]: Photostat copy of the Order dt 27-4-200 
Ex.W2: Photostat copy of the Representation of WWI dt.3.3.200 
Ex.W3: Photostat copy of order passed in OA. No. 229/20I 
Ex.W4: Photostat copy of order passed in OA. No. l00/20l0 
Ex.W5: Photostat copy of order passed in CA. No. 0!/200 


Ex.W6: Photostat copy of proceeding of respondent dt 9-5-2007 


Ex.W7: Photostat copy of proceeding of Director, BSNL Railway Electrification Project Secunderabad dt. |2-9- 
2002 


Ex.W8: Photostat copy of list of candidates issued by Div. Engineer, Secunderabad dt. |-9-2002 
Ex.W9: Photostat copy of proceeding Dt. !3--2007 providing information under RTI Act 


796 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Ex.W0: Photostat copy of letter dt.2-!-2000 with regard to temporary status 

55.9४] |: Photostat copy of Days Book signed by authority 

+5.9४]2: Photostat copy of Identity card of petitioner 

Ex.W3: Copy of order passed in WP No. 267 2/06 
Documents marked for the Respondent 


NIL 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 890.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार मुख्य आयुक्त, सीमा शुल्क और केंद्रीय उत्पाद शुल्क,विजाग जोन, विशाखापत्तनम; आयुक्त,सीमा शुल्क और 
केंद्रीय उत्पाद शुल्क, तिरुपति आयुक्तालय; तिरुपति;सहायक आयुक्त, सीमा शुल्क और केंद्रीय उत्पाद शुल्क, मंडल 
कार्यालय, कुरनूल मंडल, कुरनूल; मालिक श्री बी.वी. रमना, श्रीकृष्ण रोजगार सूचना और सेवाएं, नेहरू नगर, कुरनूल, 
के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री पी. वनमन्ना, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-हैदराबाद के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या M.P. No. 7/2007) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में 
दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 77.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025-07-2023-444-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 26th May, 2023 


S.O. 890.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. M.P. No. 7/2007) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court — Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Chief Commissioner, Customs and Central Excise, Vizag Zone, Visakhapatnam ;The 
Commissioner, Customs and Central Excise, Tirupati Commissionerate; Tirupathi; The Assistant 
Commissioner, Customs and Central Excise, Divisional Office, Kurnool Division, Kurnool; Proprietor Shri 
B.V. Ramana, M/s. Shri Krishna Employment Information and Services, Nehru Nagar, Kurnool, and Shri P. 
Vanamanna, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
7.05.2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023-] | | -२ (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under 86९५. 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM- LABOUR COURT, 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Shri IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 
Dated the 207 day of April, 2023 
M.P. No. 7/2007 
Between: 


Sri P. Vanamanna, 

S/o Layanna, 

R/o Pasupalla Village & Post, 

Kurnool Mandal, 

Kurnool — 58004. ....Petitioner 


AND 


l. The Chief Commissioner, 


[भाग --खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 ]797 


Customs and Central Excise, 
Vizag Zone, Visakhapatnam. 


2. The Commissioner, 
Customs and Central Excise, 
Tirupati Commissionerate, 
9-86-A, West Church Compound, 
MLR. Palle Road, Tirupathi-5!7502. 


3. The Assistant Commissioner, 
Customs and Central Excise, 
Divisional Office, Kurnool Division, 
Near Children’s Park, N.R. Peta, 
Kurnool — 58 004. 


4. M/s. Sri Krishna Employment 
Information and Services, 
No.40-790-2, Nehru Nagar, 
Kurnool — 58 004, rep. by its 


Proprietor Shri B.V. Ramana. ....Respondents 
Appearance: 
For the Petitioner : Sri William Burra, Advocate 
For the Respondent : Sri Kapu Ramakrishna Reddy, Advocate for Rl, R2 & R3 


Sri M.V.L.Narasaiah, Advocate for R4 


ORDER 


This petition has been filed by Sri P. Vanamanna under Sec.33 C(2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 for payment of the amount wage due to Petitioner from Respondent and arrear of revised wages as 
well as to direct the Respondents to pay the dues with interest @ !2% p.a. 


2: The brief facts of the application are that the Petitioner was engaged by the Respondent No.3 orally on 
..998. The duties performed by him in Respondent’s office were "cleaning, sweeping, gardening and 
certain miscellaneous works like supplying Coffee/Tea or water to the permanent and regular employees.” The 
Petitioner continued to be engaged as Casual Labour from I..98 to 3..2007. The services of the Petitioner 
were orally terminated by Respondent No.3 w.e.f. 0!.02.2007. The said oral termination of Petitioner was 
illegal, unjust, contrary to the Provisions of the I.D.Act, l947 and also against the Principles of natural justice. 
A separate application u/s 2A(2) of the I.D.Act, 947 has been submitted challenging the illegal termination. 
The Petitioner submits that while he was working as Casual Labour in the 37 Respondent Office, he engaged 
M/s. Sree Krishna Employment Information and Services, Kurnool w.e.f. 0!.2.2004 as Labour Supply Agency 
and engaged labour through the above Agency. However, the Petitioner continued to render his services upto 
3..2007 as direct labour. The 37 Respondent however failed to pay the salary/wages from 0.2.2004 to 
3.0.2007 and also arrears of difference in wages from 0.4.2004 to 30.!.2004. The Petitioner approached 
the 3 Respondent for payment of his salary/ wage and difference in wages every month, but the 37 
Respondent refused to pay the same on the ground that the Petitioner should register his name through the 
labour supply agency. The Petitioner therefore approached the CAT, Hyderabad and thereafter the High Court 
of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad and obtained interim stay, thereby the Respondents were directed to maintain 
status quo. The Petitioner submits that he was in the service of the 37 Respondent upto 3..2007 and hence he 
is entitled for difference in wages and salary for the period from |.4.2004 to 3!.!.2007. The Petitioner further 
submits that during the period from .4.2004 to 30..2004, he is entitled for arrears of Rs. 50/- per day 
consequent upon the revised rates of wages as per the Proceedings of the Collector and District Magistrate, 
Kurnool which came into force w.e.f. .4.2004. The Petitioner is entitled to towards difference in wages of 
Rs.87,960/-, and Wages/ Salary from .4.2004 to 3..2007. It is also submitted that Sri A. Rajasekhara Reddy, 
Asst. Solicitor General of India, High Court of A.P. at Hyderabad has also given his opinion to the I* 
Respondent to pay the wages as per the interim orders of the Hon’ble High Court of A.P., Hyderabad. But the 
Respondent did not pay the wages till date in gross violation of the provisions of law. 


3. Notice sent to the Respondent. In response to the notice, 37 Respondent has submitted his counter and 
he submitted that the 3 Respondent has paid total salary to agency. All casual workers have received their 
salaries from the agency except the Petitioner. The Petitioner has demanded salary amount of Rs.87,960/-, 


798 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


which is not correct. The Petitioner has not worked 30 days in every month. He has worked excluding 
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays declared by Government. 


4. Further, the Respondent No.4 has also submitted his counter and he submitted that all the allegations 
made in the present petition are neither true nor correct. It is submitted that the Respondent No.4 engaged 7 
employees with Respondent No.3 on contract basis from |.2.2004 to I.2.2007. The contract was closed on 
.2.2007. It is submitted that the respondent organization was closed in the month of February 2007. Since 
that day no persons were with Respondent No.4. The Respondent No.4 paid entire wages to workers as per 
their work period. The Respondent No. 4 denies the allegation of the petitioner that he was not paid his wages 
from |.2.2004 to 3..2007. It is submitted that there is not even single allegation or any compliant against 
Respondent No.4 during the employment of the present petitioner. The petitioner never made any complaint 
against Respondent No.4, either to any labour authority or to Respondents No.! to 3 who are his immediate 
employers, now he cannot take such false and untenable plea that his wages were not paid from |.!2.2004 to 
3..2007. The Respondent No.4 submitted that the present petition originally was filed against the 
Respondents No.!,2 and 3 and there is not even a single allegation against Respondent No.4 in petition. 


5. In support of his petition, Petitioner has filed chief evidence affidavit of WW wherein he has support 
his averments made in his petition and also proved the documents which have been marked as ४5.४७] to WI5 
respectively. 


6. Petitioner has also filed written arguments. No evidence is lead on behalf of the Respondent. 
7. Heard the arguments. Perused the record. 
8. The present petition has been filed by the Petitioner u/s . 33C(2) of the LD. Act, 947. 


The provision of Sec.33C(2) provides that, 


“ (2) Where any workman is entitled to receive from the employer any money or any benefit which is capable of 
being computed in terms of money and if any question arises as to the amount of money due or as to the amount 
at which such benefit should be computed, then the question may, subject to any rules that may be made under 
this Act, be decided by such Labour Court as may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate 
Government; within a period not exceeding three months Provided that where the presiding officer of a Labour 
Court considers it necessary or expedient so to do, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend such 
period by such further period as he may think fit.” 


Now, we proceed to examine whether any money or benefit is due to workman from the employer Respondent 
under any settlement or an award or under the provision of Chapter 4A. 


9 Petitioner submitted that he was engaged by the Respondent no.3 orally on I.!0.98 and he performed 
the duties of cleaning, sweeping, gardening, certain miscellaneous works like supplying Coffee/Tea and water 
to the permanent an regular employees. The Petitioner continued as casual labour from I..98 to 3..2007 
but his services were terminated from |.2.2007. Further it is submitted that while Petitioner was working as a 
casual labour in Respondent No.3 office, Respondent No.3 appointed M/s. Sri Krishna Employment Information 
and Services Agency w.e.f. !.2.2004 as labour supply agency and engaged labour through the above agency. 
However, the Petitioner and another have also rendered their services upto 3..2007 directly. It is further 
submitted that Respondent No.3 failed to pay the salary/wages from |.2.2004 to 3.l.2007 and arrears of 
difference of wages for the said period. The Petitioner approached the Respondent No.3 for payment of his 
salary and difference in wages every month. But the Respondent No.3 refused to pay the same on the ground 
that the Petitioner shall register his name through the labour supply agency mentioned herein above. It is 
submitted that Petitioner was in service of Respondent No.3 on 3].[|.2007, hence he is entitled for difference in 
wages/salary for the period from |.4.2004 to 3..2007. It is further submitted that during the period from 
.4.2004 to 30..2004 he entitled for arrears of Rs.50/- per day consequent upon the revised rate of wages as 
per proceedings of the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool which came into force w.e.f. .4.2004. The 
details of salary/wages including difference of wages, as worked out are annexed thereto. The Petitioner is 
entitled to Rs.87,960/- towards difference in wages for the said period. 


0. The Petitioner has supported the averments of his petition in the chief evidence affidavit and he has 
proved the documents marked as 75.४७] to ७४5. 


Il. As per counter filed by Respondent No.3 there is no specific denial that the Petitioner has not 
worked in the office of Respondent No.3 from !..98 to I.2.2007 as a casual labour. Therefore, it is admitted 
fact that the Petitioner had worked as a casual labour in the office of Respondent No.3 for the said period. 
Further, the claim of the Petitioner that from !.2.2004 the Respondent No.3 has appointed M/s. Sri Krishna 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 799 


Employment Information and Services Agency, as labour supply agency, and engaged labour through this 
agency is also not denied by Respondent No.3. As regard the payment of wages to the Petitioner by the 
Respondent No.3, for the period from .2.2004 to .2.2007. So far as, regarding the fact of engagement of the 
Petitioner as a casual labour in the Respondent office is concerned the Petitioner has filed the relevant 
documents Ex.W3 and W2 which goes to reveal that the Petitioner has had worked as a casual labour in the 
Respondent office of Respondent No.3 as well as oral evidence also submitted by Petitioner. Respondent No.3 
submitted that he has paid the Petitioner’s total salary to the agency and all casual workers have received their 
salaries from the agencies except the Petitioner. Therefore, Respondent No.3 has clearly admitted the fact that 
he has engaged the agency M/s. Sri Krishna Employment Information and Services Agency for engagement of 
casual labour and he has paid the salary to the agency. He has also admitted that all casual workers have 
received their salaries through the agency except the Petitioner. Respondent has engaged the contract labour 
agency w.e.f. |.!2.2004 and since then he has paid the wages to the agency regarding causal labour. No proof 
of payment of salaries/wages paid to Petitioner has been filed by the Respondent No.3. Respondent No.4 has 
also not paid wages to the Petitioner nor filed any document pertaining to payment of wages to Petitioner. 
Whereas Respondent No.4 in his counter he stated that Respondent No.4 paid entire wages in the month of 
February, 2007 itself at the time of closure of Respondent No.4. Further, Respondent No.4 contended that the 
Petitioner never made any complaint against Respondent No.4 either to any labour authority or Respondents 
No.I,2, & 3 who are his immediate employers. Now, he can not take such false plea that, he was not paid for 
the period from .2.2004 to 3..2007. Admittedly, Petitioner was engaged as daily wager duly since 998. 
However, the Respondent No.3 claims that the payment of wages was made to the Petitioner through agency 
but no payment voucher or receipt has been filed by the Respondent No.3 or Respondent No.4 for payment of 
wages to the Petitioner for the said period. Therefore, for want of evidence of payment of wages to Petitioner 
since .!2.2004 the claim of the Petitioner that his salary/wages for the period from |.!2.2004 is due and to be 
paid by the Respondent No.3 since he was in the direct employment of Respondent No.3 has been proved. 


2: As per calculation submitted by the Petitioner he was engaged on the wages @ Rs.60/- per day, 
whereas it has not been disputed by the Respondent No.3. Therefore, the Petitioner is liable for the payment of 
wages @Rs.60/- per day for the period from .2.2004 to 3..2007. 


3. Further, the Petitioner/ Applicant contended that he is eligible for the revised pay of salary/wages as 
he claims that as per the proceeding of the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool which came into effect 
w.e.f. .4.2004, he is eligible for revised pay from that period till his date of termination. In this regard, the 
Petitioner submits that during the period from .4.2004 to 30..2004 he is entitled for arrears of Rs.50/- per 
day consequent upon the revised rates of wages as per the proceeding of the Collector and District Magistrate, 
Kurnool which came into effect force from .4.2004. The details of the salary/wages including difference of 
wages as worked out are annexed thereto. Therefore, Petitioner is entitled to receive Rs.87,960/- towards 
difference in wages for the said period as well as the salary/wages. In support of his claim he has submitted 
annexure statement with his petition wherein the details of the wages paid, to be paid to the Petitioner from 
.2.2004 to 3i..2007 is mentioned. As per the proceeding of the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool, 
rate of wages payable has been revised w.e.f. |.4.2004 raising from the rate of wages of Rs.60/- to Rs.l0/- 
and further the proceeding of the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool has revised the wages w.e.f. 
.4.2006 from 7२४/। 0/- to Rs.24/- per day. The Petitioner has filed 75.9४] which is a copy of proceeding of 
the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool dated 6.2.2006. The perusal of the said proceeding of the 
Collector reflects that it is applicable to the casual labour employed in the State Government establishment or 
the offices where as in the present matter, the Respondent No.3 is Central Government establishment. 
Therefore, this proceeding of the revised pay by the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool is not 
applicable to the Respondent No.3 office. Apart from it, the Petitioner has not submitted any other notification 
or circular of appropriate government as mentioned under Sec.33C(2) applicable to casual labour engaged for 
revised wages. Therefore, in the absence of any notification from appropriate Government the claim of the 
Petitioner that he is eligible to receive the revised wages as he has claimed is not acceptable. 


4. In this context, the decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of M/s. Bombay Chemical 
Industries Vs. Deputy Labour Commissioner, Civil Appeal ४०.83/2022, dated 4.2.2022 is relevant, 
wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held, “ as per the settled proposition of law, in an application under 
Sed.33C(2) of the ILD. Act, /947, the Labour Court has no jurisdiction and cannot adjudicate dispute of 
entitlement or the basis of claim of workmen. It can only interpret the award or settlement which the claim is 
based. 


435. Further it is held that in the case of Ganesh Razak and another, “the Labour Court’s jurisdiction 
under Sec.33C(2) is like that of an executing Court. As per the settled proposition of law without prior 
adjudication or recognition of the disputed claim of the workmen, proceedings for computation of the arrears 


800 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


of wages and/or difference of wages claimed by the workmen shall not be maintainable under section 33C(2) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, /94/.. 


6. It is admitted fact that since Respondent No.3 has engaged the contract labour agency, M/s. Sri 
Krishna Employment Information and Services Agency w.e.f. l.4.2004 and wages @Rs.60/- per day has not 
been paid to the Petitioner from |.4.2004 upto the date of his termination w.e.f. .2.2007. Therefore, Petitioner 
is liable to receive the wage amount @ Rs.60/- per day for the period from .4.2004 to |.2.2007. The petition 
is liable to be allowed partly. 


ORDER 


Therefore, in view of the discussion as above, the Petitioner’s application u/s 33C(2) of I.D. Act, 947 
is partly allowed. Therefore, the application for arrears of wages is allowed and the Petitioner is liable for the 
payment of wages @Rs.60/- per day, for the period from .2.2004 to 3].].2007 for the number of days he has 
worked excluding non working days, like, public holidays, Saturdays and Sundays from Respondent No.3. The 
claim for revised pay is rejected. The said wages amount shall be paid by Respondent No.3 to the Petitioner 
within 4 months from the date of receipt of this order. 


Ordered accordingly. 


Dictated to Smt P. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her and corrected by me on this the 
20" day of April, 2023. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri P. Vanamanna NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Ex.WI: Photocopy of proceedings No.D.Dis/l029/2006, of the District Collector, Kurnool dated 


6.2.2006 

Ex.W2: Photocopy of proceedings No.D.Dis(C.3) 062/M/2004 of the District Collector, Kurnool dated 
7.5.2005 

Ex.W3: Photocopy of Status Quo orders dt. l6.!2.2004 from Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, 
Hyderabad 


Ex.W4: Photocopy of interim orders dt. .8.2005 in WPMP No.254 of 2005 in WP ]१२०.6637 


Ex.W5S: Photocopy of opinion of Rajasekhar Reddy, Asst. Solicitor Gen. of India, Hon’ble High Court, 
Hyderabad dt.2..2005 


Ex.W6: Photocopy of Ir. Dt. 30.II.2005 form R3 to R2 
Ex.W7: Photocopy of representation of WWI and ors. Dt. 0.0.2006 to २[ 
Ex.W8: Photocopy of Ir. Dt.23..2006 from R2 to R3 
Ex.W9: Photocopy of representation of WWI & ors 9.23.].2005 to R3 
Ex.W0: Photocopy of Ir. Dt. 24..2005 from R3 to R4 
Ex.WIil: Photocopy of Ir. Dt. 2.2.2005 from R4 to R3. 
Ex.Wi2: Photocopy of proceedings dt.23.8.2006 from R3 to R2 
Ex.W3: Photocopy of representation dt. 8..2006 from ४४७] & ors to RLCC, Hyderabad 
Ex.Wi4: Photocopy of representation dt. .2.2007 from WWI & ors to RLCC, Hyderabad 
Ex.Wi5: Payment voucher dt. !6.2.2000 with contingent bill dt. 6.2.2000 in original. 
Documents marked for the Respondent 
NIL 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 i80] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 894.— sirens विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार मुख्य आयुक्त, सीमा शुल्क और केंद्रीय उत्पाद शुल्क,विजाग जोन, विशाखापत्तनम; आयुक्त,सीमा शुल्क और 
केंद्रीय उत्पाद शुल्क, तिरुपति आयुक्तालय; तिरुपति;सहायक आयुक्त, सीमा शुल्क और केंद्रीय उत्पाद शुल्क, मंडल 
कार्यालय, कुरनूल मंडल, कुरनूल; मालिक श्री बी.वी. रमना, श्रीकृष्ण रोजगार सूचना और सेवाएं, नेहरू नगर, कुरनूल, 
के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री पी. नागराजू, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-हैदराबाद के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या M.P. No. 5/2007) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में 
दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 77.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025-07-2023-409-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 26th May, 2023 


S.O. 89.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. M.P. No. 5/2007) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court — Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Chief Commissioner, Customs and Central Excise, Vizag Zone, Visakhapatnam ;The 
Commissioner, Customs and Central Excise, Tirupati Commissionerate; Tirupathi; The Assistant 
Commissioner, Customs and Central Excise, Divisional Office, Kurnool Division, Kurnool; Proprietor Shri 
B.V. Ramana, M/s. Shri Krishna Employment Information and Services, Nehru Nagar,Kurnool, and Shri P. 
Nagaraju, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
7.05.2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-09 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM -LABOUR COURT, 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Shri IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 
Dated the 20" day of April, 2023 
M.P. No. 5/2007 


Between: 
Sri P. Nagaraju, 


S/o P. Devanna, 
H.No.40/706, Dharmapeta, 
Kurnool — 58004. ..... Petitioner 


And 


l. The Chief Commissioner, 
Customs and Central Excise, 
Vizag Zone, Visakhapatnam. 


2. The Commissioner, 
Customs and Central Excise, 
Tirupati Commissionerate, 
9-86-A, West Church Compound, 
MLR. Palle Road, Tirupathi-57502. 


802 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


3. The Assistant Commissioner, 
Customs and Central Excise, 
Divisional Office, Kurnool Division, 
Near Children’s Park, N.R. Peta, 
Kurnool — 58 004. 


4. Ms. Sri Krishna Employment 
Information and Services, 
No.40-790-2, Nehru Nagar, 
Kurnool — 58 004, rep. by its 


Proprietor Shri B.V. Ramana. .....Respondents 
Appearance: 
For the Petitioner : Sri William Burra, Advocate 
For the Respondent : Sri Kapu Ramakrishna Reddy, Advocate for Rl, R2 & R3 


Sri M.V.L.Narasaiah, Advocate for R4 


ORDER 


This petition has been filed by Sri P. Nagaraju under Sec.33 C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 
for payment of the amount wage due to Petitioner from Respondent and arrear of revised wages as well as to 
direct the Respondents to pay the dues with interest 9]2% p.a. 


४8 The brief facts of the application are that the Petitioner was engaged by the Respondent No.3 orally on 
5.7.998. The duties performed by him in Respondent’s office were "cleaning, sweeping, gardening and 
certain miscellaneous works like supplying Coffee/Tea or water to the permanent and regular employees.” The 
Petitioner continued to be engaged as Casual Labour from 5.7..98 to 3.!.2007. The services of the Petitioner 
were orally terminated by Respondent No.3 w.e.f. 0!.02.2007. The said oral termination of Petitioner was 
illegal, unjust, contrary to the Provisions of the I.D. Act, !947 and also against the Principles of natural justice. 
A separate application u/s 2A(2) of the I.D.Act, 947 has been submitted challenging the illegal termination. 
The Petitioner submits that while he was working as Casual Labour in the 3"? Respondent Office, he engaged 
M/s. Sree Krishna Employment Information and Services, Kurnool w.e.f. 0!.2.2004 as Labour Supply Agency 
and engaged labour through the above Agency. However, the Petitioner continued to render his services upto 
3..2007 as direct labour. The 37" Respondent however failed to pay the salary/wages from 0.2.2004 to 
3.0i.2007 and also arrears of difference in wages from 0.4.2004 to 30.!.2004. The Petitioner approached 
the 37१ Respondent for payment of his salary/ wage and difference in wages every month, but the 3% 
Respondent refused to pay the same on the ground that the Petitioner should register his name through the 
labour supply agency. The Petitioner therefore approached the CAT, Hyderabad and thereafter the High Court 
of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad and obtained interim stay, thereby the Respondents were directed to maintain 
status quo. The Petitioner submits that he was in the service of the 37 Respondent upto 3..2007 and hence he 
is entitled for difference in wages and salary for the period from |.4.2004 to 3!..2007. The Petitioner further 
submits that during the period from .4.2004 to 30..2004, he is entitled for arrears of Rs. 50/- per day 
consequent upon the revised rates of wages as per the Proceedings of the Collector and District Magistrate, 
Kurnool which came into force w.e.f. .4.2004. The Petitioner is entitled to towards difference in wages of 
Rs.87,960/-, and Wages/ Salary from .4.2004 to 3..2007. It is also submitted that Sri A. Rajasekhara Reddy, 
Asst. Solicitor General of India, High Court of A.P. at Hyderabad has also given his opinion to the I“ 
Respondent to pay the wages as per the interim orders of the Hon’ble High Court of A.P., Hyderabad. But the 
Respondent did not pay the wages till date in gross violation of the provisions of law. 


3. Notice sent to the Respondent. In response to the notice, 37 Respondent has submitted his counter and 
he submitted that the 37 Respondent has paid total salary to agency. All casual workers have received their 
salaries from the agency except the Petitioner. The Petitioner has demanded salary amount of Rs.87,960/-, 
which is not correct. The Petitioner has not worked 30 days in every month. He has worked excluding 
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays declared by Government. 


4. Further, the Respondent No.4 has also submitted his counter and he submitted that all the allegations 
made in the present petition are neither true nor correct. It is submitted that the Respondent No.4 engaged 7 
employees with Respondent No.3 on contract basis from |.2.2004 to I.2.2007. The contract was closed on 
.2.2007. It is submitted that the respondent organization was closed in the month of February 2007. Since 
that day no persons were with Respondent No.4. The Respondent No.4 paid entire wages to workers as per 
their work period. The Respondent No. 4 denies the allegation of the petitioner that he was not paid his wages 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 803 


from .2.2004 to 3..2007. It is submitted that there is not even single allegation or any compliant against 
Respondent No.4 during the employment of the present petitioner. The petitioner never made any complaint 
against Respondent No.4, either to any labour authority or to Respondents No.| to 3 who are his immediate 
employers, now he cannot take such false and untenable plea that his wages were not paid from |.!2.2004 to 
3..2007. The Respondent No.4 submitted that the present petition originally was filed against the 
Respondents No.l,2 and 3 and there is not even a single allegation against Respondent No.4 in petition. 


5. In support of his petition, Petitioner has filed chief evidence affidavit of WW wherein he has support 
his averments made in his petition and also proved the documents which have been marked as 7. ४४। to WI5 
respectively. 


6. Petitioner has also filed written arguments. No evidence is lead on behalf of the Respondent. 
Te Heard the arguments. Perused the record. 
8. The present petition has been filed by the Petitioner u/s . 33C(2) of the ID. Act, 947. 


The provision of Sec.33C(2) provides that, 


“ (2) Where any workman is entitled to receive from the employer any money or any benefit which is capable of 
being computed in terms of money and if any question arises as to the amount of money due or as to the amount 
at which such benefit should be computed, then the question may, subject to any rules that may be made under 
this Act, be decided by such Labour Court as may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate 
Government; within a period not exceeding three months Provided that where the presiding officer of a Labour 
Court considers it necessary or expedient so to do, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend such 
period by such further period as he may think fit.” 


Now, we proceed to examine whether any money or benefit is due to workman from the employer 
Respondent under any settlement or an award or under the provision of Chapter 4A. 


9 Petitioner submitted that he was engaged by the Respondent No.3 orally on 5.7.98 and he performed 
the duties of cleaning, sweeping, gardening, certain miscellaneous works like supplying Coffee/Tea and water 
to the permanent an regular employees. The Petitioner continued as casual labour from 5.7.98 to 3..2007 but 
his services were terminated from |.2.2007. Further it is submitted that while Petitioner was working as a 
casual labour in Respondent No.3 office, Respondent No.3 appointed M/s. Sri Krishna Employment Information 
and Services Agency w.e.f. !.2.2004 as labour supply agency and engaged labour through the above agency. 
However, the Petitioner and another have also rendered their services upto 3i..2007 directly. It is further 
submitted that Respondent No.3 failed to pay the salary/wages from .2.2004 to 3..2007 and arrears of 
difference of wages for the said period. The Petitioner approached the Respondent No.3 for payment of his 
salary and difference in wages every month. But the Respondent No.3 refused to pay the same on the ground 
that the Petitioner shall register his name through the labour supply agency mentioned herein above. It is 
submitted that Petitioner was in service of Respondent No.3 on 3].[|.2007, hence he is entitled for difference in 
wages/salary for the period from |.4.2004 to 3..2007. It is further submitted that during the period from 
.4.2004 to 30..2004 he entitled for arrears of Rs.50/- per day consequent upon the revised rate of wages as 
per proceedings of the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool which came into force w.e.f. .4.2004. The 
details of salary/wages including difference of wages, as worked out are annexed thereto. The Petitioner is 
entitled to Rs.87,960/- towards difference in wages for the said period. 


0. The Petitioner has supported the averments of his petition in the chief evidence affidavit and he has 
proved the documents marked as Ex.W! to ७४5. 


Il. As per counter filed by Respondent No.3 there is no specific denial that the Petitioner has not 
worked in the office of Respondent No.3 from 5.7.98 to .2.2007 as a casual labour. Therefore, it is admitted 
fact that the Petitioner had worked as a casual labour in the office of Respondent No.3 for the said period. 
Further, the claim of the Petitioner that from .!2.2004 the Respondent No.3 has appointed M/s. Sri Krishna 
Employment Information and Services Agency, as labour supply agency, and engaged labour through this 
agency is also not denied by Respondent No.3. As regard the payment of wages to the Petitioner by the 
Respondent No.3, for the period from |.2.2004 to I.2.2007. So far as, regarding the fact of engagement of 
the Petitioner as a casual labour in the Respondent office is concerned the Petitioner has filed the relevant 
documents Ex.W3 and W2 which goes to reveal that the Petitioner has had worked as a casual labour in the 
Respondent office of Respondent No.3 as well as oral evidence also submitted by Petitioner. Respondent No.3 
submitted that he has paid the Petitioner’s total salary to the agency and all casual workers have received their 
salaries from the agencies except the Petitioner. Therefore, Respondent No.3 has clearly admitted the fact that 
he has engaged the agency M/s. Sri Krishna Employment Information and Services Agency for engagement of 


804 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


casual labour and he has paid the salary to the agency. He has also admitted that all casual workers have 
received their salaries through the agency except the Petitioner. Respondent has engaged the contract labour 
agency w.e.f. l.!2.2004 and since then he has paid the wages to the agency regarding causal labour. No proof 
of payment of salaries/wages paid to Petitioner has been filed by the Respondent No.3. Respondent No.4 has 
also not paid wages to the Petitioner nor filed any document pertaining to payment of wages to Petitioner. 
Whereas Respondent No.4 in his counter he stated that Respondent No.4 paid entire wages in the month of 
February, 2007 itself at the time of closure of Respondent No.4. Further, Respondent No.4 contended that the 
Petitioner never made any complaint against Respondent No.4 either to any labour authority or Respondents 
No.I,2, & 3 who are his immediate employers. Now, he can not take such false plea that, he was not paid for 
the period from .2.2004 to 3..2007. Admittedly, Petitioner was engaged as daily wager duly since 998. 
However, the Respondent No.3 claims that the payment of wages was made to the Petitioner through agency 
but no payment voucher or receipt has been filed by the Respondent No.3 or Respondent No.4 for payment of 
wages to the Petitioner for the said period. Therefore, for want of evidence of payment of wages to Petitioner 
since .2.2004 the claim of the Petitioner that his salary/wages for the period from |.!2.2004 is due and to be 
paid by the Respondent No.3 since he was in the direct employment of Respondent No.3 has been proved. 


2. As per calculation submitted by the Petitioner he was engaged on the wages @ Rs.60/- per day, 
whereas it has not been disputed by the Respondent No.3. Therefore, the Petitioner is liable for the payment of 
wages @Rs.60/- per day for the period from |.2.2004 to 3..2007. 


3. Further, the Petitioner/ Applicant contended that he is eligible for the revised pay of salary/wages as 
he claims that as per the proceeding of the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool which came into effect 
w.e.f. .4.2004, he is eligible for revised pay from that period till his date of termination. In this regard, the 
Petitioner submits that during the period from |.4.2004 to 30..2004 he is entitled for arrears of Rs.50/- per 
day consequent upon the revised rates of wages as per the proceeding of the Collector and District Magistrate, 
Kurnool which came into effect force from |.4.2004. The details of the salary/wages including difference of 
wages as worked out are annexed thereto. Therefore, Petitioner is entitled to receive Rs.87,960/- towards 
difference in wages for the said period as well as the salary/wages. In support of his claim he has submitted 
annexure statement with his petition wherein the details of the wages paid, to be paid to the Petitioner from 
.2.2004 to 3..2007 is mentioned. As per the proceeding of the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool, 
rate of wages payable has been revised w.e.f. |.4.2004 raising from the rate of wages of Rs.60/- to Rs.l0/- 
and further the proceeding of the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool has revised the wages w.e-f. 
.4.2006 from Rs/0/- to Rs.24/- per day. The Petitioner has filed Ex.Wl which is a copy of proceeding of 
the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool dated 6.2.2006. The perusal of the said proceeding of the 
Collector reflects that it is applicable to the casual labour employed in the State Government establishment or 
the offices where as in the present matter, the Respondent No.3 is Central Government establishment. 
Therefore, this proceeding of the revised pay by the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool is not 
applicable to the Respondent No.3 office. Apart from it, the Petitioner has not submitted any other notification 
or circular of appropriate government as mentioned under Sec.33C(2) applicable to casual labour engaged for 
revised wages. Therefore, in the absence of any notification from appropriate Government the claim of the 
Petitioner that he is eligible to receive the revised wages as he has claimed is not acceptable. 


4. In this context, the decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of M/s. Bombay Chemical 
Industries Vs. Deputy Labour Commissioner, Civil Appeal ४०.83/2022, dated 4.2.2022 is relevant, 
wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held, “ as per the settled proposition of law, in an application under 
Sed.33C(2) of the ILD. Act, 7947, the Labour Court has no jurisdiction and cannot adjudicate dispute of 
entitlement or the basis of claim of workmen. It can only interpret the award or settlement which the claim is 
based. 


435. Further it is held that in the case of Ganesh Razak and another, “the Labour Court’s jurisdiction 
under Sec.33C(2) is like that of an executing Court. As per the settled proposition of law without prior 
adjudication or recognition of the disputed claim of the workmen, proceedings for computation of the arrears 
of wages and/or difference of wages claimed by the workmen shall not be maintainable under section 33C(2) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, /947. 


6. It is admitted fact that since Respondent No.3 has engaged the contract labour agency, M/s. Sri 
Krishna Employment Information and Services Agency w.e.f. .4.2004 and wages @Rs.60/- per day has not 
been paid to the Petitioner from |.4.2004 upto the date of his termination w.e.f. .2.2007. Therefore, Petitioner 
is liable to receive the wage amount @ Rs.60/- per day for the period from .4.2004 to .2.2007. The petition 
is liable to be allowed partly. 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 805 


ORDER 


Therefore, in view of the discussion as above, the Petitioner’s application u/s 33C(2) of I.D. Act, 947 
is partly allowed. Therefore, the application for arrears of wages is allowed and the Petitioner is liable for the 
payment of wages @Rs.60/- per day, for the period from |.2.2004 to 3..2007 for the number of days he has 
worked excluding non working days, like, public holidays, Saturdays and Sundays from Respondent No.3. The 
claim for revised pay is rejected. The said wages amount shall be paid by Respondent No.3 to the Petitioner 
within 4 months from the date of receipt of this order. 


Ordered accordingly. 


Dictated to Smt P. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her and corrected by me on this the 
20" day of April, 2023. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri 7. Nagaraju NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Ex.WI: Photocopy of proceedings No.D.Dis/l029/2006, of the District Collector, Kurnool dated 6.2.2006 


Ex.W2: Photocopy of proceedings No.D.Dis(C.3) l062/M/2004 of the District Collector, Kurnool dated 
7.5.2005 


Ex.W3: Photocopy of Status Quo orders dt. 6.2.2004 from Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, 
Hyderabad 


Ex.W4: Photocopy of interim orders dt. .8.2005 in WPMP No.254 of 2005 in WP ]१२०.।6637 


Ex.W5: Photocopy of opinion of Rajasekhar Reddy, Asst. Solicitor Gen. of India, Hon’ble High Court, 
Hyderabad dt.2..2005 


Ex.W6: Photocopy of Ir. Dt. 30..2005 form R3 to R2 

Ex.W7: Photocopy of representation of WWI and ors. Dt. 0.0.2006 to RI 

Ex.W8: Photocopy of Ir. Dt.23.!.2006 from R2 to R3 

Ex.W9: Photocopy of representation of WWI & ors त.23.] | .2005 to R3 

Ex.W0: Photocopy of Ir. Dt. 24..2005 from R3 to R4 

+ऋ.१४७।]: Photocopy of Ir. Dt. 2.!2.2005 from R4 to R3. 

Ex.W2: Photocopy of proceedings dt.23.8.2006 from R3 to R2 

Ex.W3: Photocopy of representation dt. l8.!.2006 from ४४५७] & ors to RLCC, Hyderabad 
Ex.W4: Photocopy of representation dt. .2.2007 from १४७] & ors to RLCC, Hyderabad 
Ex.W5: Payment voucher dt. 6.2.2000 with contingent bill dt. 6.2.2000 in original. 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


NIL 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 892.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 7947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार मुख्य आयुक्त, सीमा शुल्क और केंद्रीय उत्पाद शुल्क,विजाग जोन, विशाखापत्तनम; आयुक्त,सीमा शुल्क और 
केंद्रीय उत्पाद शुल्क, तिरुपति आयुक्तालय; तिरुपति; सहायक आयुक्त, सीमा शुल्क और केंद्रीय उत्पाद शुल्क, मंडल 


806 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


कार्यालय, कुरनूल मंडल, कुरनूल; मालिक श्री बी.वी. रमना, श्रीकृष्ण रोजगार सूचना और सेवाएं, नेहरू नगर, 
कुरनूल, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री पी. श्रीनिवासुलु, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय 
सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-हैदराबाद के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या M.P. No. 6/2007) को जैसा 
कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 7.05.2023 
को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025-07-2023-440-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 26th May, 2023 


S.O. 892.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. M.P. No. 6/2007) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court — Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Chief Commissioner, Customs and Central Excise, Vizag Zone, Visakhapatnam ;The 
Commissioner, Customs and Central Excise, Tirupati Commissionerate; Tirupathi; The Assistant 
Commissioner,Customs and Central Excise, Divisional Office, Kurnool Division, Kurnool; Proprietor Shri B.V. 
Ramana, M/s. Shri Krishna Employment Information and Services, Nehru Nagar,Kurnool, and Shri P. 
Srinivasulu, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
7.05.2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023-0-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL- CUM- LABOUR COURT, 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Shri IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 
Dated the 207 day of April, 2023 
M.P. No. 6/2007 
Between: 


Sri P. Srinivasulu, 

S/o P. Basavaiah, 

C/o Sri P. Pulla Rao garu, 

Principal, 

Ravindra Junior College, 

Abbas Nagar, 

Kurnool — 58004. .....Petitioner 


AND 


l. The Chief Commissioner, 
Customs and Central Excise, 
Vizag Zone, Visakhapatnam. 


2. The Commissioner, 
Customs and Central Excise, 
Tirupati Commissionerate, 
9-86-A, West Church Compound, 
MLR. Palle Road, Tirupathi-57502. 


3. The Assistant Commissioner, 
Customs and Central Excise, 
Divisional Office, Kurnool Division, 
Near Children’s Park, N.R. Peta, 
Kurnool — 58 004. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 807 


4. M/s. Sri Krishna Employment 
Information and Services, 
No.40-790-2, Nehru Nagar, 
Kurnool — 58 004, rep. by its 


Proprietor Shri B.V. Ramana. ....Respondents 
Appearance: 
For the Petitioner : Sri William Burra, Advocate 
For the Respondent Sri Kapu Ramakrishna Reddy, Advocate for Rl, R2 & R3 


Sri M.V.L.Narasaiah, Advocate for R4 


ORDER 


This petition has been filed by Sri P. Srinivasulu under Sec.33 C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
947 for payment of the amount wage due to Petitioner from Respondent and arrear of revised wages as well as 
to direct the Respondents to pay the dues with interest @2% p.a. 


2. The brief facts of the application are that the Petitioner was engaged by the Respondent No.3 orally on 
..999. The duties performed by him in Respondent’s office were "cleaning, sweeping, gardening and 
certain miscellaneous works like supplying Coffee/Tea or water to the permanent and regular employees.” The 
Petitioner continued to be engaged as Casual Labour from ..!999 to 3..2007. The services of the 
Petitioner were orally terminated by Respondent No.3 w.e.f. 0i.02.2007. The said oral termination of 
Petitioner was illegal, unjust, contrary to the Provisions of the I.D.Act, 947 and also against the Principles of 
natural justice. A separate application u/s 2A(2) of the I.D.Act, !947 has been submitted challenging the 
illegal termination. The Petitioner submits that while he was working as Casual Labour in the 37 Respondent 
Office, he engaged M/s. Sree Krishna Employment Information and Services, Kurnool w.e.f. 0i.2.2004 as 
Labour Supply Agency and engaged labour through the above Agency. However, the Petitioner continued to 
render his services upto 3..2007 as direct labour. The 3५ Respondent however failed to pay the salary/wages 
from 0I.2.2004 to 3!.0.2007 and also arrears of difference in wages from 0.4.2004 to 30..2004. The 
Petitioner approached the 37 Respondent for payment of his salary/ wage and difference in wages every month, 
but the 3 Respondent refused to pay the same on the ground that the Petitioner should register his name 
through the labour supply agency. The Petitioner therefore approached the CAT, Hyderabad and thereafter the 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad and obtained interim stay, thereby the Respondents were directed to 
maintain status quo. The Petitioner submits that he was in the service of the 37 Respondent upto 3.].2007 and 
hence he is entitled for difference in wages and salary for the period from .4.2004 to 3..2007. The Petitioner 
further submits that during the period from .4.2004 to 30..2004, he is entitled for arrears of Rs. 50/- per day 
consequent upon the revised rates of wages as per the Proceedings of the Collector and District Magistrate, 
Kurnool which came into force w.e.f. .4.2004. The Petitioner is entitled to towards difference in wages of 
Rs.87,960/-, and Wages/ Salary from |.4.2004 to 3..2007. It is also submitted that Sri A. Rajasekhara Reddy, 
Asst. Solicitor General of India, High Court of A.P. at Hyderabad has also given his opinion to the I* 
Respondent to pay the wages as per the interim orders of the Hon’ble High Court of A.P., Hyderabad. But the 
Respondent did not pay the wages till date in gross violation of the provisions of law. 


3. Notice sent to the Respondent. In response to the notice, 377 Respondent has submitted his counter and 
he submitted that the 3"? Respondent has paid total salary to agency. All casual workers have received their 
salaries from the agency except the Petitioner. The Petitioner has demanded salary amount of Rs.87,960/-, 
which is not correct. The Petitioner has not worked 30 days in every month. He has worked excluding 
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays declared by Government. 


4. Further, the Respondent No.4 has also submitted his counter and he submitted that all the allegations 
made in the present petition are neither true nor correct. It is submitted that the Respondent No.4 engaged 7 
employees with Respondent No.3 on contract basis from |.2.2004 to l.2.2007. The contract was closed on 
.2.2007. It is submitted that the respondent organization was closed in the month of February 2007. Since 
that day no persons were with Respondent No.4. The Respondent No.4 paid entire wages to workers as per 
their work period. The Respondent No. 4 denies the allegation of the petitioner that he was not paid his wages 
from .2.2004 to 3i..2007. It is submitted that there is not even single allegation or any compliant against 
Respondent No.4 during the employment of the present petitioner. The petitioner never made any complaint 
against Respondent No.4, either to any labour authority or to Respondents No.! to 3 who are his immediate 
employers, now he cannot take such false and untenable plea that his wages were not paid from |.!2.2004 to 
3..2007. The Respondent No.4 submitted that the present petition originally was filed against the 
Respondents No.l,2 and 3 and there is not even a single allegation against Respondent No.4 in petition. 


808 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


5. In support of his petition, Petitioner has filed chief evidence affidavit of WWI wherein he has support 
his averments made in his petition and also proved the documents which have been marked as Ex.W! to ७5 
respectively. 


6. Petitioner has also filed written arguments. No evidence is lead on behalf of the Respondent. 
He Heard the arguments. Perused the record. 
8. The present petition has been filed by the Petitioner u/s . 33C(2) of the I.D. Act, 947. 


The provision of Sec.33C(2) provides that, 


“ (2) Where any workman is entitled to receive from the employer any money or any benefit which is capable of 
being computed in terms of money and if any question arises as to the amount of money due or as to the amount 
at which such benefit should be computed, then the question may, subject to any rules that may be made under 
this Act, be decided by such Labour Court as may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate 
Government; within a period not exceeding three months Provided that where the presiding officer of a Labour 
Court considers it necessary or expedient so to do, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend such 
period by such further period as he may think fit.” 


Now, we proceed to examine whether any money or benefit is due to workman from the employer Respondent 
under any settlement or an award or under the provision of Chapter 4A. 


9 Petitioner submitted that he was engaged by the Respondent no.3 orally on ..999 and he performed 
the duties of cleaning, sweeping, gardening, certain miscellaneous works like supplying Coffee/Tea and water 
to the permanent an regular employees. The Petitioner continued as casual labour from |.!.999 to 3].].2007 
but his services were terminated from |.2.2007. Further, it is submitted that while Petitioner was working as a 
casual labour in Respondent No.3 office, Respondent No.3 appointed M/s. Sri Krishna Employment Information 
and Services Agency w.e.f. !.2.2004 as labour supply agency and engaged labour through the above agency. 
However, the Petitioner and another have 250 rendered their services upto 3..2007 directly. It is further 
submitted that Respondent No.3 failed to pay the salary/wages from .2.2004 to 3I.l.2007 and arrears of 
difference of wages for the said period. The Petitioner approached the Respondent No.3 for payment of his 
salary and difference in wages every month. But the Respondent No.3 refused to pay the same on the ground 
that the Petitioner shall register his name through the labour supply agency mentioned herein above. It is 
submitted that Petitioner was in service of Respondent No.3 on 3].[.2007, hence he is entitled for difference in 
wages/salary for the period from .4.2004 to 3.I.2007. It is further submitted that during the period from 
.4.2004 to 30..2004 he entitled for arrears of Rs.50/- per day consequent upon the revised rate of wages as 
per proceedings of the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool which came into force w.e.f. .4.2004. The 
details of salary/wages including difference of wages, as worked out are annexed thereto. The Petitioner is 
entitled to Rs.87,960/- towards difference in wages for the said period. 


0. The Petitioner has supported the averments of his petition in the chief evidence affidavit and he has 
proved the documents marked as 75.४७] to ७४5. 


Il. As per counter filed by Respondent No.3 there is no specific denial that the Petitioner has not 
worked in the office of Respondent No.3 from .!.999 to .2.2007 as a casual labour. Therefore, it is 
admitted fact that the Petitioner had worked as a casual labour in the office of Respondent No.3 for the said 
period. Further, the claim of the Petitioner that from .!2.2004 the Respondent No.3 has appointed M/s. Sri 
Krishna Employment Information and Services Agency, as labour supply agency, and engaged labour through 
this agency is also not denied by Respondent No.3. As regard the payment of wages to the Petitioner by the 
Respondent No.3, for the period from |.2.2004 to I.2.2007. So far as, regarding the fact of engagement of 
the Petitioner as a casual labour in the Respondent office is concerned the Petitioner has filed the relevant 
documents Ex.W5 and W2 which goes to reveal that the Petitioner has had worked as a casual labour in the 
Respondent office of Respondent No.3 as well as oral evidence also submitted by Petitioner. Respondent No.3 
submitted that he has paid the Petitioner’s total salary to the agency and all casual workers have received their 
salaries from the agencies except the Petitioner. Therefore, Respondent No.3 has clearly admitted the fact that 
he has engaged the agency M/s. Sri Krishna Employment Information and Services Agency for engagement of 
casual labour and he has paid the salary to the agency. He has also admitted that all casual workers have 
received their salaries through the agency except the Petitioner. Respondent has engaged the contract labour 
agency w.e.f. l.!2.2004 and since then he has paid the wages to the agency regarding causal labour. No proof 
of payment of salaries/wages paid to Petitioner has been filed by the Respondent No.3. Respondent No.4 has 
also not paid wages to the Petitioner nor filed any document pertaining to payment of wages to Petitioner. 
Whereas Respondent No.4 in his counter he stated that Respondent No.4 paid entire wages in the month of 
February, 2007 itself at the time of closure of Respondent No.4. Further, Respondent No.4 contended that the 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 809 


Petitioner never made any complaint against Respondent No.4 either to any labour authority or Respondents 
No.I,2, & 3 who are his immediate employers. Now, he can not take such false plea that, he was not paid for 
the period from .2.2004 to 3!..2007. Admittedly, Petitioner was engaged as daily wager duly since 999. 
However, the Respondent No.3 claims that the payment of wages was made to the Petitioner through agency 
but no payment voucher or receipt has been filed by the Respondent No.3 or Respondent No.4 for payment of 
wages to the Petitioner for the said period. Therefore, for want of evidence of payment of wages to Petitioner 
since .2.2004 the claim of the Petitioner that his salary/wages for the period from .2.2004 is due and to be 
paid by the Respondent No.3 since he was in the direct employment of Respondent No.3 has been proved. 


2. As per calculation submitted by the Petitioner he was engaged on the wages @ Rs.60/- per day, 
whereas it has not been disputed by the Respondent No.3. Therefore, the Petitioner is liable for the payment of 
wages @Rs.60/- per day for the period from .2.2004 to 3..2007. 


3. Further, the Petitioner/ Applicant contended that he is eligible for the revised pay of salary/wages as 
he claims that as per the proceeding of the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool which came into effect 
w.e.f. .4.2004, he is eligible for revised pay from that period till his date of termination. In this regard, the 
Petitioner submits that during the period from .4.2004 to 30..2004 he is entitled for arrears of Rs.50/- per 
day consequent upon the revised rates of wages as per the proceeding of the Collector and District Magistrate, 
Kurnool which came into effect force from .4.2004. The details of the salary/wages including difference of 
wages as worked out are annexed thereto. Therefore, Petitioner is entitled to receive Rs.87,960/- towards 
difference in wages for the said period as well as the salary/wages. In support of his claim he has submitted 
annexure statement with his petition wherein the details of the wages paid, to be paid to the Petitioner from 
.2.2004 to 3..2007 is mentioned. As per the proceeding of the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool, 
rate of wages payable has been revised w.e.f. |.4.2004 raising from the rate of wages of Rs.60/- to Rs.l0/- 
and further the proceeding of the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool has revised the wages w.e-.f. 
.4.2006 from Rs/l0/- to Rs.24/- per day. The Petitioner has filed 75.9४] which is a copy of proceeding of 
the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool dated 6.l2.2006. The perusal of the said proceeding of the 
Collector reflects that it is applicable to the casual labour employed in the State Government establishment or 
the offices where as in the present matter, the Respondent No.3 is Central Government establishment. 
Therefore, this proceeding of the revised pay by the Collector and District Magistrate, Kurnool is not 
applicable to the Respondent No.3 office. Apart from it, the Petitioner has not submitted any other notification 
or circular of appropriate government as mentioned under Sec.33C(2) applicable to casual labour engaged for 
revised wages. Therefore, in the absence of any notification from appropriate Government the claim of the 
Petitioner that he is eligible to receive the revised wages as he has claimed is not acceptable. 


4. In this context, the decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of M/s. Bombay Chemical 
Industries Vs. Deputy Labour Commissioner, Civil Appeal ४०.83/2022, dated 4.2.2022 is relevant, 
wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held, “ as per the settled proposition of law, in an application under 
Sed.33C(2) of the ILD. Act, 7947, the Labour Court has no jurisdiction and cannot adjudicate dispute of 
entitlement or the basis of claim of workmen. It can only interpret the award or settlement which the claim is 


based. 


IS, Further it is held that in the case of Ganesh Razak and another, “the Labour Court’s jurisdiction 
under Sec.33C(2) is like that of an executing Court. As per the settled proposition of law without prior 
adjudication or recognition of the disputed claim of the workmen, proceedings for computation of the arrears 
of wages and/or difference of wages claimed by the workmen shall not be maintainable under section 33C(2) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, /947.. 


6. It is admitted fact that since Respondent No.3 has engaged the contract labour agency, M/s. Sri 
Krishna Employment Information and Services Agency w.e.f. l.4.2004 and wages @Rs.60/- per day has not 
been paid to the Petitioner from |.4.2004 upto the date of his termination w.e.f. .2.2007. Therefore, Petitioner 
is liable to receive the wage amount @ Rs.60/- per day for the period from .4.2004 to .2.2007. The petition 
is liable to be allowed partly. 


ORDER 


Therefore, in view of the discussion as above, the Petitioner’s application u/s 33C(2) of I.D. Act, 947 
is partly allowed. Therefore, the application for arrears of wages is allowed and the Petitioner is liable for the 
payment of wages @Rs.60/- per day, for the period from .2.2004 to 3[.[.2007 for the number of days he has 
worked excluding non working days, like, public holidays, Saturdays and Sundays from Respondent No.3. The 
claim for revised pay is rejected. The said wages amount shall be paid by Respondent No.3 to the Petitioner 
within 4 months from the date of receipt of this order. 


80 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Ordered accordingly. 


Dictated to Smt P. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her and corrected by me on this the 
20" day of April, 2023. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
४४५७]: Sri P. Srinivasulu NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Ex.WI: Photocopy of proceedings No.D.Dis/l029/2006, of the District Collector, Kurnool dated 6.2.2006 


Ex.W2: Photocopy of proceedings No.D.Dis(C.3) l062/M/2004 of the District Collector, Kurnool dated 
7.5.2005 


Ex.W3: Photocopy of Status Quo orders dt. 6.2.2004 from Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, 
Hyderabad 


Ex.W4: Photocopy of interim orders dt. .8.2005 in WPMP No.254 of 2005 in WP No.l6637 


Ex.W5: Photocopy of opinion of Rajasekhar Reddy, Asst. Solicitor Gen. of India, Hon’ble High Court, 
Hyderabad dt.2..2005 


Ex.W6: Photocopy of Ir. Dt. 30..2005 form R3 to R2 

Ex.W7: Photocopy of representation of WWI and ors. Dt. 0.0.2006 to RI 

Ex.W8: Photocopy of Ir. Dt.23.!.2006 from R2 to R3 

Ex.W9: Photocopy of representation of ४४७] & ors त.23.| | .2005 to R3 

Ex.W0: Photocopy of Ir. Dt. 24..2005 from R3 to R4 

+.१४।]: Photocopy of Ir. Dt. 2.!2.2005 from R4 to R3. 

Ex.W2: Photocopy of proceedings dt.23.8.2006 from R3 to R2 

Ex.W3: Photocopy of representation dt. [8.!.2006 from ४४७] & ors to RLCC, Hyderabad 
Ex.W4: Photocopy of representation dt. .2.2007 from ५४४७] & ors to RLCC, Hyderabad 
Ex.W5: Payment voucher dt. 6.2.2000 with contingent bill dt. 6.2.2000 in original. 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


NIL 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 893.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार बैंक ऑफ बडीौदा के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण / श्रम न्यायालय, जयपुर के Gare (54/20I9) प्रकाशित 
करती है। 


[सं. Wet-20/ /50/209-aTe arz(4-I])] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 26th May, 2023 


S.O. 893.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.54/20l9) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 I8]] 


Jaipur as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Bank of Baroda and 
their workmen. 
[No. L-20/50/209-IR (B-II)] 


SALONI, Dy. Director 


अनुबंध 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, जयपुर 


राधा मोहन चतुर्वेदी, पीठासीन अधिकारी, सी.जी.आई.टी. प्रकरण सं. 54 / 2049 


Reference No. L-20/50/209-IR (B-ID) 
Dated: 02.2.209 


श्री सूरज पुत्र श्री रमेश चन्द्र, C/o संयुक्त महामंत्री, हिन्द मजदूर सभा, 


बंगाली कालोनी, छावनी, कोटा RRA) 0थ#.. प्रार्थी 
बनाम 
4. क्षेत्रीय प्रबंधक, बैंक ऑफ बडौदा, रीजनल ऑफिस, i 
पहली मंजिल, पुखराज टॉवर, स्टेशन रोड़ कोटा (राजस्थान) 342002.$#..... अप्रार्थीगण / विपक्षी 


उपस्थितः- 


प्रार्थी की तरफ से : कोई उपस्थित नहीं। 
अप्रार्थी की तरफ से : कोई उपस्थित नहीं | 


: अधिनिर्णय : 
दिनांक : 0605.2022 


4. अश्रम मंत्रालय भारत सरकार नई दिल्‍ली द्वारा दिनांक 02.42.2049 को औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 
की धारा i0 (3) (डी) व 2A के अन्तर्गत प्रदत्त शक्तियो के अनुसरण में निम्नांकित औद्योगिक विवाद 
न्यायनिर्णयन हेतु इस अधिकरण को संदर्भित किया गया :- 

“क्या कर्मकार श्री सूरज, पुत्र श्री रमेश चन्द्र, सफाई कर्मचारी, मोदी कॉलेज शाखा, 
(जो कथित तौर पर दिनांक 47.40.2040 से 48.03.2044 तक कार्यरत थे), को 
प्रबंधन, क्षेत्रीय प्रबंधक, बैंक ऑफ seta, ate कार्यालय, कोटा द्वारा मौखिक 
आदेश दिनांक 48.03.2044 द्वारा नौकरी से निकालने की कार्यवाही, विधि एवं 
न्यायसंगत है? यदि नहीं, तो कर्मकार किस राहत का व कब से पाने का हकदार 
है?? 


2. अश्रम मंत्रालय द्वारा यह विवाद दिनांक 02.42.2049 को पंजीकृत डाक द्वारा इस अधिकरण के साथ साथ 
विवाद के पक्षकारों यथा प्रार्थी संगठन व विपक्षीगण को भी प्रेषित किया गया था। यह विवाद दिनांक 42.42.2049 
को इस अधिकरण में प्राप्त हुआ-तथा पक्षकारों की उपसंजाति व अभिवचनों की प्रतीक्षा में अब तक लंबित रहा 
है। आज दिनांक 06.05.2022 तक भी इस संदर्भित विवाद के अग्रसरण हेतु प्रार्थी ने अपने दावे का अभिकथन 
प्रस्तुत नहीं किया है। श्रम मंत्रालय द्वारा संदर्भित विवाद के संबंध में विवाद प्रस्तुत करने वाले पक्षकार (प्रार्थी) को 
यह निर्देश दिया गया है कि वह vad आदेश की प्राप्ति के 45 दिन की अवधि में अपने दावे का अभिकथन इस 
अधिकरण के समक्ष प्रस्तुत करे। चूकि weit ot यह आदेश पंजीकृत डाक के माध्यम से प्रेषित किया गया है, यह 
उपधारित किया जाना नितांत न्‍्यायोचित है कि- जिस प्रकार इस अधिकरण को संदर्भित आदेश 42.42.2049 को 
प्राप्त हो चुका है- प्रार्थी को भी यह आदेश प्राप्त हो चुका होगा। 


82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


3. इस ततथ्यात्मक परिदृश्य में इस अधिकरण का यह सुविचारित अधिमत है कि प्रार्थी व विपक्षीगण के 
मध्य संदर्भित विवाद के अग्रसरण हेतु प्रार्थी-पक्ष अनिच्छुक व उदासीन है। इसलिए दावे के अभिकथन के अभाव 
में प्रार्थी संदर्भित विवाद में कोई अनुतोष पाने का अधिकारी नहीं है। 

4. संदर्भित विवाद का निस्तारण इसी प्रकार किया जाता है। 


5. अधिनिर्णय की प्रतिलिपि औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 की धारा 47 (3) के अनुसरण में प्रकाषनार्थ 
प्रेषित की जावें। 


राधा मोहन चतुर्वेदी, पीठासीन अधिकारी 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 894.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44 ) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार बैंक ऑफ बडौदा के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण श्रम न्यायालय, जयपुर के Gare (55/20]3) 
प्रकाशित करती है | 


[a. Wet-202/75/203-aTe आरा(बी-)|] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 26th May, 2023 


S.O. 894.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.55/203) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Jaipur as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Bank of Baroda and 
their workmen. 


[No. L- 20i2/75/203-IR (B-ID] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 


अनुबंध 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, जयपुर 


राधा मोहन चतुर्वेदी, पीठासीन अधिकारी, सी.जी.आई.टी. प्रकरण सं. 55 / 2043 
Reference No. L-202/75/203-IR (8-) Dated: 8.0.203 


संजय कुमार सैनी, पुत्र श्री प्रेम सिंह, निवासी ग्राम डफलपुर, 


पोस्ट जहॉगीरपुर, तहसील करौली, जिला करौली (रज0)॥ ee प्रार्थी 


बनाम 


2. श्रीमान महाप्रबंधक, बैंक ऑफ बड़ौदा, राजस्थान अंचल, अंचल कार्यालय, चौथा तल, आनन्द भवन, 
संसार चन्द्र मार्ग, जयपुर | 
3. श्रीमान क्षेत्रीय प्रबंधक, बैंक ऑफ बड़ौदा, कूर्षि उपज मण्डी, शाखा भरतपुर, राजस्थान | 
4. STA शाखा प्रबंधक, बैंक ऑफ बड़ौदा, शाखा कुड़गांव, जिला करौली (राज0) .......अप्रार्थीगण » विपक्षी 
उपस्थित:- 


प्रार्थी की तरफ से : कोई उपस्थित नहीं। 
अप्रार्थी की तरफ से : श्री मुनेश चन्द्र शर्मा, अधिवक्ता | 


: अधिनिर्णय : 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 83 


दिनांक : 02082022 


4. अश्रम मंत्रालय भारत सरकार नई दिल्ली द्वारा दिनांक 48.0.2043 को औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 
की धारा 40 (3) (डी) व 2। के अन्तर्गत प्रदत्त शक्तियो के अनुसरण में निम्नांकित औद्योगिक विवाद 
न्यायनिर्णयन हेतु इस अधिकरण को संदर्भित किया गया :- 


“क्या अप्रार्थी, बैंक प्रबंधक द्वारा प्रार्थी अंशकालीन श्री संजय कुमार सैनी को 
नौकरी से हटाने की कार्यवाही वैध एवं न्यायोचित है? यदि नही तो प्रार्थी किस 
राहत का और कब से पाने का हकदार है? ”’ 

2. दिनांक 03.03.2044 को प्रार्थी की ओर से दावे का अभिकथन प्रस्तुत किया गया। जिसके संक्षिप्त 
अभिवचन इस प्रकार है- प्रार्थी की नियुक्ति विपक्षी सं. 3, के अधीन 02.09.2003 को चतुर्थ श्रेणी कर्मचारी के 
पद पर हुई, प्रार्थी ने 48.03.2044 तक विपक्षी के अधीन कार्य किया और उसे नियमित रूप से भुगतान दिया 
गया। 49.03.2044 को विपक्षी सं. 3 ने प्रार्थी को डयूटी पर लेने से मना कर दिया और मौखिक आदेश द्वारा 
सेवा समाप्त कर दी। प्रार्थी ने प्रत्येक वर्ष 240 दिन से अधिक कार्य लगातार किया है। सेवामुक्ति के पूर्व प्रार्थी 
को कोई नोटिस, नोटिस वेतन अथवा मुआवजा नहीं दिया गया। प्रार्थी को सेवा मुक्त करते समय उससे 
कनिष्ठतर अनेक श्रमिक कार्यरत थे और बाद में भी नये श्रमिकों की भर्ती की ws) इस प्रकार विपक्षी द्वारा की 
गई प्रार्थी की सेवा समाप्ति अधिनियम की धारा 25 (एफ) (जी) व (एच) के प्रावधानों का उललघंन है। अतः सेवा 
समाप्ति को अवैध घोषित कर प्रार्थी को सेवा में निरंतरता एवं विगत वेतन परिलाभों सहित सेवा में बहाल किया 
urd | 

3. विपक्षीगण ने वादोत्तर में वाद के तथ्यों को अस्वीकार करते हुये यह कहा कि विपक्षी बैंक में भर्ती हेतु 
विहित प्रकिया एवं नियम बने हुये है। प्रार्थी इस प्रकिया से नियमानुसार नहीं गुजरा है। प्रार्थी को विपक्षी बैक 
की शाखा में पेयजल भरने के लिए रखा गया था, उसके एवज में निर्धारित राशि का भुगतान किया गया। प्रार्थी 
एवं विपक्षी के मध्य नियोक्‍ता और कर्मकार का संबंध नहीं है। इसलिए प्रार्थी विपक्षी से कोई अनुतोश प्राप्त 
करने का अधिकारी नहीं है। वाद विलम्ब से प्रस्तुत हुआ है। प्रार्थी ने नियमित रूप से कोई कार्य नहीं किया। 
विपक्षी ने प्रार्थी को न तो नियुक्त किया और न सेवामुक्त | अतः वाद निरस्त किया जायें। 


4. प्रार्थी द्वारा वादोत्तर के उपरांत अतिरिक्त कथन भी प्रस्तुत किये गये और पुनः: अनुतोष दिये जाने का 
निवेदन किया गया। 


5. दिनांक 44.0.2024 से यह प्रकरण प्रार्थी की साक्ष्य हेतु नियत किया जाता रहा है। प्रार्थी को दिनांक 
24.(2.2020 को दस्तावेजों पर आक्षेप के संबंध में प्रार्थना पत्र प्रस्तुत करने हेतु अंतिम अवसर दिया गया था 
किंतु प्रार्थी आगामी तिथि 04.03.2024 से लगातार अनुपस्थित चला आ रहा है। इसलिये प्रार्थी की साक्ष्य का 
अवसर समाप्त कर दिया गया। विपक्षी ने भी इस स्थिति में कोई साक्ष्य प्रस्तुत नहीं करना चाहा। अतः साक्ष्य 
विपक्षी भी समाप्त की गई | 

6. दिनांक 04.08.2022 को मैनें विपक्षी अभिभाषक को सुना और पत्रावली का अवलोकन किया। विपक्षी का 
यह तर्क है कि प्रार्थी ने अपने वाद के समर्थन में कोई साक्ष्य प्रस्तुत नहीं की है, इसलिये वाद निरस्त किया 
जावें। मैनें इस तर्क पर मनन किया। 

7. विपक्षी का यह आक्षेप स्वीकार्य है कि प्रार्थी ने कई अवसर दिये जाने के उपरांत भी कोई साक्ष्य वाद 
के समर्थन में प्रस्तुत नहीं की है। साक्ष्य के अभाव में प्रार्थी यह प्रमाणित नहीं कर पाया है कि अप्रार्थी बैंक द्वारा 
प्रार्थी को सेवा से पृथक करने की कार्यवाही किसी प्रकार अवैध एवं अन्यायपूर्ण हो। ae प्रार्थी उस पर 
आरोपित Rife को उनन्‍मोचित करने में विफल रहा है, इसलिये साक्ष्य के अभाव में प्रार्थी श्री संजय कुमार 
सैनी विपक्षीगण से कोई अनुतोष प्राप्त करने का अधिकारी नहीं है। 


8. संदर्भित विवाद का इसी प्रकार न्याय निर्णयन किया जाता हैं। 


84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


9. अधिनिर्णय की प्रतिलिपि औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, i947 की धारा i7 (3) के अनुसरण में 
प्रकाशनार्थ प्रेषित की जावे। 


राधा मोहन चतुर्वेदी, पीठासीन अधिकारी 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 895.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम i947 (4947 का 44 ) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार पीएनबी मेटलाइफ इंश्योरेंस कंपनी लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो 
के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण / श्रम न्यायालय, कानपुर 
के Ware (86/207) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं. एल-42025/04/2047-आई आरो(बी-)|] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 895.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.86/20l7) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Kanpur as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of PNB Metlife Insurance 
Co. Ltd. and their workmen. 


[No. L- 2025/0/207- IR (B-ID)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL—CUM-LABOUR COURT KANPUR 
resent: SOMA SHEKHAR JENA HIS (Retd.) 
I.D. No. 86/207 
Ref. No. L-2025/0/207-IR(B-II) dated:.2.207 
BETWEEN 
Shri Pankaj Sharma S/o Shri Shiv Om Sharma, 
S/o Sh. Anil Kumar Kulshreshtha, 
7/Q/34, Radha Krishna Housing Society, 


Sharda Nagar, 
Kanpur (U.P.) - 208023 


AND 


l. The Associate Director Legar, PNB Metlife Insurance Co. Ltd., I‘t Floor, Techni Plus-l, Techniplus, In 
front of Sawarkar Flyover, Goregaon West, Mumbai — 400062 (Maharashtra) 


2. The Manager- Regional Human Resources, M/s P.N.B. Metlife India Insurance Co. Ltd., 2™ Floor, 
Commercial Motors Building, |l-M.G. Marg, Hazratganj, Lucknow — 22600! (U.P.) 


AWARD 


This award is delivered with reference to the Industrial Dispute referred to this Tribunal in notification 
no. L-2025/0/207 — IR(B-ID) dated /2/207 issued by the Government of India Ministry of Labour & 
Employment as stated in the Schedule. 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether Shri Pankaj Sharma, AMS Agency Sales can be treated as workman under the 
provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 947? If so, whether the action of the management of 
PNB Metlife India Insurance Company Limited in terminating his services w.e.f. 30/07/204 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 85 


alleged to be working from January, 2008 is just, fair and legal? If not, to what relief he is 
entitled to and from what date?” 


After receiving the reference the claimant workman was called upon to submit his statement of claim. 
The statement of claim has been filed by the claimant workman with averments which may be summarized as 
follows: 


In January 2008 the claimant joined the employment under the P.N.B. Metlife Insurance Company Ltd. 
as field worker under Branch Manager Sanjay Pandey and Regional Manager Ajay Awasthi. The claimant 
workman was awarded with promotion for his commendable performance in the year 20l2 and 20l3. On 
27/06/20l4 without any prior notice or any warning the claimant was terminated from the post of Assistant 
Sales Manager which he was holding shortly before his termination. Claimant had requested his authority to let 
him know about the reason of his illegal termination, no satisfactory reply was received by the claimant 
workman from his employer. Originally the claimant approached the Hon’ble High Court of Allahabad 
challenging his termination but his WRIT application was dismissed with liberty to approach the Industrial 
Tribunal in the matter of adjudication of illegal termination of his job by the 0.7. side. 


The O.P. employer (PNB Metlife) has submitted counter with averments which may be concisely 
stated as follows: 


O.P. employer has controverted the claim of the claimant as workman. It is further submitted on behalf 
of the O.P. that the claimant was appointed as Probationary Assistant Sales Manager, Agency Sales F2 Grade of 
the company M/s PNB Metlife India Insurance Co. Ltd. It is submitted that the Applicant was managing and 
administering the affairs as per the terms of the Employment Contract and was given targets on the basis of 
which his performance was adjudged. It is absolutely denied that the applicant was in service of the Opposite 
Party Company in the year 2008 to 20il. He was Financial Advisor with PNB Met Life India Insurance Co. 
Ltd. before joining as Probationary ASM on rolls of the company. It is averred that Financial Advisor’s work 
was on a commission basis and they are not employees of the company. Also there is no master/ servant 
relationship between PMLI and Pankaj Sharma at that point of time. As per the records of the company the 
Applicant had applied in November 20!! and was appointed after interview vide appointment letter dated 8" 
January 202. 


It is denied that there was no complaint in regard to his work and he was working satisfactorily. It is 
submitted that the Applicant before his appointment as ASM was a Financial Advisor and O.P. had no control or 
supervision over his working. It is submitted that from 09/02/20I2 to 30/05/20l2 the Applicant was on 
probation period and had worked properly but thereafter on his confirmation in post on 3/05/202 his 
performance deteriorated gradually. It is submitted that the Applicant was found to be involved in wrongful 
practices for which a show cause notice was issued to him on 4/08/20l2 seeking explanation for 
misappropriation of customer renewal payment towards spuriously issuing fresh policy login/payment. Further 
the performance improvement plan was also issued to the applicant vide letter dated 05/05/20l4 as an 
opportunity to improve his performance. On failure of improving his performance after reassessment and despite 
giving him opportunity for submitting explanation and after due inquiry and investigation he was terminated 
from services. 


It is submitted by the O.P. that the claimant was honoured for his work during the period 2008 up to 
203. Later performance of the claimant was unsatisfactory and he failed to reach the targets. The 0.7. denied 
exersion of any unethical unlawful course on the claimant. 


It is submitted that the remuneration given to applicant was as per the Employment Contract and the 
policy of the Company considering the remuneration of the employees in different designations with respect to 
their job profiles. The Opposite Party Company had given the salary to the Applicant since the period of 
appointment 09.02.202 only and the salary slip is proof is being provided for that period only. It is denied that 
any salary was given to him during the period of 2008 to 202 or salary slip was issued before his appointment 
with the Opposite party. It is asserted by O.P. management that the financial advisors are paid only 
commissions. 


It is denied that he was ever tortured or blamed for any reason pertaining to appointment/promotion of 
any person. It is further submitted that the reason for issuing show cause notice and termination was solely for 
his non-performance. It is submitted that the allegations made in the paragraph under reply is false, baseless and 
malafide with sole intention to misdirect the Tribunal and to disrepute the Company and its management. It is 
denied that Opposite Party has decided to terminate his service due to any other reason except his non- 
performance and wrongful acts. It is submitted that the applicant failed to work in the Company as per the terms 


8l6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


and conditions expressed in the Employment contract despite salary was duly and periodically made to him. The 
Applicant is trying to show discrimination and bring out a new case before this Hon’ble Court and grab an 
order. 


Against the written statement the claimant submitted his rejoinder reiterating his averments made in the 
statement of claim. In the rejoinder the claimant has reiterated his claims raised in the statement of claim. For 
adjudication of the Industrial Dispute the following points are to be answered: 


l. Whether the claimant ( Pankaj Sharma) is a workman. 


2. Whether the termination of the claimant is in accordance with law to what relief the claimant is 
entitled. 


l. For the sake of clarity be its stated here that though the O.P. has submitted the written statement it has 
not participated in cross-examination of the claimant or by adducing its evidence. In the circumstance 
the evidence of the claimant has virtually gone unchallenged and uncontroverted. The documentary 
evidence produced by the claimants clearly establishes that the O.P. by letter dated 23/02/2009 did 
absorb the claimant as financial advisor under General Manager Madhukar Pandey. The uncontroverted 
documents read together show that the claimant by letter dated 8 January 20!2 was appointed as 
Probationary ASM Agency Sales with basic salary Rs. [,25,000 per annum with total fixed pay Rs. 
2,50,000 per annum. 


The unchallenged documents submitted by the claimant clearly show that he was a salaried employee 
of the O.P. management and the evidence found on record also leads to a presumption that the claimant was 
working in the insurance sector under the O.P. management without any supervisory assignment for 
managerial authority. In the scenario the claimant is a workman. 


Answer to this point goes in favour of the claimant and against the stand of the O.P. 


2. From cumulative reading of the documents containing the communication made between the claimant 
and the officials of the O.P. it is clearly seen that at one stage the claimant was issued commendation. It is seen 
that by letter dated 27/06/20l4 General Manager Human Resources of the O.P. issued the letter of termination 
for poor performance of the claimant who was posted as Assistant Sales Manager Agency Sales. The letter does 
not contain details of assessment of the performance of the claimant though the said letter informs the claimant 
that one month salary in view of notice was allowed in favour of the claimant. The uncontroverted documents 
filed by the claimant otherwise show that on 4/04/204 the claimant had made complaint before the authorities 
with averments that on l0" April at 06:30 PM Ajay Awasthi and Sanjay Pandey forcefully took away one 
resignation letter from the claimant. The uncontroverted evidence of the claimant can be taken as reliable 
evidence and this evidence otherwise establishes that the so called resignation was no resignation. The 
uncontroverted evidence further establishes that the claimant was fired from the job without any opportunity of 
submission of explanation. It is not clear if any objective assessment in respect of his performance was under 
taken. It remains unclear as to how of the performance of the claimant was taken to be poor under what kind of 
calibration. It is not clear if the claimant was given any compensation before his termination on 2" July, 204 
which may fall in the category of retrenchment. In view of the uncontroverted evidence the termination of the 
claimant workman w.e.f. 2" July, 20I4 is unsustainable in eye of law. 


Answer to this point goes in favour of the claimant and against the O.P. 


3. More than eight years have passed after retrenchment of the claimant during that period of eight year 
the O.P. company has not taken any work from the claimant. The transactions between the O.P. management 
and the claimant otherwise show that there was loss of confidence of the O.P. on the claimant workman. Under 
such scenario reinstatement with back wages is no equitable relief. There is no evidence of the O.P. that the 
claimant was gainfully employed from July 204 till now. On the other hand it can be seen that the claimant has 
also undergone much suffering due to loss of job. In view of the evidence there appears greater propriety for 
awarding one time compensation in favour of the claimant workman. In the year 204 before retrenchment the 
full salary of the claimant was Rs. 2,50,000 per annum w.e.f. l“ June, 20i2. Since the claimant was retrenched 
without justifiable strong grounds he is entitled to get compensation. Such compensation at this point can be 
worked out by accepting the guess work. There is ample evidence that from 2008 onwards till June 204 the 
claimant had served the O.P. in different capacities. Such being the scenario by resorting to guess work the 
claimant is entitled to get compensation of total fixed pay for one year i.e. Rs. 2,50,000/- from the O.P. 
management which shall be deposited by the O.P. in the account of the claimant within 30 days from the date of 
publication of the award. 


In the event of non-deposit the claimant shall be entitled to get simple interest at the rate of 8.5 per cent per 
annum on the said amount from the date of the award till the whole amount is deposited. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 87 


Parties are left to bear their respective costs. 


PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 896.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 74) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, 
स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर ; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 
4/97, विद्युत खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री लक्ष्मी नारायण, कामगार,के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 
73/204॥) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के 
साथ 29/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025-07-2023-424-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 896.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 73/20I]) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow ;M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Shri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, /97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Laxmi 
Narain,Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
29/05/2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023-[ 2-२ (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
Present: JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
ID. No. 73/20]] 
BETWEEN 


Laxmi Narain son of late Chhotey Lal, 
resident of village Chamraukha, sector 4, 
near Pani Ki Tanki, Indira Ngar, Lucknow 


AND 
l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General 
Manager. 
2. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 
3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 


Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, /97, 
Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 
AWARD 


On 0.03.20l! the claimant/workman has filed the ID case No. 73/20l] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


88 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.[990 under Section 40 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2.2.200]. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.2.200 by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than l00 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (ID, U.P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.200 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.200 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 
their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 200) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0!.20ll, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 89 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare 
that the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 
2/./2.2097 is neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to 
get reinstatement in service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages 
and other service benefits, in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20l2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


“I. That the aforesaid ID Case No.82/20I] is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
4947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2070) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 2070) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination service as specified in sub section I". 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise 
reply to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the 
question “whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20I] as per the provisions of section 
2A (2) of the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2].!2.200] is barred by the 
period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the 
claimant his services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial 
dispute u/s 2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three 
years, from the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


27. That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, /947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 
2079 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the 
permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the 
case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0/.2077, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble 
Tribunal for the adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman 
and the employers.” 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised 
by the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, 947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 287 October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 3"! February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 


820 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency of 
conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings and 
of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under:- 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and growing 
production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in production i.e. 
absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and are in a harmonious 
bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the vitality of industry. 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really caused by 
the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of labour struggle is 
nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied forms e.g. (a) increase in 
wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. 
A.D.Divelkar, AIR 957 SC 727) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement 
of industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece 
of social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. LTribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the 
amendments of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified 
categories of individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 82] 


not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after .2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 200 (Act No. 24 of 200), Section 2A(a), was renumbered 
as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) have been 
inserted after Section 2A (l) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.20I0, which 
reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


"(l) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and 
his employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 70, any such workman as is specified 
in sub-Section(!) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the 
date he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate 
Government for conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the 
Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the 
dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply 
in relation to such adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section()." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that admittedly 
the services of applicant was terminated on 2.!2.200I, thereafter he has filed the present case before this 
Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 0I.03.20 on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is maintainable 
or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in ITC 
Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 304॥, relevant potion quoted as under: 


#॥9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an 
irresistible conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or 
the Tribunal as the case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the 
date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in 
sub-Section (4). 7 Time limit for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub- 
Section (3) of Section 2A does not appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) 
of Section 2A. In any event right conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding 
the date of expiry of three years from the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same 
cannot be condoned by taking recourse to Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no 
application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, /947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, 
the same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS 
SITARAM AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is 
ambiguous. It is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it 
cannot change the texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or 
intention when the language of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or 
subtract the words to a statute or read something into it which is not there. It cannot re- 
write or recast legislation. It is also necessary to determine that there exists a 
presumption that the legislature has not used any superfluous words. It is well settled 
that the real intention of legislature must be gathered from the language used." 


822 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to 
supra, when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that 
the period of limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as 
directory, then it would not have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used 
the words "at any time" instead of using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the 
words at any time’ is found in Section 7007), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of 
Section 2A which would clearly depict the intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately 
imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A and as such legislature did not 
employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as found in Section 700) and in its place, it 
has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of three years’. Hence, to interpret the 
period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as directory and not mandatory would 
amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision by the legislature or it would 
amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/209 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for 
adjudication of the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub- 
section (3) provides that the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of 
three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified. 


&. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to 
the petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same 
would have no application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the 
provision under which the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the 
Act, itself was introduced by the amendment Act of 20709 alongwith the limitation therein and 
therefore, the provision of limitation which was introduced in the year 2079 alongwith the main 
provision providing for the limitation would apply with all force and the submission that the 
same would have no application to the cause of action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action 
has arisen post 2079, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 20709 
like in the year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would 
never become barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had 
approached the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no 
limitation and the petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the 
Conciliation Officer the claim could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not 
advance the cause of the petitioner, inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of 
the said position, if the Conciliation Officer had sent a failure report to the appropriate 
Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the Labour Court. Merely because the 
Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, which suggestion was accepted 
by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 709 of the Act to the Labour 
Court. 


409. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
MANU/TN/669I/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096./9.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As 
such, there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to 
entertain the application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the 
decisions of this Court in the following cases:- 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 823 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 03.03,2076 in W.P. 
No. 27579 of 205 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.094.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 964 of 2076 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated //.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 20I7 passed by the Madurai Bench of this 
Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 
20.09.20/9 in W.P. No. 8443 of 2049 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation 
must be excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days 
from the date of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require 
that the conciliation proceedings should have been completed before making that application 
under Section 2-A(2) of the Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the 
limitation has to be reckoned on the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The 
Petitioner in the instant case had made the application for conciliation on /2,94,2077 which had 
also concluded on 27.06.20I7, but the Petitioner had not approached the Labour Court after 45 
days either from 72,94,.2047 or even from 27.06.20I7. As such, the contentions made on behalf of 
the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.”’ 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. ॥/4/४०१९०५/८853//20 9 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (875) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (2) Ltd., (2003) 
2 SCC II], held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25. Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 


824 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”’. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court observed as 
under:- 


“9 It is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the view:- 


# 2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) 0 SCC 765 has held as under: 


/॥6, It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but 
it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to extend 
the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the 
same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor 
to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is never an 
evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from 
its operation." 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para 4 and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma!].) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200I, challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 0.03.20. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his 
termination, because his services were terminated on 2!.!2.200] and filed the present case on 0.03.20]] u/s 2A 
(2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, 
liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 897.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, 
स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर ; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 
4/97, विद्युत खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री नंद लाल, कामगार,के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 825 


89/20) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के 
साथ 29/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025-07-2023-443-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 897.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 89/20!]) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow ;M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Shri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, 4/97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Nand lal, Worker, 
which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 29/05/2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-3 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
Present: JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
LD. No. 89/20]] 


BETWEEN 
Nand Lal son of late Maiku Lal, Lavkush Nagar, 
A Block, Sector 22, Indira Nagar, Lucknow 
AND 
l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General 
Manager. 
2. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 
3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 


Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, /97, 
Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 


AWARD 


On 28.02.20l! the claimant/workman has filed the ID case No. 89/20l] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.[990 under Section 40 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 


826 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2.2.200]. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.2.200 by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than l00 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (ID, U.P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: !26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.200 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.200 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 
their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 200) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0!.20i, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare 
that the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 
24./2.2097 is neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to 
get reinstatement in service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages 
and other service benefits, in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20l2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 827 


ढ॥, That the aforesaid ID Case No.82/20I] is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
4947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2079) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 20790) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination service as specified in sub section I". 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise reply to 
the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the 
question “whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20I] as per the provisions of section 
2A (2) of the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.2.200] is barred by the 
period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the 
claimant his services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial 
dispute u/s 2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three 
years, from the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


Se That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, /947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2079 (No. 24 of 
20709) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 
27.07.2077, which was duly accepted by the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble Tribunal for the 
adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman and the employers.”’ 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised 
by the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 287 October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 3"! February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency 
of conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings 
and of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 


828 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under: - 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and growing 
production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in production i.e. 
absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and are in a harmonious 
bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the vitality of industry. 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really caused by 
the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of labour struggle is 
nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied forms e.g. (a) increase in 
wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. 
A.D.Divelkar, AIR 957 SC 2]) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement of 
industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece of 
social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. L.Tribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the amendments 
of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified categories of 
individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after |.2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 200), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (]) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 829 


#॥(7) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and 
his employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 709, any such workman as is specified 
in sub-Section(!) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the 
date he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate 
Government for conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the 
Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the 
dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply 
in relation to such adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section()." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2.2.200], thereafter he has filed the present case before 
this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20ll on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 304, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


४9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an 
irresistible conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or 
the Tribunal as the case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the 
date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in 
sub-Section (4). 7 Time limit for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub- 
Section (3) of Section 2A does not appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) 
of Section 2A. In any event right conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding 
the date of expiry of three years from the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same 
cannot be condoned by taking recourse to Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no 
application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, /947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, 
the same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS 
SITARAM AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is 
ambiguous. It is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it 
cannot change the texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or 
intention when the language of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or 
subtract the words to a statute or read something into it which is not there. It cannot re- 
write or recast legislation. It is also necessary to determine that there exists a 
presumption that the legislature has not used any superfluous words. It is well settled 
that the real intention of legislature must be gathered from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to 
supra, when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that 
the period of limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as 
directory, then it would not have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used 
the words "at any time" instead of using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the 
words at any time’ is found in Section /0(7), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of 
Section 2A which would clearly depict the intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately 
imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A and as such legislature did not 
employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as found in Section 707) and in its place, it 


830 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of three years’. Hence, to interpret the 
period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as directory and not mandatory would 
amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision by the legislature or it would 
amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/20l9 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for 
adjudication of the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub- 
section (3) provides that the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of 
three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified. 


5. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to 
the petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same 
would have no application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the 
provision under which the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the 
Act, itself was introduced by the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and 
therefore, the provision of limitation which was introduced in the year 2079 alongwith the main 
provision providing for the limitation would apply with all force and the submission that the 
same would have no application to the cause of action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action 
has arisen post 2079, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 20709 
like in the year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would 
never become barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had 
approached the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no 
limitation and the petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the 
Conciliation Officer the claim could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not 
advance the cause of the petitioner, inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of 
the said position, if the Conciliation Officer had sent a failure report to the appropriate 
Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the Labour Court. Merely because the 
Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, which suggestion was accepted 
by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 79 of the Act to the Labour 
Court. 


40. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 0/4/४0/779/6697/2020 
Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096./9.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As such, 
there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to entertain the 
application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the decisions of this 
Court in the following cases: - 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 03.03, 207/6 in W.P. No. 
275470 of 2073 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.04.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 2076 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated 7/.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 2047 passed by the Madurai Bench of this Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 20.09,20/9 in 
W.P. No. 8443 of 2049 passed by this Court) 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 83] 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation 
must be excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days 
from the date of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require 
that the conciliation proceedings should have been completed before making that application 
under Section 2-A(2) of the Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the 
limitation has to be reckoned on the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The 
Petitioner in the instant case had made the application for conciliation on 72,04,2077 which had 
also concluded on 27.06,.2077, but the Petitioner had not approached the Labour Court after 45 
days either from 72,94,2047 or even from 27.06.2077. As such, the contentions made on behalf of 
the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.”’ 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. MANU/RN/683I/209 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (8759) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (P) Ltd., (2003) 
2 SCC II], held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25. Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 
ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 
under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 
observed as under:- 


832 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


“9 It is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 
view:- 


# 2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) 0 SCC 765 has held as under: 


४॥6. It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party 
but it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to 
extend the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to 
the same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive 
factor to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is 
never an evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress 
resulting from its operation." 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para मर and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma!]!.) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200 and the same has been challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 
28.02.20II. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his 
termination, because his services were terminated on 2.!2.200] and filed the present case on 28.02.20I] u/s 2A 
(2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the 
Act, liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 

Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 898.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, 
स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर ; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 
4/97, विद्युत खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री खुशी राम, कामगार,के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 
84/204॥) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के 
साथ 29/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025-07-2023-424-आई आर (डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 898.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 84/20) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 833 


to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow ;M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Shri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, !/97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Khusi Ram, Worker, 
which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 29/05/2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-24 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 


PRESENT: Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
ID. No. 84/20I] 
BETWEEN 
Khusi Ram son of late Kanhai resident of 63/6], 
Ismailganj, Post Chinhat, Faizabad Raod, Lucknow. 


AND 
l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General 
Manager. 
2. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 
3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 


Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, 
Director Personnel, /97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 


AWARD 


On 20.05.20l! the claimant/workman has filed the ID case No. 84/20l] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.[990 under Section 40 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2.!2.200]. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.2.200 by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than 400 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


834 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: !26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.200 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.200 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 
their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 20l0) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0i.20ll, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, |947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare 
that the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 
24./2.2097 is neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to 
get reinstatement in service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages 
and other service benefits, in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20I2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


“I. That the aforesaid ID Case No.82/20I] is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
4947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2079) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 2079) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination service as specified in sub section I". 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise 
reply to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the 
question “whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20I] as per the provisions of section 


[भाग II—ve 3(ii)] भारत का UAT : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 835 


2A (2) of the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2].2.200] is barred by the 
period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the 
claimant his services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial 
dispute u/s 2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three 
years, from the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


27. That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, /947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 
20709 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the 
permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the 
case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.07.2077, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble 
Tribunal for the adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman 
and the employers.” 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised 
by the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28" October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 3 February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency of 
conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings and 
of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under:- 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and growing 
production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in production i.e. 
absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and are in a 
harmonious bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the vitality of 
industry. 


(i) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really 
caused by the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of 


836 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


labour struggle is nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied 
forms e.g. (a) increase in wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and 
benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. A.D.Divelkar, AIR 957 SC 727) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement 
of industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece 
of social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 7957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. L.Tribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the 
amendments of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified 
categories of individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after |.2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 20I0), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (l) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


#॥(7) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services 
of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer 
connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall 
be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of 
workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section /09, any such workman as is specified in sub- 
Section(l) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication of 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 837 


the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the date he has made the 
application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate Government for conciliation of the 
dispute, and in receipt of such application the Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and 
jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by the 
appropriate Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act and all the provisions of 
this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial 
dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section()." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2.2.200], thereafter he has filed the present case before 
this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 20.05.20ll on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 3047, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


“9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an 
irresistible conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or 
the Tribunal as the case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the 
date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in 
sub-Section (4). 7 Time limit for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub- 
Section (3) of Section 2A does not appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) 
of Section 2A. In any event right conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding 
the date of expiry of three years from the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same 
cannot be condoned by taking recourse to Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no 
application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, /947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, 
the same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS 
SITARAM AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is 
ambiguous. It is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it 
cannot change the texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or 
intention when the language of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or 
subtract the words to a statute or read something into it which is not there. It cannot re- 
write or recast legislation. It is also necessary to determine that there exists a 
presumption that the legislature has not used any superfluous words. It is well settled 
that the real intention of legislature must be gathered from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to 
supra, when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that 
the period of limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as 
directory, then it would not have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used 
the words "at any time" instead of using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the 
words at any time’ is found in Section /0(7), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of 
Section 2A which would clearly depict the intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately 
imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A and as such legislature did not 
employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as found in Section 70) and in its place, it 
has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of three years’. Hence, to interpret the 
period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as directory and not mandatory would 
amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision by the legislature or it would 
amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought to be made." 


838 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/209 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for 
adjudication of the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub- 
section (3) provides that the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of 
three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified. 


&. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to the 
petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same would have no 
application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the provision under which 
the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the Act, itself was introduced by 
the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and therefore, the provision of limitation 
which was introduced in the year 2070 alongwith the main provision providing for the limitation 
would apply with all force and the submission that the same would have no application to the cause of 
action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action has 
arisen post 2070, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 2070 like in the 
year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would never become 
barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had approached 
the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no limitation and the 
petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the Conciliation Officer the claim 
could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not advance the cause of the petitioner, 
inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of the said position, if the Conciliation Officer 
had sent a failure report to the appropriate Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the 
Labour Court. Merely because the Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, 
which suggestion was accepted by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 79 of 
the Act to the Labour Court. 


409. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
744/00/70/6697/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096./9.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As such, 
there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to entertain the 
application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the decisions of this 
Court in the following cases: - 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 03,03,2076 in W.P. No. 
275470 of 2073 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.04.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 20I6 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated 7/.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 2047 passed by the Madurai Bench of this Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 20.99, 2079 in 
W.P. No. 8473 of 2049 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation must be 
excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the Act 
contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days from the date 
of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require that the conciliation 
proceedings should have been completed before making that application under Section 2-A(2) of the 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 839 


Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the limitation has to be reckoned on 
the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The Petitioner in the instant case had made the 
application for conciliation on 72,04.2077 which had also concluded on 27.06.2077, but the Petitioner 
had not approached the Labour Court after 45 days either from 72.04.207/ or even from 27.06.20I7. 
As such, the contentions made on behalf of the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.” 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. ॥/4/४०१९०५/८853//20 9 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (8759) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 7954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
Statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (2) Ltd., (2003) 
2 SCC II], held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25. Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 
ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”’. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 
under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 
observed as under:- 


“9 Jt is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 
view:- 


840 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


# 2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) I0 SCC 765 has held as under: 


४॥6. It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but 
it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to extend 
the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the 
same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor 
to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is never an 
evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from 
its operation." 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para म and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma!].) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per the admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200I, challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 20.05.20. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his 
termination, because his services were terminated on 2!.!2.200] and filed the present case on 20.05.20I] u/s 2A 
(2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, 
liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 899.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 74) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स MS Fa, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, 
स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर ; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 
4/97, विद्युत खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री राम मनोहर, कामगार,के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के Gare (संदर्भ संख्या 
78/204॥) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के 
साथ 29/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025-07-2023-422-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 899.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 78/20) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow ;M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Shri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, /97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Ram 
Monohar,Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
29/05/2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-22 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 84] 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
Present: Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
ID. No. 78/20I] 
BETWEEN 


Ram Monohar resident of village Nurpur Behta, 
post Chinhat Police station Chinhat District Lucknow (now deceased) through 
Smt. Shiv Pyari wife of claimant. 


AND 
l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General 
Manager. 
2. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 
3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 


Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, 
Director Personnel, /97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 


AWARD 


On 28.02.20] the claimant/workman now has filed the ID case No. 78/20] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.[990 under Section !0 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2.2.200]. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.2.200 by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than l00 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (ID, U.P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


842 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.200 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.200 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 
their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0.20ll, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare 
that the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 
24./2.2097 is neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to 
get reinstatement in service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages 
and other service benefits, in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20l2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


“I. That the aforesaid ID Case No.82/20I] is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
4947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2079) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 20790) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination service as specified in sub section I". 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise 
reply to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the 
question “whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20I] as per the provisions of section 
2A (2) of the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.2.200] is barred by the 
period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the 
claimant his services were terminated on 2!.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial 
dispute u/s 2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three 
years, from the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 843 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


Dil That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2070 (No. 24 of 
20709) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 
27.07.2077, which was duly accepted by the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble Tribunal for the 
adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman and the employers.” 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised 
by the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28" October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 37 February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency 
of conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings 
and of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under:- 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and 
growing production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in 
production i.e. absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied 
and are in a harmonious bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the 
vitality of industry. 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really 
caused by the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of 
labour struggle is nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied 
forms e.g. (a) increase in wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and 
benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. A.D.Divelkar, AIR 7957 SC 2]) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement 
of industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece 
of social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 


844 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. LTribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the amendments of 
965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified categories of individual 
disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after .2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 20I0), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (l) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


#॥(7) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his 
employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 79, any such workman as is specified in 
sub-Section(]) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the date 
he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate Government for 
conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the Labour Court or Tribunal 
shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute, as if it were a dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they apply in 
relation to an industrial dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section()." 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 845 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2.2.200], thereafter he has filed the present case before 
this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20l! on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 3047, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


“9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an irresistible 
conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or the Tribunal as the 
case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, 
dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section (/). 7 Time limit 
for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A does not 
appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) of Section 2A. In any event right 
conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding the date of expiry of three years from 
the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the limitation of three years prescribed under 
sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same cannot be condoned by taking recourse to 
Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes 
Act, /94/. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, the 
same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS SITARAM 
AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is ambiguous. It 
is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it cannot change the 
texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or intention when the language 
of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or subtract the words to a statute or 
read something into it which is not there. It cannot re-write or recast legislation. It is also 
necessary to determine that there exists a presumption that the legislature has not used any 
superfluous words. It is well settled that the real intention of legislature must be gathered 
from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to supra, 
when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that the period of 
limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as directory, then it would not 
have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used the words "at any time" instead of 
using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the words at any time’ is found in Section 
4090), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of Section 2A which would clearly depict the 
intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) 
of Section 2A and as such legislature did not employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as 
found in Section 7004) and in its place, it has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of 
three years’. Hence, to interpret the period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as 
directory and not mandatory would amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision 
by the legislature or it would amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought 
to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/209 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for 
adjudication of the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub- 
section (3) provides that the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of 
three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified. 


&. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to the 
petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same would have no 
application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the provision under which 
the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the Act, itself was introduced by 
the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and therefore, the provision of limitation 
which was introduced in the year 2070 alongwith the main provision providing for the limitation 


846 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


would apply with all force and the submission that the same would have no application to the cause of 
action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action has 
arisen post 2070, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 2070 like in the 
year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would never become 
barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had approached 
the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no limitation and the 
petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the Conciliation Officer the claim 
could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not advance the cause of the petitioner, 
inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of the said position, if the Conciliation Officer 
had sent a failure report to the appropriate Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the 
Labour Court. Merely because the Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, 
which suggestion was accepted by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 79 of 
the Act to the Labour Court. 


409. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
744/00/7/3/6697/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
06./9.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As such, 
there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to entertain the 
application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the decisions of this 
Court in the following cases: - 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 93.09,.2076 in W.P. No. 
275470 of 20735 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.094.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 2076 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated 7/.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 2047 passed by the Madurai Bench of this Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 20.09,.2079 in 
W.P. No. 8473 of 2049 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation must be 
excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the Act 
contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days from the date 
of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require that the conciliation 
proceedings should have been completed before making that application under Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the limitation has to be reckoned on 
the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The Petitioner in the instant case had made the 
application for conciliation on 72,04.2077 which had also concluded on 27.06.20I7, but the Petitioner 
had not approached the Labour Court after 45 days either from 72,94,2077 or even from 27.06.20]7. 
As such, the contentions made on behalf of the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.” 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. ॥/4/४०१९०५/०53//20 9 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (68759) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 847 


Vindhya Pradesh AIR 7954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”’. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (2) Ltd., (2003) 
2 SCC I2], held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25; Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 
ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”’. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 
under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 
observed as under:- 


“9 Jt is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 
view:- 


# 2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) I0 SCC 765 has held as under: 


४॥6,. It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but 
it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to extend 
the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the 
same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor 
to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is never an 
evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from 
its operation." 


848 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para म and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma!]!.) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200I, challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 28.02.20I]. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman (now deceased) cannot derive any 
benefit from the facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date 
of his termination, because his services were terminated on 2.!2.200] and filed the present case on 28.02.20I] 
u/s 2A (2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the 
Act, liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, PRESIDING OFFICER 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 900.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 74) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, 
स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 
4/97, विद्युत खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री उदयभान सिंह, कामगार,के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट (संदर्भ 
संख्या 67/20(4) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट 
कॉपी के साथ 29/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025-07-2023-420-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 900.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 67/20) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow ;M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Shri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, !/97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Udai Bhan Singh, 
Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 29/05/2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-20 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT 
LUCKNOW 
Present: Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
ID. No. 67/20I] 


BETWEEN 


Udai Bhan Singh son of late Makrand Singh Ismailganj post Chinhat, 
Faizabad Raod, District Lucknow. 
AND 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 849 


l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General 
Manager. 

De General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 

3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 


Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, /97, 
Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 


AWARD 


On 28.02.20l! the claimant/workman has filed the ID case No. 67/20l] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.]990 under Section 40 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2.2.200I. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.!2.200l by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than !00 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.20l0 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


850 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.200 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 
their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0i.20ll, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare 
that the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 
24./2.2097 is neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to 
get reinstatement in service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages 
and other service benefits, in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20I2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


ढ॥, That the aforesaid ID Case No.82/20I] is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
4947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2079) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 2079) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination service as specified in sub section / 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise 
reply to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the 
question “whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20l] as per the provisions of section 
2A (2) of the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.2.200] is barred by the 
period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the 
claimant his services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial 
dispute u/s 2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three 
years, from the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


"DT That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 7947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 
2070 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the 
permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the 
case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0/.207, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble 
Tribunal for the adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman 
and the employers.” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 85] 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised 
by the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28" October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 37 February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency 
of conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings 
and of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under: - 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and 
growing production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in 
production i.e. absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and 
are in a harmonious bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the 
vitality of industry. 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really 
caused by the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of 
labour struggle is nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied 
forms e.g. (a) increase in wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and 
benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. A.D.Divelkar, AIR 7957 SC 727) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement 
of industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece 
of social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. I.Tribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 


852 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the 
amendments of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified 
categories of individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after |.2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 20I0), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (l) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


77) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his 
employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 709, any such workman as is specified in 
sub-Section(]) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the date 
he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate Government for 
conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the Labour Court or Tribunal 
shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute, as if it were a dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they apply in 
relation to an industrial dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section(!)." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2!.2.200], thereafter he has filed the present case before 
this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20ll on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 3047, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


#॥9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an irresistible 
conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or the Tribunal as the 
case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, 
dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section (/). 7 Time limit 
for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A does not 
appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) of Section 2A. In any event right 


[भाग II—ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 853 


conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding the date of expiry of three years from 
the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the limitation of three years prescribed under 
sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same cannot be condoned by taking recourse to 
Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes 
Act, /947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, the 
same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS SITARAM 
AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is ambiguous. It 
is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it cannot change the 
texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or intention when the language 
of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or subtract the words to a statute or 
read something into it which is not there. It cannot re-write or recast legislation. It is also 
necessary to determine that there exists a presumption that the legislature has not used any 
superfluous words. It is well settled that the real intention of legislature must be gathered 
from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to supra, 
when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that the period of 
limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as directory, then it would not 
have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used the words "at any time" instead of 
using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the words at any time’ is found in Section 
407), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of Section 2A which would clearly depict the 
intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) 
of Section 2A and as such legislature did not employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as 
found in Section /0(4) and in its place, it has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of 
three years’. Hence, to interpret the period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as 
directory and not mandatory would amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision 
by the legislature or it would amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought 
to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/209 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for adjudication of 
the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub-section (3) provides that 
the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of three years from the date of 
discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified. 


&. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to the 
petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same would have no 
application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the provision under which 
the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the Act, itself was introduced by 
the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and therefore, the provision of limitation 
which was introduced in the year 2070 alongwith the main provision providing for the limitation 
would apply with all force and the submission that the same would have no application to the cause of 
action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action has 
arisen post 2070, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 2070 like in the 
year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would never become 
barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had approached 
the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no limitation and the 
petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the Conciliation Officer the claim 
could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not advance the cause of the petitioner, 
inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of the said position, if the Conciliation Officer 
had sent a failure report to the appropriate Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the 
Labour Court. Merely because the Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, 


854 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


which suggestion was accepted by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 70 of 
the Act to the Labour Court. 


40. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
MANU/TN/669I/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096.4/09.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As 
such, there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to 
entertain the application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the 
decisions of this Court in the following cases: - 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 03,03,2076 in W.P. 
No. 27579 of 29735 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.094.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 20I6 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated //.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 2077 passed by the Madurai Bench of this 
Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 
20.09.20I9 in W.P. No. 843 of 209 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation 
must be excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days 
from the date of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require 
that the conciliation proceedings should have been completed before making that application 
under Section 2-A(2) of the Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the 
limitation has to be reckoned on the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The 
Petitioner in the instant case had made the application for conciliation on /2,94,2077 which had 
also concluded on 27.06.20I7, but the Petitioner had not approached the Labour Court after 45 
days either from 72,94,2047 or even from 27.06.2077. As such, the contentions made on behalf of 
the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.”’ 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. MANU/RN/683/20l9 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (8759) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 7954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 


[भाग II-—ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 855 


conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (2) Ltd., (2003) 


2 SCC II], held as under:- 


under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25. Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 
ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 


observed as under:- 


view:- 


“9 Jt is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 


“2. Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 


Acquisition Officer & another (2073) 70 SCC 765 has held as under: 


“T6. It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but 
it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to extend 
the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the 
same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor 
to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is never an 
evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from 
its operation." 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para / and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma!].) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position, the services of the workman was 


terminated on 2.2.200I, challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 28.02.20I] 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 


facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his 
termination, because his services were terminated on 2!.2.200] and filed the present case on 28.02.20I] u/s 2A 
(2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, 
liable to be rejected. 


856 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 90.—siterthiten विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार प्रबंध निदेशक ,स्कूटर इंडिया लिमिटेड, सरोजिनी नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री 
माता प्रसाद, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ 
के पंचाट (संदर्भ संखया 42/2074) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय 
सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 29/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[4. एल-42042/485/2042-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 90.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 42/204) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The Managing Director, Scooters India Limited , Sarojani Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Mata Prasad, Worker, 
which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 29/05/2023. 


[No. L- 4202/85/20 2-२ (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM-LABOUR COURT, LUCKNOW 
Present: Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
LD. No. 42/204 
Ref. No. L-4202/85/20I2-IR(DU) dated 2/26-05-204 
BETWEEN 
Mata Prasad, S/o Late Sh. Raghubir Singh, 


R/o H No. 570/669, Virat Nagar, Kasimpur Pathari, 
Alambag, Lucknow 


AND 


The Managing Director Scooters India Limited 
Sarojani Nagar, Lucknow. 
AWARD 


By order No. L-4202/85/20l2-IR(DU) dated 2/26-05-204 the Central Government in the Ministry 
of Labour, New Delhi in exercise of powers conferred by clause (d) of sub section (l) and sub section (2A) of 
Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 (4 of 947) referred this industrial dispute for adjudication with 
following schedule: 


“क्या कर्मकार श्री माता प्रसाद पुत्र स्व० रघुवीर सिंह को प्रबंध निदेशक, eed इंडिया लिमिटेड, 
सरोजनी नगर, लखनऊ द्वारा कर्मकार को दिनांक 22.02.4994 को नौकरी से स्वैच्छिक सेवा 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 857 


निवृत्त कर दिया जाना उचित एवं वैधानिक है? यदि नही तो कर्मकार क्‍या अनुतोष पाने का 
अधिकारी है?" 


On 0.09.204 the claimant has filed his claim petition, praying the following relief: 


“Wherefore, it is prayed that the illegal Voluntary Retirement is liable to 
party/employer be may set of the applicant-workman aside and the opposite kindly be 
directed reinstate applicant-workman on the post with consequential service/salary 
benefits and pay his arrears of salary within stipulated period with 2% interest, and/or 
pass such other order or direction, which this Hon'ble Tribunal may deem just and 
proper in the circumstances of the case. “ 


On 2.03.20!7 on behalf of respondent written statement (M-l!) has been filed; wherein an objection 
has been raised by the respondent that no dispute much less an industrial dispute can exist after about ॥7 years 
of taking voluntary retirement and no relief, if any can be granted to the applicant/workman. 


It has also been submitted that because the applicant/workman accepted the scheme of “Golden Shake 
Hand” by opting voluntary retirement and accepting all the benefits of it, therefore, there exists no dispute. 


In this regard respondent place reliance on a case which similar to the present case, where an employee 
has challenged for release on voluntary retirement before Hon’ble High Court, Lucknow vide Writ Petition no. 
65 of 994 Jagdish Chandra Nigam vs. Scooters India Limited, which was finally dismissed by Hon’ble High 
Court providing that after accepting all benefits under the VRS, the petitioner is not entitled to the reinstatement 
in service, as such, the VRS was Golden Hand Shake Scheme. 


Moreover, it has also been contended that voluntary retirement also does not come in the purview of 
retrenchment. 


On behalf of respondent it has also been argued that in the statement of claim, claimant has himself 
pleaded that he has submitted an application of Voluntary Retirement, voluntarily, no compulsion and no 
injustice was made to the applicant/workman in accepting his voluntary retirement and he was paid notice pay 
accordingly, as per Rule which govern his service condition, so, the present claim is not maintainable, liable to 
be dismissed. 


The claimant/workman did not file any rejoinder. 


Needless to mention that after filing of written statement several opportunities were granted to the 
workman to file rejoinder. 


Thereafter, by an order dated 04.2.208, passed by this Tribunal, the opportunity to the workman has 
been closed; and the matter is listed for argument. 


From perusal of the order sheet the position is emerged out that since 5.02.2020 the matter is listed for 
hearing and none is appeared on behalf of claimant. 


Moreover, on 24.02.203, when the matter is taken up in revised list neither the workman nor his legal 
representative has put his appearance. 


Accordingly, heard learned counsel for opposite party and perused the record. 


Taking into consideration, the above said facts as well as the fact that no oral/documentary evidence 
has been filed on behalf of the claimant to support his claim, as such, the adjudication case is liable to be 
dismissed. 


Because, Hon’ble High Court in the case of V. K. Raj Industries v. Labour Court (I) and others 7987 
(29) FLR 294 as under: 


“It is well settled that if a party challenges the legality of an order, the burden lies upon him to prove 
illegality of the order and if no evidence is produced the party invoking jurisdiction of the Court must 
fail. Whenever a workman raises a dispute challenging the validity of the termination of service if is 
imperative for him to file written statement before the Industrial Court setting out grounds on which 
the order is challenged and he must also produce evidence to prove his case. If the workman fails to 
appear or to file written statement or produce evidence, the dispute referred by the State Government 
cannot be answered in favour of the workman and he would not be entitled to any relief.” 


858 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In the case of M/s Uptron Powertronics Employees’ Union, iabad through its Secretary v. Presiding 
Officer, Labour Court (II), Ghaziabad and others 2008 (78) FLR 7764 Hon’ble Allahabad High Court has 
held as under: 


The law has been settled by the Apex Court in case of Shanker Chakravarti v. Britannia Biscuit Co. 
Ltd., V.K. Raj Industries v. Labour Court and Ors., Airtech Private Limited v. State of U.P. and Ors. 
4964 (49) FLR 38 and Meritech India Ltd. v. State of U.P. and Ors. 7996 FLR that in the absence of 
any evidence led by or on behalf of the workman the reference is bound to be answered by the court 
against the workman. In such a situation it is not necessary for the employers to lead any evidence at 
all. The obligation to lead evidence to establish an allegation made by a party is on the party making 
the allegation. The test would be, who would fail if no evidence is led.” 


Hon’ble Allahabad High Court in the case of District Administrative Committee, U.P. P.A.C.C.S.C. 
Services v. Secretary-cum-G.M. District Co-operative Bank Ltd. 2070 (726) FLR 579 has held as under: 


“The submission is that even if the petitioner failed to lead the evidence, burden was on the shoulders 
of the respondent to prove the termination order as illegal. He was required to lead evidence first 
which he failed. A perusal of the impugned award also does not show that any evidence either oral or 
documentary was led by the respondent. In the case of no evidence, the reference has to be dismissed.” 


For the foregoing reasons, the case is dismissed and; and the workman is not entitled for any relief. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 902.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 74) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, 
स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर ; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 
4/97, विद्युत खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री रामेश्वर, कामगार,के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 
75/204॥) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के 
साथ 29/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025-07-2023-448-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 902.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 75/20) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow ;M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Shri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, /97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Rameshwar, Worker, 
which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 29/05/2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023-8-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
PRESENT: Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
ID. No. 75/20I] 
BETWEEN 
Rameshwar son of Sri Dori Lal resident of village Rahimabad, 
post Chinhat District Lucknow 


[भाग II—ve 3(ii)] भारत का UAT : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 859 


AND 
l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General Manager. 
2, General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 
3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 


Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, /97, Vidyut 
Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 


AWARD 


On 28.02.20l! the claimant/workman has filed the ID case No. 75/20l] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.]990 under Section 40 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2.2.200]. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.2.200] by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than !00 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (ID, U.P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.20l0 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.200 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 


860 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 
their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlkement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0.20i, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare 
that the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 
24./2.2097 is neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to 
get reinstatement in service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages 
and other service benefits, in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20l2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


ढ॥, That the aforesaid ID Case No.82/20I] is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
4947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2079) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 2079) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination service as specified in sub section I". 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise 
reply to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the 
question “whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20I] as per the provisions of section 
2A (2) of the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.2.200] is barred by the 
period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the 
claimant his services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial 
dispute u/s 2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three 
years, from the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


“DH: That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, /१47 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2079 (No. 24 of 
2070) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional 
Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court 
on 27.04.2074, which was duly accepted by the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble Tribunal for 
the adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman and the employers.” 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised 
by the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 86] 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28" October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 3 February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency 
of conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings 
and of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under:- 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and 
growing production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in 
production i.e. absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied 
and are in a harmonious bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the 
vitality of industry. 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really 
caused by the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of 
labour struggle is nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied 
forms e.g. (a) increase in wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and 
benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. A.D.Divelkar, AIR 7957 SC 727) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement 
of industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece 
of social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. LTribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 


862 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the 
amendments of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified 
categories of individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after |.2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 200), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (]) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


#॥॥) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his 
employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 79, any such workman as is specified in 
sub-Section(]) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the date 
he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate Government for 
conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the Labour Court or Tribunal 
shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute, as if it were a dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they apply in 
relation to an industrial dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section(I)." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2.2.200I, thereafter he has filed the present case before 
this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20ll on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 3047, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


#॥9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an irresistible 
conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or the Tribunal as 
the case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, 
dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section (3). Time 
limit for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A does 
not appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) of Section 2A. In any event right 
conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding the date of expiry of three years from 
the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the limitation of three years prescribed under 
sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same cannot be condoned by taking recourse to 


[भाग II—ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 863 


Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 7963 which has no application to the provisions of Industrial 
Disputes Act, 7947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, the 
same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS SITARAM 
AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is ambiguous. 
It is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it cannot change 
the texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or intention when the 
language of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or subtract the words to a 
Statute or read something into it which is not there. It cannot re-write or recast legislation. 
It is also necessary to determine that there exists a presumption that the legislature has not 
used any superfluous words. It is well settled that the real intention of legislature must be 
gathered from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to 
supra, when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that 
the period of limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as 
directory, then it would not have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used 
the words "at any time" instead of using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the 
words at any time’ is found in Section 7007), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of 
Section 2A which would clearly depict the intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately 
imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A and as such legislature did not 
employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as found in Section 7004) and in its place, it 
has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of three years’. Hence, to interpret the 
period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as directory and not mandatory would 
amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision by the legislature or it would 
amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/209 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for 
adjudication of the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub- 
section (3) provides that the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of 
three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified. 


&. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to 
the petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same 
would have no application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the 
provision under which the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the 
Act, itself was introduced by the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and 
therefore, the provision of limitation which was introduced in the year 2079 alongwith the main 
provision providing for the limitation would apply with all force and the submission that the 
same would have no application to the cause of action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action 
has arisen post 2079, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 20709 
like in the year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would 
never become barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had 
approached the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no 
limitation and the petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the 
Conciliation Officer the claim could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not 
advance the cause of the petitioner, inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of 
the said position, if the Conciliation Officer had sent a failure report to the appropriate 
Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the Labour Court. Merely because the 
Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, which suggestion was accepted 


864 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 709 of the Act to the Labour 
Court. 


40. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
MANU/TN/669I/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096./9.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As 
such, there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to 
entertain the application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the 
decisions of this Court in the following cases: - 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 03.03, 2076 in W.P. 
No. 27579 of 205 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.094.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 2076 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated //.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 20I7 passed by the Madurai Bench of this 
Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 
20.09.20I9 in W.P. No. 843 of 209 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation 
must be excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days 
from the date of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require 
that the conciliation proceedings should have been completed before making that application 
under Section 2-A(2) of the Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the 
limitation has to be reckoned on the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The 
Petitioner in the instant case had made the application for conciliation on 72,04,.2077 which had 
also concluded on 27.06.20I7, but the Petitioner had not approached the Labour Court after 45 
days either from 72,94,2047 or even from 27.06.20I7. As such, the contentions made on behalf of 
the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.”’ 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. MANU/RN/683/20l9 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited’, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (8759) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 7954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 


[भाग II-—ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 865 


conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (2) Ltd., (2003) 
2 SCC I2], held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25. Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the language 
of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must ordinarily 
be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or modified 
unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 


उठ 


unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 
under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 

construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 

In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 
observed as under:- 


“9 Jt is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 

unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 

to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 

consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 

In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 
view:- 

# 2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 

of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 

resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 

Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) 70 SCC 765 has held as under: 

“T6. It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular 

party but it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no 

power to extend the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may 

cause hardship or inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce 

it giving full effect to the same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard 

but it is the law", stands attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, 

"inconvenience is not" a decisive factor to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result 

flowing from a statutory provision is never an evil. A court has no power to ignore that 

provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from its operation." 

(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para 4१ and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 

Prakash Sharma!].) 

Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200I, challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 28.02.20I. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his 
termination, because his services were terminated on 2.2.200] and filed the present case on 28.02.20I] u/s 2A 
(2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, 
liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 

Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 


866 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 903.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 74) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, स्वच्छता 
ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 7/97, विद्युत 
खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री तुन्नी लाल, कामगार,के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संखया 77/204) को जैसा कि 
अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 29/05/2023 को 
प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. Wa-42025-07-2023-77-areanz (डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 903.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 7/20) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow ;M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Shri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, !/97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Tunni Lal, Worker, 
which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 29/05/2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023-] | 7-२ (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
Present: Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
LD. No. 7/20]] 
BETWEEN 
Tunni Lal, son of late Malli Prasad, 


resident of Chinhat Post Chinhat, 
Faizabad Road, Lucknow 


AND 
l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General 
Manager. 
2, General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 
3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 


Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, /97, 
Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 


AWARD 


On 28.02.20l! the claimant/workman has filed the ID case No. 7!/20l] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 867 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.]990 under Section !0 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2!.2.200I. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.!2.200l by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than l00 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (ID, U.P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.200 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.20l0 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 
their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0i.20l, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, !947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


868 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare 
that the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 
24./2.20997 is neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to 
get reinstatement in service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages 
and other service benefits, in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20!2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


“I. That the aforesaid ID Case No.82/20I] is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
4947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 20709) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 2079) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination service as specified in sub section I". 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise 
reply to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the 
question “whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20l] as per the provisions of section 
2A (2) of the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.2.200] is barred by the 
period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the 
claimant his services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial 
dispute u/s 2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three 
years, from the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


“27. That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, /947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 
2070 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the 
permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the 
case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0/.207, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble 
Tribunal for the adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman 
and the employers.” 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised 
by the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


Ihave heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28" October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 37 February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 


[भाग II—ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 869 


such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency of 
conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings and 
of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under: - 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and growing 
production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in production i.e. 
absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and are in a harmonious 
bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the vitality of industry. 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really caused by 
the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of labour struggle is 
nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied forms e.g. (a) increase in 
wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. 
A.D.Divelkar, AIR 957 SC 2) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement of 
industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece of 
social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. LTribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the 
amendments of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified 
categories of individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 


870 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after |.2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 20I0), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (]) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


"(l) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and 
his employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 709, any such workman as is specified 
in sub-Section(!) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the 
date he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate 
Government for conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the 
Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the 
dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply 
in relation to such adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section()." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2!.2.200], thereafter he has filed the present case before 
this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20ll on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 3047, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


#॥9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an 
irresistible conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or 
the Tribunal as the case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the 
date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in 
sub-Section (4). 7 Time limit for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub- 
Section (3) of Section 2A does not appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) 
of Section 2A. In any event right conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding 
the date of expiry of three years from the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same 
cannot be condoned by taking recourse to Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no 
application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, /947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, 
the same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS 
SITARAM AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is 
ambiguous. It is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it 
cannot change the texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or 
intention when the language of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or 
subtract the words to a statute or read something into it which is not there. It cannot re- 
write or recast legislation. It is also necessary to determine that there exists a 
presumption that the legislature has not used any superfluous words. It is well settled 
that the real intention of legislature must be gathered from the language used." 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 87] 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to 
supra, when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that 
the period of limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as 
directory, then it would not have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used 
the words "at any time" instead of using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the 
words at any time’ is found in Section /0(7), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of 
Section 2A which would clearly depict the intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately 
imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A and as such legislature did not 
employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as found in Section 70) and in its place, it 
has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of three years’. Hence, to interpret the 
period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as directory and not mandatory would 
amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision by the legislature or it would 
amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/20I9 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for 
adjudication of the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub- 
section (3) provides that the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of 
three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified. 


&. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to 
the petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same 
would have no application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the 
provision under which the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the 
Act, itself was introduced by the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and 
therefore, the provision of limitation which was introduced in the year 2079 alongwith the main 
provision providing for the limitation would apply with all force and the submission that the 
same would have no application to the cause of action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action 
has arisen post 2079, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 20709 
like in the year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would 
never become barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had 
approached the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no 
limitation and the petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the 
Conciliation Officer the claim could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not 
advance the cause of the petitioner, inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of 
the said position, if the Conciliation Officer had sent a failure report to the appropriate 
Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the Labour Court. Merely because the 
Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, which suggestion was accepted 
by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 79 of the Act to the Labour 
Court. 


40. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
MANU/TN/669I/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096.79.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As 
such, there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to 
entertain the application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the 
decisions of this Court in the following cases: - 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 03.03, 207/6 in W.P. 
No. 27579 of 205 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


872 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.094.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 2076 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated //.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 20I7 passed by the Madurai Bench of this 
Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 
20.09.20I9 in W.P. No. 843 of 20l9 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation 
must be excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days 
from the date of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require 
that the conciliation proceedings should have been completed before making that application 
under Section 2-A(2) of the Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the 
limitation has to be reckoned on the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The 
Petitioner in the instant case had made the application for conciliation on 72,94,2077 which had 
also concluded on 27.06.2077, but the Petitioner had not approached the Labour Court after 45 
days either from 72,94,2047 or even from 27.06.2077. As such, the contentions made on behalf of 
the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.”’ 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. MANU/RN/683/209 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (879) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 7954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (2) Ltd., (2003) 
2 SCC II], held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25. Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 
ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 873 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 
under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 
observed as under:- 


“9 Jt is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 
view:- 


# 2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) I0 SCC 765 has held as under: 


४॥6. It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular 
party but it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no 
power to extend the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may 
cause hardship or inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce 
it giving full effect to the same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard 
but it is the law", stands attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, 
"inconvenience is not" a decisive factor to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result 
flowing from a statutory provision is never an evil. A court has no power to ignore that 
provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from its operation." 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para 4१ and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma!].) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200], challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 28.02.20I]. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his 
termination, because his services were terminated on 2.2.200] and filed the present case on 28.02.20I] u/s 2A 
(2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, 
liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 904.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, 
स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 
/97, विद्युत खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री राम सुंदर, कामगार,के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 


874 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


94/204) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के 
साथ 29/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., Weat-42025-07-2023- 5-arearz(STq)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 904.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 94/20) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow; M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Shri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, /97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Ram Sundar, 
Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 29/05/2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-5 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
Present: Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
ID. No. 94/20I] 
BETWEEN 
Ram Sundar son of late Hari Ram Kashyap, 


Village Emauna, Shrawasti, 
Police Station Shrawasti District Bahraich 


AND 
l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General 
Manager. 
2: General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 
3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 


Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, 
Director Personnel, /97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 


AWARD 


On 28.02.20l! the claimant/workman has filed the ID case No. 94/20I] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.[990 under Section 40 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 875 


the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2.2.200I. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.2.200 by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than l00 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (II), U-P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.200, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.200 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.200 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 
their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 20l0) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0!.20ll, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare that 
the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 27/./2.2097 is 
neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to get reinstatement in 
service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages and other service benefits, 
in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20l2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


“I. That the aforesaid ID Case ४०.62/20/4 is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act /947 
(as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2079) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 2A(3) of the 
ID Act (Amendment 2079) which is quoted as below: 


876 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or Tribunal 
before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise 
termination service as specified in sub section / 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise reply 
to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the question 
“whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20I] as per the provisions of section 2A (2) of the 
Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.2.200I is barred by the period of limitation 
as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the claimant his 
services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial dispute u/s 2A (2) of 
the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three years, from the date of 
retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A 
(3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


“27. That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, /947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2079 (No. 24 of 
20l0) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 
27.07.2077, which was duly accepted by the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble Tribunal for the 
adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman and the employers.” 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised by the 
learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 287 October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 3 February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency 
of conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings 
and of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under: - 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and growing 
production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in production i.e. 
absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and are in a harmonious 
bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the vitality of industry. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 877 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really caused by 
the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of labour struggle is 
nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied forms e.g. (a) increase in 
wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. 
A.D.Divelkar, AIR 957 SC 22) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement of 
industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece of 
social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. I.Tribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the amendments 
of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified categories of 
individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after |.!2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 200), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (l) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


#॥(7) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his 
employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


878 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 709, any such workman as is specified in 
sub-Section(]) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the date 
he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate Government for 
conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the Labour Court or Tribunal 
shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute, as if it were a dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they apply in 
relation to an industrial dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section(I)." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2!.!2.200I, thereafter he has filed the present case 
before this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20l on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 3047, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


#॥9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an irresistible 
conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or the Tribunal as the 
case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, 
dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section (२). 7 Time limit 
for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A does not 
appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) of Section 2A. In any event right 
conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding the date of expiry of three years from 
the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the limitation of three years prescribed under 
sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same cannot be condoned by taking recourse to 
Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes 
Act, /94/7. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, the 
same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS SITARAM 
AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is ambiguous. It 
is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it cannot change the 
texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or intention when the language 
of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or subtract the words to a statute or 
read something into it which is not there. It cannot re-write or recast legislation. It is also 
necessary to determine that there exists a presumption that the legislature has not used any 
superfluous words. It is well settled that the real intention of legislature must be gathered 
from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to supra, 
when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that the period of 
limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as directory, then it would not 
have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used the words "at any time" instead of 
using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the words at any time’ is found in Section 
4090), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of Section 2A which would clearly depict the 
intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) 
of Section 2A and as such legislature did not employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as 
found in Section 7097) and in its place, it has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of 
three years’. Hence, to interpret the period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as 
directory and not mandatory would amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision 
by the legislature or it would amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought 
to be made." 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 879 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/20I9 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for adjudication of 
the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub-section (3) provides that 
the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of three years from the date of 
discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified. 


8. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to the 
petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same would have no 
application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the provision under which 
the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the Act, itself was introduced by 
the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and therefore, the provision of limitation 
which was introduced in the year 2070 alongwith the main provision providing for the limitation 
would apply with all force and the submission that the same would have no application to the cause of 
action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action has 
arisen post 2070, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 2070 like in the 
year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would never become 
barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had approached 
the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no limitation and the 
petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the Conciliation Officer the claim 
could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not advance the cause of the petitioner, 
inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of the said position, if the Conciliation Officer 
had sent a failure report to the appropriate Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the 
Labour Court. Merely because the Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, 
which suggestion was accepted by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 709 of 
the Act to the Labour Court. 


409. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
MANU/TN/669/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096.49.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As such, 
there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to entertain the 
application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the decisions of this 
Court in the following cases:- 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 93.09,.2076 in W.P. No. 
2750 of 20I5 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.04.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 20I6 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated 7/.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 20I7 passed by the Madurai Bench of this Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 20.09, 20/9 in 
W.P. No. 8443 of 2049 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation must be 
excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the Act 
contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days from the date 
of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require that the conciliation 
proceedings should have been completed before making that application under Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the limitation has to be reckoned on 
the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The Petitioner in the instant case had made the 


880 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


application for conciliation on 72,04.2077 which had also concluded on 27.06.2077, but the Petitioner 
had not approached the Labour Court after 45 days either from 72,04.207/ or even from 27.06.20I7. 
As such, the contentions made on behalf of the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.”’ 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. MANU/RN/683/209 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (875) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 7954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad /999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
Statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (P) Ltd., (2003) 
2 SCC I2], held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25; Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 
ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 
under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 
observed as under:- 


“9 It is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 
view:- 


“2. Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 88] 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) 70 SCC 765 has held as under: 


/॥6. It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but 
it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to extend 
the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the 
same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor 
to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is never an 
evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from 
its operation." 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para / and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma!].) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200I, challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 28.02.20II. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his 
termination, because his services were terminated on 2!.2.200] and filed the present case on 28.02.20I] u/s 2A 
(2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, 
liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 905.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 74) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, स्वच्छता 
ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर ; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 4/97, विद्युत 
खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री शिव शरण, कामगार,के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 69/20I) को जैसा कि 
अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 29/05/2023 को 
प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., Weat-42025-07-2023-6- -आईआर(डीयू)| 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 905.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 69/20) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow ;M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah, Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Shri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, [/97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Shiv Sharan, 
Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 29/05/2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-6 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


882 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
Present: Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
ID. No. 69/20I] 
BETWEEN 
Shiv Sharan son of late Ram Kishun, 
Village Khajurgoan, Post Tindola, District Barabanki 


AND 
l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General 
Manager. 
2. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 
3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 


Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, [/97, 
Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 


AWARD 


On 28.02.20l! the claimant/workman has filed the ID case No. 69/20I! as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.]990 under Section 40 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2.2.200]. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.!2.200l by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than |00 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (ID, U.P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 883 


have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.20l0 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.200 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 
their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0!.20ll, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, |947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare 
that the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 
2/./2.2097 is neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to 
get reinstatement in service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages 
and other service benefits, in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20l2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


ढ॥, That the aforesaid ID Case No.82/20I] is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
4947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2070) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 2070) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination service as specified in sub section / 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise 
reply to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the 
question “whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20l] as per the provisions of section 
2A (2) of the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.2.200] is barred by the 
period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the 
claimant his services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial 
dispute u/s 2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three 
years, from the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


884 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


27. That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, /947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 
20709 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the 
permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the 
case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0/.207, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


26. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble 
Tribunal for the adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman 
and the employers.” 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised 
by the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28" October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 37 February |947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the 
pendency of conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation 
proceedings and of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under: - 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and 
growing production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in 
production i.e. absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and 
are in a harmonious bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the 
vitality of industry. 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really 
caused by the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of 
labour struggle is nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied 
forms e.g. (a) increase in wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and 
benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. A.D.Divelkar, AIR 7957 SC 72) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement of 
industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece of 
social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


[भाग II—ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 885 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. LTribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the 
amendments of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified 
categories of individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after |.2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 20I0), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (/) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


#॥(7) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his 
employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 79, any such workman as is specified in 
sub-Section(]) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the date 
he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate Government for 
conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the Labour Court or Tribunal 
shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute, as if it were a dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they apply in 
relation to an industrial dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section(!)." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2!.!2.200I, thereafter he has filed the present case 


886 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


before this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20I on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 304, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


#॥9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an irresistible 
conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or the Tribunal as 
the case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, 
dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section (4). Time 
limit for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A does 
not appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) of Section 2A. In any event right 
conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding the date of expiry of three years from 
the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the limitation of three years prescribed under 
sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same cannot be condoned by taking recourse to 
Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no application to the provisions of Industrial 
Disputes Act, /947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, the 
same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS SITARAM 
AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is ambiguous. 
It is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it cannot change 
the texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or intention when the 
language of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or subtract the words to a 
statute or read something into it which is not there. It cannot re-write or recast legislation. 
It is also necessary to determine that there exists a presumption that the legislature has not 
used any superfluous words. It is well settled that the real intention of legislature must be 
gathered from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to supra, 
when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that the period of 
limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as directory, then it would 
not have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used the words "at any time" 
instead of using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the words at any time’ is found 
in Section 70(4), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of Section 2A which would clearly 
depict the intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately imposed limitation period under 
sub-Section (3) of Section 2A and as such legislature did not employ the words at any time’ in the 
said provision as found in Section 70(4) and in its place, it has specifically incorporated the words 
before the expiry of three years’. Hence, to interpret the period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) 
of Section 2A as directory and not mandatory would amount to adding something which is not 
provided in the provision by the legislature or it would amount to doing violence to the provision, if 
such interpretation is sought to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/209 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for adjudication of 
the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub-section (3) provides that 
the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of three years from the date of 
discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified. 


8. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to the 
petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same would have no 
application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the provision under which 
the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the Act, itself was introduced by 
the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and therefore, the provision of limitation 
which was introduced in the year 2079 alongwith the main provision providing for the limitation 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 887 


would apply with all force and the submission that the same would have no application to the cause of 
action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action has 
arisen post 2070, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 2070 like in the 
year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would never become 
barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had approached 
the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no limitation and the 
petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the Conciliation Officer the claim 
could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not advance the cause of the petitioner, 
inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of the said position, if the Conciliation Officer 
had sent a failure report to the appropriate Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the 
Labour Court. Merely because the Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, 
which suggestion was accepted by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 709 of 
the Act to the Labour Court. 


409. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
MANU/TN/669I/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096.79.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As such, 
there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to entertain the 
application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the decisions of this 
Court in the following cases: - 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 03.03, 207/6 in W.P. No. 
275470 of 20I5 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.094.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 2076 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated 7/.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 2047 passed by the Madurai Bench of this Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 20.09. 20/9 in 
W.P. No. 8473 of 2049 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation must be 
excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the Act 
contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days from the date 
of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require that the conciliation 
proceedings should have been completed before making that application under Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the limitation has to be reckoned on 
the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The Petitioner in the instant case had made the 
application for conciliation on 72,04,.2077 which had also concluded on 27.06.2077, but the Petitioner 
had not approached the Labour Court after 45 days either from 72.04.204// or even from 27.06.20I7. 
As such, the contentions made on behalf of the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.”’ 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. ॥/4700/7५/6853//20/9 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (68759) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 7954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 


888 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 


Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (2) Ltd., (2003) 


2 SCC I2], held as under:- 


under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25. Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the language 
of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must ordinarily 
be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or modified 
unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 


observed as under:- 


view:- 


“9 It is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 


ढ॥2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 


Acquisition Officer & another (2073) 0 SCC 765 has held as under: 


४॥6. It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but 
it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to extend 
the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the 
same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor 
to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is never an 
evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from 
its operation." 


[भाग II-—ve 3(ii)] भारत का UAT : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 889 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para उर्ब and Rohitash Kumar 
v. Om Prakash Sharma!I.) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200I, challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 28.02.20I]. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his 
termination, because his services were terminated on 2!.2.200] and filed the present case on 28.02.20I] u/s 2A 
(2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the 
Act, liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 906.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 74) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स Me Fa, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, 
स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर ; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 
(/97, विद्युत खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री शिव कुमार, कामगार,के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के Gare (संदर्भ संख्या 
85/204॥) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के 
साथ 29/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025-07-2023-444- -आईआर (डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 906.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 85/20) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow ; M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri 
Yogendra Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, 
through Shri Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, [/97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Shiv 
Kumar, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
29/05/2023. 


[No. L-42025-07-2023-4-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL—CUM-LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
Present: Justice ANIL KUMAR Presiding Officer 
LD. No. 85/20I] 


BETWEEN 
Shiv Kumar son of Sri Nanda, Ismailganj, Post Chinhat, Faizabad Road, Lucknow 
AND 
॥ Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General 
Manager. 


2. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 


890 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 
Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, 
Director Personnel, /97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 


AWARD 


On 28.02.20l! the claimant/workman has filed the ID case No. 85/20I] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.[990 under Section 40 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2.2.200I. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.2.200 by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than |00 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (ID, U.P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.20I0 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.200 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 89] 


their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 20l0) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0!.20ll, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare that 
the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 27./2.2097 is 
neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to get reinstatement in 
service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages and other service benefits, in 
the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20l2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


ढ॥ That the aforesaid ID Case No.82/20I] is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act /947 
(as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2079) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 2A(3) of the 
ID Act (Amendment 20790) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or Tribunal 
before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise 
termination service as specified in sub section 77. 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise reply 
to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the question 
“whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20I] as per the provisions of section 2A (2) of the 
Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.2.200] is barred by the period of limitation 
as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the claimant his 
services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial dispute u/s 2A (2) of 
the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three years, from the date of 
retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A 
(3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


‘27. That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, /947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2079 (No. 24 of 
20709) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 
27.07.20747, which was duly accepted by the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble Tribunal for the 
adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman and the employers.” 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised by the 
learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, 947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28" October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 370 February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


892 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency 
of conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings 
and of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under: - 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and growing 
production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in production i.e. 
absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and are in a harmonious 
bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the vitality of industry. 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really caused by 
the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of labour struggle is 
nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied forms e.g. (a) increase in 
wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. 
A.D.Divelkar, AIR 957 SC 2]) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement 
of industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece 
of social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. LTribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the 
amendments of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified 
categories of individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 893 


with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after |.2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 20I0), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (/) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


#॥(7) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his 
employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 79, any such workman as is specified in 
sub-Section(]) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the date 
he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate Government for 
conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the Labour Court or Tribunal 
shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute, as if it were a dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they apply in 
relation to an industrial dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section()." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2.2.200], thereafter he has filed the present case before 
this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20l! on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 3047, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


#॥9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an 
irresistible conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or 
the Tribunal as the case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the 
date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in 
sub-Section (4). 7 Time limit for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub- 
Section (3) of Section 2A does not appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) 
of Section 2A. In any event right conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding 
the date of expiry of three years from the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same 
cannot be condoned by taking recourse to Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no 
application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, /947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, the 
same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS SITARAM 
AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is ambiguous. It 
is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it cannot change the 
texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or intention when the language 


894 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or subtract the words to a statute or 
read something into it which is not there. It cannot re-write or recast legislation. It is also 
necessary to determine that there exists a presumption that the legislature has not used any 
superfluous words. It is well settled that the real intention of legislature must be gathered 
from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to supra, 
when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that the period of 
limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as directory, then it would not 
have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used the words "at any time" instead of 
using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the words at any time’ is found in Section 
4090), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of Section 2A which would clearly depict the 
intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) 
of Section 2A and as such legislature did not employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as 
found in Section 7004) and in its place, it has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of 
three years’. Hence, to interpret the period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as 
directory and not mandatory would amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision 
by the legislature or it would amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought 
to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/20I9 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for 
adjudication of the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub- 
section (3) provides that the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of 
three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified. 


5. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to 
the petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same 
would have no application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the 
provision under which the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the 
Act, itself was introduced by the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and 
therefore, the provision of limitation which was introduced in the year 2900 alongwith the main 
provision providing for the limitation would apply with all force and the submission that the 
same would have no application to the cause of action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action 
has arisen post 2079, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 20709 
like in the year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would 
never become barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had 
approached the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no 
limitation and the petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the 
Conciliation Officer the claim could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not 
advance the cause of the petitioner, inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of 
the said position, if the Conciliation Officer had sent a failure report to the appropriate 
Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the Labour Court. Merely because the 
Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, which suggestion was accepted 
by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 79 of the Act to the Labour 
Court. 


40. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
MANU/TN/669I/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096./9.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 895 


such, there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to 
entertain the application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the 
decisions of this Court in the following cases: - 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 03,03,.2076 in W.P. 
No. 27579 of 29735 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.04.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 206 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated //.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 2077 passed by the Madurai Bench of this 
Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 
20.09.20I9 in W.P. No. 8443 of 2049 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation 
must be excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days 
from the date of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require 
that the conciliation proceedings should have been completed before making that application 
under Section 2-A(2) of the Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the 
limitation has to be reckoned on the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The 
Petitioner in the instant case had made the application for conciliation on 72,094,2077 which had 
also concluded on 27.06,.2077, but the Petitioner had not approached the Labour Court after 45 
days either from 72,94,.2047 or even from 27.06.2077. As such, the contentions made on behalf of 
the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.” 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. MANU/RN/683I/209 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (8759 LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 7954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (2) Ltd., (2003) 
2 SCC I2], held as under:- 


896 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25. Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 
ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute ”. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 
under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 
observed as under:- 


“9 It is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 
view:- 


ढ#2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) 0 SCC 765 has held as under: 


/॥6, It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but 
it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to extend 
the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the 
same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor 
to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is never an 
evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from 
its operation." 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para म and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma!].) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200I, challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 28.02.20I]. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his 
termination, because his services were terminated on 2!.!2.200] and filed the present case on 28.02.20I] u/s 2A 
(2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, 
liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 897 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 907.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 ((947 का 44) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, 
स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर ; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 
4/97, विद्युत खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री हरि लाल, कामगार,के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट (संदर्भ 
संख्या 76/20(7) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट 
कॉपी के साथ 29/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025-07-2023-442-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 907.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 76/20) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow ;M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Shri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, !/97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Hari lal, Worker, 
which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 29/05/2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07/-2023-] |2-7२ (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
Present: Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
LD. No. 76/20I! 
BETWEEN 
Hari Lal, son of late Kallu, 


resident of village Nizampur Mallahaur, 
Post Chinhat, District, Lucknow. 


AND 
l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General 
Manager. 
25 General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 
3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 


Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, I/97, 
Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 
AWARD 


On 28.02.20l! the claimant/workman has filed the ID case No. 76/20l] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


898 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.[990 under Section 40 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2.2.200I. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.2.200 by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than |00 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (II), U-P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.200 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.200 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as 
Case No. LKO-8(2-32)/20l0: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics 
Limited and others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 
their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 20l0) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0i.20ll, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


[भाग II—ve 3(ii)] भारत का UAT : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 899 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare 
that the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 
2/./2.2097 is neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to 
get reinstatement in service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages 
and other service benefits, in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20l2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


“I. That the aforesaid ID Case No.82/20I] is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
4947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2079) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 2070) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination service as specified in sub section I". 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise 
reply to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the 
question “whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20I] as per the provisions of section 
2A (2) of the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.2.200] is barred by the 
period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the 
claimant his services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial 
dispute u/s 2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three 
years, from the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


27. That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, /947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 207/9 (No. 24 of 
20709) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 
27.07.2077, which was duly accepted by the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble Tribunal for the 
adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman and the employers.”’ 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised 
by the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28" October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 3 February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


900 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the 
pendency of conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation 
proceedings and of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under: - 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and growing 
production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in production i.e. 
absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and are in a harmonious 
bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the vitality of industry. 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really caused by 
the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of labour struggle is 
nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied forms e.g. (a) increase in 
wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. 
A.D.Divelkar, AIR I957 SC 2) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement of 
industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece of 
social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. L.Tribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the amendments 
of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified categories of 
individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after I.2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 90] 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 200), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (l) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


#॥(7) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his 
employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 79, any such workman as is specified in 
sub-Section(]) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the date 
he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate Government for 
conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the Labour Court or Tribunal 
shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute, as if it were a dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they apply in 
relation to an industrial dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section(!)." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2!.2.200], thereafter he has filed the present case before 
this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20ll on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 304, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


“9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an irresistible 
conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or the Tribunal as the 
case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, 
dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section (२). 7 Time limit 
for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A does not 
appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) of Section 2A. In any event right 
conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding the date of expiry of three years from 
the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the limitation of three years prescribed under 
sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same cannot be condoned by taking recourse to 
Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes 
Act, /947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, the 
same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS SITARAM 
AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is ambiguous. It 
is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it cannot change the 
texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or intention when the language 
of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or subtract the words to a statute or 
read something into it which is not there. It cannot re-write or recast legislation. It is also 
necessary to determine that there exists a presumption that the legislature has not used any 
superfluous words. It is well settled that the real intention of legislature must be gathered 
from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to supra, 
when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that the period of 
limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as directory, then it would not 


902 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used the words "at any time" instead of 
using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the words at any time’ is found in Section 
4090), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of Section 2A which would clearly depict the 
intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) 
of Section 2A and as such legislature did not employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as 
found in Section 7004) and in its place, it has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of 
three years’. Hence, to interpret the period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as 
directory and not mandatory would amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision 
by the legislature or it would amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought 
to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/209 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for adjudication of 
the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub-section (3) provides that 
the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of three years from the date of 
discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified. 


&. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to the 
petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same would have no 
application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the provision under which 
the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the Act, itself was introduced by 
the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and therefore, the provision of limitation 
which was introduced in the year 2079 alongwith the main provision providing for the limitation 
would apply with all force and the submission that the same would have no application to the cause of 
action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action has 
arisen post 2070, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 2070 like in the 
year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would never become 
barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had approached 
the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no limitation and the 
petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the Conciliation Officer the claim 
could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not advance the cause of the petitioner, 
inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of the said position, if the Conciliation Officer 
had sent a failure report to the appropriate Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the 
Labour Court. Merely because the Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, 
which suggestion was accepted by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 709 of 
the Act to the Labour Court. 


40. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
MANU/TN/669I/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096./9.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As such, 
there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to entertain the 
application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the decisions of this 
Court in the following cases: - 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 93.09,.2076 in W.P. No. 
275470 of 20:3 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.094.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 964 of 2076 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated 7/.094.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 2047 passed by the Madurai Bench of this Court) 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 903 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 20.99. 20/9 in 
W.P. No. 8443 of 2049 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation must be 
excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the Act 
contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days from the date 
of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require that the conciliation 
proceedings should have been completed before making that application under Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the limitation has to be reckoned on 
the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The Petitioner in the instant case had made the 
application for conciliation on 72.04.2077 which had also concluded on 27.06.2077, but the Petitioner 
had not approached the Labour Court after 45 days either from 72,04.2077 or even from 27.06.20I7. 
As such, the contentions made on behalf of the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.”’ 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. MANU/RN/683/209 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (68759) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 7954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
Statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 
said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (2) Ltd., (2003) 
2 SCC II], held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


29; Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 

language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 

ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 

modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 

unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”. 

In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 
under:- 

“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 

construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 

In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 
observed as under:- 


“9 Jt is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 


904 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 

consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 

In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 
view:- 

ढह2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 

of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 

resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 

Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) I0 SCC 765 has held as under: 

४॥6. It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but 

it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to extend 

the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 

inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the 

same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 

attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor 

to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is never an 

evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from 

its operation." 

(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para 4 and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 

Prakash Sharma!].) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200I, challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 28.02.20I]. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his 
termination, because his services were terminated on 2!.!2.200] and filed the present case on 28.02.20I] u/s 2A 
(2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the 
Act, liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 


Award as above. 
Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 908.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 74) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, 
स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर ; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 
4/97, विद्युत खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री रामू , कामगार,के बीच अनुबंध 
में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट (संदर्भ Awa 79/20) को 
जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
29/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025-07-2023-423-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 908.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 79/20) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow ;M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Shri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, [/97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Ramu, Worker, which 
was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 29/05/2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023- 23-7२ (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 905 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
Present: Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
I.D. No. 79/20I] 
BETWEEN 
Ramu, son of Sri Hazari Lal, village Ismailganj, 
Post Chinhat Faizabad Road, District Lucknow. 


AND 
l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General 
Manager. 
2. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 
3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 


Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 
Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, /97, 
Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 


AWARD 


On 28.02.20 the claimant/workman has filed the ID case No. 79/20I] as per the provisions of Section 
2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 24.04. 990 
under Section l0 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the recommendation of 
Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby 8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are regular or perennial 
in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2.2.200]. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.!2.200l by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than 400 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 


906 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (ID, U.P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.20l0 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.20i0 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for conciliation 
proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed their 
objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the parties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 200) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0!.20l, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare 
that the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 
24./2.2097 is neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to 
get reinstatement in service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages 
and other service benefits, in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.202 in which following preliminary 
objection was taken: 


“I. That the aforesaid ID Case No.82/20I] is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
4947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2079) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 2079) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or Tribunal 
before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise 
termination service as specified in sub section I". 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise 
reply to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the 
question “whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20l] as per the provisions of section 
2A (2) of the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.2.200] is barred by the 
period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the claimant 
his services were terminated on 2.2.200, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial dispute u/s 
2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three years, from 
the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of limitation as 
provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 907 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


“DT. That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, /947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2070 (No. 24 
of 2040) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional 
Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court 
on 27.07.20747, which was duly accepted by the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble Tribunal for 
the adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman and the employers.” 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised by 
the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute Act, 
947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28" October 946. After the Select Committee’s report on 37 February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for the 
prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of employers 
and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute apply 
for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award of a 
tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for such 
periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the entire 
conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency 
of conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings 
and of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under:- 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and growing 
production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in production i.e. 
absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and are in a harmonious 
bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the vitality of industry. 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really caused by 
the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of labour struggle is 
nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied forms e.g. (a) increase in 
wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. 
A.D.Divelkar, AIR 957 SC 22) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement 
of industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece 


908 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. IL.Tribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the 
amendments of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified 
categories of individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after |.2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 20I0), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (/) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


77) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and 
his employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 709, any such workman as is specified 
in sub-Section(!) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the 
date he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate 
Government for conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the 
Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the 
dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply 
in relation to such adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section()." 


[भाग II—ve 3(ii)] भारत का UAT : जून 3, 2023 ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 909 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2!.2.200], thereafter he has filed the present case before 
this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20ll on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 3047, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


#॥9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an 
irresistible conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or 
the Tribunal as the case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the 
date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in 
sub-Section (4). 7 Time limit for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub- 
Section (3) of Section 2A does not appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) 
of Section 2A. In any event right conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding 
the date of expiry of three years from the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same 
cannot be condoned by taking recourse to Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no 
application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, /947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, 
the same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS 
SITARAM AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is 
ambiguous. It is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it 
cannot change the texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or 
intention when the language of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or 
subtract the words to a statute or read something into it which is not there. It cannot re- 
write or recast legislation. It is also necessary to determine that there exists a 
presumption that the legislature has not used any superfluous words. It is well settled 
that the real intention of legislature must be gathered from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to 
supra, when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that 
the period of limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as 
directory, then it would not have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used 
the words "at any time" instead of using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the 
words at any time’ is found in Section 7007), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of 
Section 2A which would clearly depict the intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately 
imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A and as such legislature did not 
employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as found in Section 70) and in its place, it 
has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of three years’. Hence, to interpret the 
period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as directory and not mandatory would 
amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision by the legislature or it would 
amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/209 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for 
adjudication of the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub- 
section (3) provides that the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of 
three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified. 


&. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to 
the petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same 
would have no application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the 
provision under which the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the 
Act, itself was introduced by the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and 
therefore, the provision of limitation which was introduced in the year 2079 alongwith the main 


90 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


provision providing for the limitation would apply with all force and the submission that the 
same would have no application to the cause of action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action 
has arisen post 2079, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 20709 
like in the year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would 
never become barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had 
approached the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no 
limitation and the petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the 
Conciliation Officer the claim could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not 
advance the cause of the petitioner, inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of 
the said position, if the Conciliation Officer had sent a failure report to the appropriate 
Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the Labour Court. Merely because the 
Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, which suggestion was accepted 
by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 79 of the Act to the Labour 
Court. 


40. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. 
744/00/790/6697/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been 
made on 96.70.2074 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into 
force, the limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily 
apply. As such, there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in 
refusing to entertain the application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is 
supported by the decisions of this Court in the following cases: - 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 03,03,.2076 in W.P. 
No. 27579 of 29735 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.094.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 2076 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated //.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 20I7 passed by the Madurai Bench of this 
Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 
20.09.20I9 in W.P. No. 84॥3 of 20l9 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of 
conciliation must be excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2- 
A(2) of the Act contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 
45 days from the date of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not 
require that the conciliation proceedings should have been completed before making that 
application under Section 2-A(2) of the Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear 
enough that the limitation has to be reckoned on the expiry of three years from the date of 
termination. The Petitioner in the instant case had made the application for conciliation on 
42.94.2047 which had also concluded on 27.06.2077, but the Petitioner had not approached the 
Labour Court after 45 days either from 72.04.2077 or even from 27.06.2077. As such, the 
contentions made on behalf of the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.”’ 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. MANU/ RN/683/209 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 9l] 


proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (8759) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 7954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In 
matters of interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention 
to other words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. 
Every provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is 
said that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word 
while considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words 
are clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is 
clearly conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating 
the statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be 
gathered from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not 
been said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of 
words or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (P) Ltd., (2003) 2 
SCC 774, held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25. Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 
ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”’. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 
under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 
observed as under:- 


“9 Jt is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 
view:- 


# 2, Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled 
principles of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then 
try to resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) 0 SCC 765 has held as under: 


४॥6, It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a 
particular party but it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The 
court has no power to extend the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory 
provision may cause hardship or inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no 
choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which 


92 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands attracted in such a situation. It has consistently 
been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor to be considered while interpreting a 
statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is never an evil. A court has no power to 
ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from its operation." 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para 4 and Rohitash Kumar 
v. Om Prakash Sharma!I.) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200I, challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 28.02.20I] 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his 
termination, because his services were terminated on 2!.!2.200] and filed the present case on 28.02.20I] u/s 2A 
(2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, 
liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per section 
2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before appropriate 
forum as per law. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 
का.आ. 909.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947(4947 का 44) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, कोरवा डिवीजन, कोरवा, अमेठी, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध 
नियोजकों और महासचिव, हिन्द मजदूर सभा, आर्य नगर, लखनऊ (उ.प्र.), के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार 
औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 05/202) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में 
दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 27/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 
[सं. एल-42044/400/2024-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 909.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 05/202) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd., Korwa Division, Korwa, Amethi, and The 
General Secretary, Hind Mazdoor Sabha, Arya Nagar, Lucknow ( U.P), which was received along with soft 
copy of the award by the Central Government on 27/05/2023. 


[No. L- 420 [/00/202 -२ (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT, LUCKNOW 
Present: Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
ILD. No. 05/202] 
Ref. No. L-420/00/202-IR(DU) dated 30..202] 
BETWEEN 
The General Secretary, Hind Mazdoor Sabha, UP 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 93 


25/28, Union Bhawan, Arya Nagar, Lucknow — 26004. 
AND 


The General Manager 
Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd., Korwa Division 
Korwa, Amethi -227405. 


AWARD 


By order No. L-420I/l00/202i-IR(DU) dated 30..202l the present industrial dispute has been 
referred for adjudication to this Tribunal in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (d) of sub-section (l) and 
sub-section (2A) of Section !0 the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947) by the Central Government, with 
following schedule: 


“Whether the issue raised by Hind Mazdoor Sabha, UP vide letter dated 27.02.208 
and 7.2.2020 against the management of HAL, Korwa that employment of direct 
casual workers are being shifted under various contractors is proper, legal and 
justified? If yes, to what reliefs the concerned workers are entitled to and what 
other direction(s), if any, is necessary in this matter?” 


Accordingly, an industrial dispute No. l05/202 has been registered on 4.2.202]. 


From the perusal of record, the position which emerge out is that the till date the claimant/workmen’s 
union has not filed any statement of claim. 


Moreover, as a matter of fact and record, workmen’s union or its authorized representative has not 
turned up before this Tribunal nor has filed any statement of claim, till date. 


Findings & Conclusion: 


Taking into consideration the fact that till date no statement of claim has been filed by the 
claimant/workmen’s union in order to establish its claim as per the reference dated 30..202]. 


So in view of the said facts, as well as the law laid by the Hon’ble High Court in the case of V. K. Raj 
Industries v. Labour Court (I) and others 7/967 (29) FLR /94 as under: 


“It is well settled that if a party challenges the legality of an order, the burden lies upon him to prove 
illegality of the order and if no evidence is produced the party invoking jurisdiction of the Court must 
fail. Whenever a workman raises a dispute challenging the validity of the termination of service if is 
imperative for him to file written statement before the Industrial Court setting out grounds on which 
the order is challenged and he must also produce evidence to prove his case. If the workman fails to 
appear or to file written statement or produce evidence, the dispute referred by the State Government 
cannot be answered in favour of the workman and he would not be entitled to any relief.” 


In the case of M/s Uptron Powertronics Employees’ Union, Ghaziabad through its Secretary v. 
Presiding Officer, Labour Court (II), Ghaziabad and others 2008 (776) FLR 7764 Hon’ble Allahabad High 
Court has held as under: 


“The law has been settled by the Apex Court in case of Shanker Chakravarti v. Britannia Biscuit Co. 
Ltd., V.K. Raj Industries v. Labour Court and Ors., Airtech Private Limited v. State of U.P. and Ors. 
4964 (49) FLR 38 and Meritech India Ltd. v. State of U.P. and Ors. /996 FLR that in the absence of 
any evidence led by or on behalf of the workman the reference is bound to be answered by the court 
against the workman. In such a situation it is not necessary for the employers to lead any evidence at 
all. The obligation to lead evidence to establish an allegation made by a party is on the party making 
the allegation. The test would be, who would fail if no evidence is led.” 


And by the Hon’ble Allahabad High Court in the case of District Administrative Committee, U.P. 
P.A.C.C.S.C. Services v. Secretary-cum-G.M. District Co-operative Bank Ltd. 2079 (726) FLR 5/9, wherein it 
has been held as under: 


“The submission is that even if the petitioner failed to lead the evidence, burden was on the shoulders 
of the respondent to prove the termination order as illegal. He was required to lead evidence first 
which he failed. A perusal of the impugned award also does not show that any evidence either oral or 
documentary was led by the respondent. In the case of no evidence, the reference has to be dismissed.” 


94 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 
As the workmen’s union has not filed any statement of claim/oral/documentary evidence, so the present 
case is liable to be dismissed. 
For the foregoing reasons, the case is dismissed and; and the workman is not entitled for any relief. 
Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 940.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 74) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, लखनऊ; मैसर्स शाह बंधु, द्वारा श्री योगेंद्र प्रसाद शाह, 
स्वच्छता ठेकेदार, हरजेंद्र नगर, कानपुर ; मैसर्स ग्रुप-4 फैसिलिटी सर्विस, द्वारा श्री नवल कपूर, निदेशक कार्मिक, 
4/97, विद्युत खंड, गोमती नगर, लखनऊ, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री ननकाऊ सिंह, कामगार,के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, लखनऊ के Gare (संदर्भ संख्या 
66/204॥) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के 
साथ 29/05/2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025-07-2023-449-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 90.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 66/20!) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court—Lucknow, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow ;M/s Shah Bandhu, through Shri Yogendra 
Prasad Shah,Sanitation Contractor, Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur ; M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Shri 
Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, [/97, Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow, and Shri Nankau Singh, 
Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 29/05/2023. 


[No. L- 42025-07-2023-9-IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT LUCKNOW 
Present: Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 
ID. No. 66/20I] 


BETWEEN 
Nankau Singh son of late Mahaveer Singh, 
resident of Ismailganj, Post Chinhat, 
Faizabad Raod, District Lucknow 
AND 
l. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow through its General 
Manager. 
2. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division, Lucknow. 
3. M/s Shah Bandhu, through Sri Yogendra Prasad Shah, 


Sanitation Contractor, 504, Viman Nagar, G.T. Road. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 95 


Harjendra Nagar, Kanpur. 


4. M/s Group -4 Facilities Service, through Sri Nawal Kapoor, Director Personnel, /97, 
Vidyut Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 


AWARD 


On 28.02.20l! the claimant/workman has filed the ID case No. 66/20l] as per the provisions of 
Section 2A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). 


Facts of the case: 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Lucknow Division (hereinafter referred to as Establishment), is a 
factory registered under the provisions of the Factories Act, which is situated at Faizabad Road, Lucknow and 
the sanitation work of the premises of the Establishment as well as Plant and Machinery installed at the factory 
premises is a perennial as well regular nature of job. 


Establishment is an Engineering Industry and the Government has issued a notification dated 
24.04.[990 under Section !0 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 after the 
recommendation of Contract Labour Advisory Board, whereby |8 works of the Engineering Industry, which are 
regular or perennial in nature has been prohibited. 


However, it was the prevalent practice in establishment that they employed the contract labour for 
sanitation work of the establishment/premises despite the fact that the sanitation work was regular in nature; and 
the claimant/workman was working in the establishment right from the very beginning i.e. from the date, the 
factory was established and continuously worked till the date of termination i.e. 2.2.200I. 


As per the case workman order of termination dated 2.2.200 by which his services in an illegal and 
unjustified manner was terminated, inasmuch as in establishment of the employers there were more than l00 
workmen employed as such the compliance of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act was necessary but 
before terminating the services of the workmen, the employers have not complied with the provisions of Section 
25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act. 


Further, the services of the workman have been terminated by the principal employer not by the 
contractor and the work which were being performed by the concerned workman still exist with employers and 
the same is being carried out by employing new workmen on contract basis. 


In the claim petition it has been pleaded that earlier the workmen’s Union in Establishment i.e. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Karamchari Sabha, raised the dispute of the workman along with some other workmen 
before the State Government which, was referred for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal (II), U-P., 
Lucknow, registered before Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow as Adj. Case No.: 26 of 2002. 


However, on account of the fact that the workman along with some other workmen were not satisfied 
with the pairavi of the Union as such an authority letter was filed along with an application by 20 workmen 
amongst the concerned workman to represent the said case but the Union, filed objection that as applicants who 
have filed the application are not party in the said case as such they are not entitled to represent the case. By an 
order dated 0.03.20l0, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer held that the workmen are not satisfied with the 
proceedings through Union, they can raise separate dispute "under the provisions of Act. 


Thereafter, an application was filed by 36 workmen including the claimant/workman on 0.07.200 
before, the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow for deletion of the names of the 
workmen from the reference order so that they may be in position to raise fresh industrial dispute before the 
competent Forum and the Hon'ble Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (2), U.P., Lucknow after hearing the 
parties concerned was pleased to allow the said application except three whose names were not mentioned in 
reference order. 


In pursuance to order dated 20.07.200 the workman concerned along with 32 other workman filed an 
application before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow which was registered as Case No. 
LKO-8(2-32)/200: Laxmi Narain and 32 others Vs. General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and 
others. 


Thereafter, Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow, called upon the parties for 
conciliation proceedings and in pursuance thereof Hindustan Aeronautics Limited appeared before him and filed 


9I6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


their objections and due to the negative attitude of the employers, no settlement could be arrived between the 
patties. 


Since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 20l0 (No. 24 of 20l0) had been expired as 
such the concerned workman seek the permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow 
to withdraw the case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0!.20ll, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


In view of above said factual background the present case has been filed u/s 2A (2) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with following prayer: 


“WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare 
that the action of the management in terminating the services of workman with effect from 
24./2.2097 is neither legal nor justified and accordingly the workman concerned is entitled to 
get reinstatement in service together with entire consequential benefits including back wages 
and other service benefits, in the interest of justice.” 


On behalf the respondent written statement has been filed on 5.05.20l2 in which following 
preliminary objection was taken: 


“I. That the aforesaid ID Case ॥४०.52/2077 is not maintainable as per the provisions of ID Act 
947 (as mended by ID (Amendment) Act 2079) because the same is barred by limitation U/S 
2A(3) of the ID Act (Amendment 20790) which is quoted as below: 


2A(3) "the application referred to in sub section 2 shall be made to Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of 3 years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination service as specified in sub section I". 


In addition to the above said facts, the respondent in its written statement also given the parawise 
reply to the case as set up by the claimant in his statement of claim. 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari has submitted that before deciding the matter in question on merit, the 
question “whether the claim petition filed by the claimant on 28.02.20I] as per the provisions of section 
2A (2) of the Act, aggrieved by the order of termination/retrenchment dated 2.2.200] is barred by the 
period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act or not?” 


Sri Adarsh Jadghari in support of his argument submits, admittedly as per the case of the 
claimant his services were terminated on 2.2.200l, aggrieved by the same he filed present industrial 
dispute u/s 2A (2) of the Act; however, u/s 2A (3) of the Act the period of limitation is provided for three 
years, from the date of retrenchment/termination, so, the present claim petition is barred by the period of 
limitation as provided u/s 2A (3) of the Act, liable to be dismissed. 


Sri D.K. Gupta, learned counsel for claimant, rebutting the said contention has placed reliance as 
pleaded in the statement of claim and submits that in view of the facts as stated hereinabove especially in 
paragraph 27 & 28, which are quoted herein below: 


"DT That since the mandatory period i.e. 45 days as specified under Section 2- A (2) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, /947 (as amended by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 
2070 (No. 24 of 20I0) had been expired as such the concerned workman seek the 
permission from the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow to withdraw the 
case and to approach the Hon'ble Court on 27.0/.2077, which was duly accepted by the 
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Lucknow. 


28. That in pursuance thereof, the workman concerned approaching the Hon'ble 
Tribunal for the adjudication of the industrial disputes as prevalent between the workman 
and the employers.” 


The present claim petition filed u/s 2 (2) of the Act is maintainable and the arguments as raised 
by the learned counsel for respondent that same is barred by the period limitation is devoid of merit, be 
rejected. 


I have heard the learned counsel for parties and gone through the record. 


Before deciding the same it will be appropriate to go through aims and objects of Industrial Dispute 
Act, |947 in brief which are that Industrial Disputes Bill was introduced by the Government of India in the 


[भाग [avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 97 


Legislative Assembly on the 287 October 946., After the Select Committee’s report on 30 February 947, with 
some amendments, it was passed in March [947 and became the law from Ist April 947 repealing the Trade 
Disputes Act 929. 


While retaining most of the provisions of the earlier law, this Act introduced two new institutions for 
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; works committees consisting of representatives of 
employers and workers; and machinery for industrial adjudication. 


A reference to an industrial tribunal under this Act lies where both parties to any industrial dispute 
apply for such reference, and also where the appropriate Government considers it expedient so to do. An award 
of a tribunal has normally to be enforced by the Government and is binding on both parties to the dispute for 
such periods as may be specified, upto a maximum of one year. This Act seeks to give a new orientation to the 
entire conciliation machinery. 


Another important new feature of the Act is the prohibition of strikes and lockouts during the pendency 
of conciliation and adjudication proceedings of settlements reached in the course of conciliation proceedings 
and of awards of industrial tribunals declared binding by the appropriate government. 


Rules, orders or notifications requiring the larger industrial establishments to set up works committees 
were issued by the Government of India and most of the State Governments. 


Objectives: General 
The objectives of industrial relations and industrial disputes legislation, may be outlined as under:- 


(i) Industrial Peace: For prosperity of industry, it is necessary that there be a continuous and growing 
production which is only possible if (a) there are no interruptions and stoppages in production i.e. 
absence of disputes, and (b) if the various agencies of production are satisfied and are in a harmonious 
bent to work. In other words, industrial peace is very necessary for the vitality of industry. 


(ii) Economic Justice: All interruptions in production arising out of industrial dispute are really caused by 
the dissatisfaction of labour with their existing economic condition. The history of labour struggle is 
nothing but a continuous demand for fair return to labour expressed in varied forms e.g. (a) increase in 
wages, (b) resistance to decrease in wages, (c) grant of allowances and benefits etc.(Hariprasad Vs. 
A.D.Divelkar, AIR 957 SC 22) 


Social and economic justice which is the bedrock of our Constitution and economic organization also 
requires that any industrial relations or disputes legislation, to be effective remedial statute, must embrace not 
only law for regulation of labour relations with capital, process for channelizing collective bargaining methods 
for negotiation, mediation, conciliation and settlements of industrial conflict, but also a system for giving fair 
play and justice to labour and removal of economic injustice. 


The preamble of the Act states that its main object is to make provision for investigation and settlement of 
industrial disputes. Viewed in the above background, the Industrial Disputes Act 947 is a progressive piece of 
social legislation and is designed to settle the disputes on a new pattern known under the Act as adjudication 
machinery. The object of all labour legislation is to ensure fair wages and to prevent disputes so that production 
might not be adversely affected. (Banaras Ice Factory Ltd. Vs. Its Workmen, AIR 957 SC 67) 


The purpose of the Act is to provide machinery for a just and equitable settlement by adjudication, (G. 
Claridge and Company Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, AIR 95I Bombay 700) and amelioration of the 
conditions of workmen in industry. 


Individual and collective industrial disputes: Individual as well as collective disputes may ripen into 
industrial disputes. The true nature of an individual dispute is that it is a collective dispute. Though a dispute 
may at the inception be initiated by an individual, yet if it is taken up by the fellow-workers or a union, or a 
sufficient number of workers, it may assume the collective character and would become an industrial dispute. 
(Standard Vacum Oil Co. Errakulam Vs. L.Tribunal, Errakulam 952-II LLJ 62). A dispute which 
continues to retain its individual character cannot be regarded as an industrial dispute. This being the basic law, 
it is within the competence of the legislature to widen or narrow the coverage of an industrial dispute. The 
Industrial Disputes Act has also been amended to cover some individual disputes. It is not necessary that a 
majority should take an industrial dispute. It is sufficient if a substantial group of workmen take it up. When 
thus taken, it becomes an industrial or collective dispute. 


98 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Individual dispute an industrial dispute: The important amongst the above are however the amendments 
of 965. By the Act of 965, a new Section 2A has been added in Act whereby specified categories of 
individual disputes are also deemed to be industrial disputes. The section reads as under: 


“2A. Dismissal, etc of an individual workman to be deemed to be industrial dispute- 


Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected 
with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the 
dispute.” 


This amendment revives, impediment in the way of workman with the necessity that to make an 
industrial dispute it must be taken up or espoused by substantial section of the workmen or any union of those 
workmen and gives an individual workman a remedy for security of his service and indirectly freedom to join or 
not to join any union. Thus, individual disputes could be referred to Tribunal as per Section 2A after |.2.965. 
(National Productivity Council, 969-II LLJ 86). 


Thereafter, by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act 20l0 (Act No. 24 of 200), Section 2A(a), was 
renumbered as Sub-section (l) and by the same Act i.e. Act No.24 of 20l0 Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) 
have been inserted after Section 2A (l) of Industrial Dispute Act 947 which came into effect w.e.f. 5.09.200, 
which reads as under: 


"2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute - 


"(l) Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the 
services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and 
his employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other 
workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 709, any such workman as is specified 
in sub-Section(!) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from the 
date he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate 
Government for conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the 
Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the 
dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply 
in relation to such adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial dispute 
referred to it by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-Section(2) shall be made to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-Section()." 


Now the core question to be considered is that in view of the facts which are stated hereinabove, that 
admittedly the services of applicant was terminated on 2!.2.200], thereafter he has filed the present case before 
this Tribunal u/s 2A of the Act on 28.02.20ll on the grounds as taken by him in his claim petition, is 
maintainable or barred by the period of limitation as provided u/s 2A(3) of the Act. 


Answer to the said question find place in the judgment passed by Hon’ble the Karnataka High Court in 
ITC Infotech India Ltd. vs. Venkataramana Uppada ILR 2076 Karnataka 3047, relevant potion quoted as 
under: 


ढ“॥9, Keeping the above principles in mind, a reading of Section 2A(3) would lead to an 
irresistible conclusion that time stipulated for invoking the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or 
the Tribunal as the case may be, has to be necessarily "before the expiry of three years from the 
date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in 
sub-Section (३). 7 Time limit for making an application to the Labour Court stipulated in sub- 
Section (3) of Section 2A does not appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-Section (2) 
of Section 2A. In any event right conferred under Section 2A would lapse immediately preceding 
the date of expiry of three years from the date of dismissal, discharge etc.,. In other words, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A being mandatory, same 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 99 


cannot be condoned by taking recourse to Section 5 of the Limitation Act, /963 which has no 
application to the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, /947. 


20. It is well settled principle that if an act is required to be performed within a specified time, 
the same would primarily be mandatory. It has been held in the case of NAZIRUDDIN VS 
SITARAM AGARWAL reported in AIR 2003 SCW 908 to the following effect: 


"The Courts jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is 
ambiguous. It is well known that in a given case, the Court can iron out the fabric but it 
cannot change the texture of the fabric. It cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or 
intention when the language of provision is plain and unambiguous. It cannot add or 
subtract the words to a statute or read something into it which is not there. It cannot re- 
write or recast legislation. It is also necessary to determine that there exists a 
presumption that the legislature has not used any superfluous words. It is well settled 
that the real intention of legislature must be gathered from the language used." 


24. Thus, in the background of the dicta of the Apex Court in NAZIRUDDIN's case referred to 
supra, when Section 2A is perused, it would indicate that if the legislature really intended that 
the period of limitation provided in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A was to be construed as 
directory, then it would not have prescribed the limitation of three years and it would have used 
the words "at any time" instead of using the words "before the expiry of three years". Though the 
words at any time’ is found in Section 7007), same is conspicuously absent in sub-Section(3) of 
Section 2A which would clearly depict the intention of the legislature namely, it had deliberately 
imposed limitation period under sub-Section (3) of Section 2A and as such legislature did not 
employ the words at any time’ in the said provision as found in Section 7004) and in its place, it 
has specifically incorporated the words before the expiry of three years’. Hence, to interpret the 
period of limitation found in sub-Section (3) of Section 2A as directory and not mandatory would 
amount to adding something which is not provided in the provision by the legislature or it would 
amount to doing violence to the provision, if such interpretation is sought to be made." 


And Hon’ble Rajasthan High court in the case of Pankaj Swami vs. Rajasthan State Road Transport 
Corporation & ors. MANU/RH/I788/209 after taking into consideration the provisions of sedation 2A(2) & 
2A(3) of the Act held as under: 


“The provisions are explicit, wherein the workman can approach the Labour Court for 
adjudication of the dispute in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment etc., however, sub- 
section (3) provides that the application should be made to the Labour Court before the expiry of 
three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified. 


&. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the cause of action arose to 
the petitioner prior to introduction of the provision of limitation by sub-section (3) the same 
would have no application is concerned, the submission made is fallacious, inasmuch as, the 
provision under which the application has been filed by the petitioner i.e. section 2-A(2) of the 
Act, itself was introduced by the amendment Act of 2079 alongwith the limitation therein and 
therefore, the provision of limitation which was introduced in the year 2079 alongwith the main 
provision providing for the limitation would apply with all force and the submission that the 
same would have no application to the cause of action, which arose prior to 2007, has no basis. 


The submissions as made, if accepted, would result in circumstances where if the cause of action 
has arisen post 2079, the same would be barred, whereas the causes, which arose prior to 20709 
like in the year 2007 in the present case and the application is filed after 7 years, the same would 
never become barred by limitation, such a result is legally untenable. 


9. The submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that as the petitioner had 
approached the Conciliation Officer and had raised the dispute before him, where there was no 
limitation and the petitioner approached the Labour Court only as per the directions of the 
Conciliation Officer the claim could not be rejected by barred by limitation also does not 
advance the cause of the petitioner, inasmuch as, the petitioner could have taken advantage of 
the said position, if the Conciliation Officer had sent a failure report to the appropriate 
Government who in turn had referred the dispute to the Labour Court. Merely because the 
Conciliation Officer suggested approaching the Labour Court, which suggestion was accepted 
by the petitioner, cannot be termed as a reference under section 709 of the Act to the Labour 
Court. 


920 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


409. In view of the above discussion in so far as the rejection of the claim of the petitioner by the 
Labour Court being barred by limitation is concerned, the same cannot be faulted.” 


And in the case of Parthasarathy vs. Souther Pins and Products Pyt. Ltd. and Ors. 
MANU/TN/669I/2020 Hon’ble the High Court of Madras has held as under: 


“Inasmuch as the notice of termination of the Petitioner in the present case has been made on 
096.4/09.20/4 under Section 2-A(2) of the Act after the said amendment has come into force, the 
limitation of three years prescribed under Section 2-A(3) of the Act would necessarily apply. As 
such, there is no infirmity in the decision-making process of the Labour Court in refusing to 
entertain the application made by the Petitioner has time barred. This view is supported by the 
decisions of this Court in the following cases:- 


(i) ITC Infotech India Ltd. v. Venkataramana Uppada (Order dated 03.03.20I6 in W.P. 
No. 27579 of 29735 passed by the High Court of Karnataka) 


(ii) Management of Ashok Leyland v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court (Order dated 
43.94.2046 in W.P. Nos. 9640 and 9647 of 2076 passed by this Court) 


(iii) Ravi Kumar v. Management, Tamil Nadu State Road Transport Corporation (Order 
dated //.94.2077 in W.P. (MD) No. 4269 of 2077 passed by the Madurai Bench of this 
Court) 


(iv) K. Settu v. Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (Order dated 
209.99.20/9 in W.P. No. 843 of 209 passed by this Court) 


5. A feeble attempt is made on behalf of the Petitioner to suggest that the period of conciliation 
must be excluded while computing the limitation. It is, no doubt, true that Section 2-A(2) of the 
Act contemplates such application to be made to the Labour Court after the expiry of 45 days 
from the date of application to the Conciliation Officer is made. However, it does not require 
that the conciliation proceedings should have been completed before making that application 
under Section 2-A(2) of the Act. The words in Section 2-A(3) of the Act are clear enough that the 
limitation has to be reckoned on the expiry of three years from the date of termination. The 
Petitioner in the instant case had made the application for conciliation on /2,04.207/7 which had 
also concluded on 27.06.20I7, but the Petitioner had not approached the Labour Court after 45 
days either from 72,94,2047 or even from 27.06.2077. As such, the contentions made on behalf of 
the Petitioner cannot be countenanced.”’ 


(see also Kandasamy Spinning Mills Private Ltd. vs S. Palanisamy and Ors. ॥/4/४०१९०५/०53//204 9 


Thus, in view of above said fact, combined reading of section 2A (2) and 2A (3) of the Act, the legal 
position which emerge out is that if a workman is aggrieved by order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or 
otherwise termination, he may approach the Tribunal within a period three years from dated of passing of order. 


Taking into consideration, above said facts and positon of law as well that “if law provides a particular 
thing that all other modes or methods of doing that thing must be deemed to have been prohibited”, the said 
proposition of law is first held in the case of Tylor Vs. Tylor (68759) LR I ChD 426 and adopted later by the 
Judicial Committee in Nazir Ahmed Vs. King Emperor AIR 7936 PC 253 and thereafter by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in a series of judgments including those in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & another Vs. State of 
Vindhya Pradesh AIR 954 SC 322, State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 7964 SC 358, Chandra 
Kishore Jha Vs. Mahavir Prasad 7999 (8) SCC 266, Dhananjaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2007 (4) SCC 
9 and Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Essar Power Ltd. 2008 (4) SCC 755. 


In the case of Grasim Industries Ltd. Vs. Collector of Customs, Bombay, (2002) 4 SCC 297, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“No words or expressions used in any statute can be said to be redundant or superfluous. In matters of 
interpretation one should not concentrate too much on one word and pay too little attention to other 
words. No provision in the statute and no word in any section can be construed in isolation. Every 
provision and every word must be looked at generally and in the context in which it is used. It is said 
that every statute is an edict of the legislature. The elementary principle of interpreting any word while 
considering a statute is to gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature. Where the words are 
clear and there is no obscurity, and there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the Court to take upon itself the task of amending or alternating the 
Statutory provisions. Wherever the language is clear the intention of the legislature is to be gathered 
from the language used. While doing so what has been said in the statute as also what has not been 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 92 


said has to be noted. The construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words 
or which results in rejection of words has to be avoided”. 


Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (2) Ltd., (2003) 
2 SCC II], held as under:- 


“24. True meaning of a provision of law has to be determined on the basis of what provides by its 
clear language, with due regard to the scheme of law. 


25. Scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. In other words statutory enactments must 
ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no words shall be added, altered or 
modified unless it is plainly necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd, 
unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute”. 


In the case of Harshad S. Mehta Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 8 SCC 257, it has been held as 
under:- 


“There is no doubt that if the words are plain and simple and call for only one construction that 
construction is to be adopted whatever be its effect”. 


In the case of Union of India Vs. Hansoli Devo (2002) 7 SCC 273, Hon’ble the Supreme Court 
observed as under:- 


“9 Jt is a cardinal principle of construction of statute that when language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open 
to the courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more 
consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act.” 


In the case of Patango Kadam Vs. Prithviraj Sayajiro Yadav Deshmukh (2007) 3 SCC 594, took the 
view:- 


“2. Thus when there is an ambiguity in terms of a provision, one must look at well-settled principles 
of construction but it is not open to first to create an ambiguity which does not exist and then try to 
resolve the same by taking recourse to some general principle.” 


Also, Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Popat Bahiru Govardhane & others vs. Special Land 
Acquisition Officer & another (2073) 70 SCC 765 has held as under: 


/॥6. It is a settled legal proposition that law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but 
it has to be applied with all its rigour when the statute so prescribes. The court has no power to extend 
the period of limitation on equitable grounds. The statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to the 
same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently been held that, "inconvenience is not" a decisive factor 
to be considered while interpreting a statute. "A result flowing from a statutory provision is never an 
evil. A court has no power to ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a distress resulting from 
its operation." 


(See Martin Burn Ltd. v. Corpn. of Calcuttal0, AIR p. 535, para / and Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma!].) 


Reverting to the facts of the present case, as per admitted position, the services of the workman was 
terminated on 2.2.200I, challenged by him by filing the present industrial dispute on 28.02.20I. 


So, keeping in view the above said facts as well as that the workman cannot derive any benefit from the 
facts on which he has approached the Tribunal after expiry of period three years from the date of his 
termination, because his services were terminated on 2!.2.200] and filed the present case on 28.02.20I] u/s 2A 
(2) of the Act, as such, the claim petition is barred by the period of limitation provided u/s 2A (3) of the 
Act, liable to be rejected. 


Accordingly, the same is rejected on the ground that same is barred by period of limitation as per 
section 2A (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, with liberty to the claimant to pursue its case before 
appropriate forum as per law. 


Award as above. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 


922 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 9.—siterthra विवाद अधिनियम, 7947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार वृषभ अधिकारी संस्थान, द्वारा - मानद सचिव, द मॉल, दिल्‍ली छावनी, नई दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध 
नियोजकों और श्री विजय कुमार, कुमार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम 
न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 30/2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित 
करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 26.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, Wet-4072/09/208 -आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 

New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 
S.O. 9.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 30/209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court - IT New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Tarus Officer Institute, Through- Honarary Secretary, The mall, Delhi Cantonment, New Delhi and 


Shri Vijay Kumar,Worker,which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
26.05.2023. 


[No. L-402/09/20i8 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI. 
Present: Smt. PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 30/209 
Date of Passing Award- %‘ May, 2023 


Between: 


Sh. Vijay Kumar, 

S/o Late Shri Roop Ram, 

R/o House No. !67-A, Village- 

Jhareda, Delhi Canntt., Delhhi-l002 ..... Workman 


Versus 


Tarus Officer Institute, 

Through- Honarary Secretary, The mall, 

Delhi Cantonment, 

New Delhi !002. ... Management 
Appearances:- 


Shri Mohan Nair, Ld .A/R for the claimant. 
Shri Santosh Kumar Pandey, Ld. A/R for the management. 


AWARD 


The Government of India in Ministry of Labour & Employment has referred the present dispute existing 
between employer i.e. the management of Tarus Officer Institute, Through- Honarary Secretary, The mall, Delhi 
Cantonment, and its workman/claimant herein, under clause (d) of sub section (l)and sub section (2A) of 
section 0 of the Industrial Dispute Act 947 vide letter No. L-!402/09/208 (IR(DU)) dated 29.0.209 to 
this tribunal for adjudication to the following effect. 


“ Whether the action of management of Taurus Officers Institute in refusing Sh. Vijay 
Kumar S/o Sh. Roop Ram who was working on the post of waiter w.e.f. 989 on ad-hoc 
basis and made permanent w.e.f. 990 to resume his duties after being cured from illness 


[भाग वत--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 923 


w.e.f. 04/03/20ll even though letter of intimation dated 0/0/20l0 was given to the 
management is legal and justified? If yes, what relief is he entitled to and what direction 
are necessary in this respect?” 


As stated in the petition of claim the claimant was appointed as a waiter in the canteen of the 
management on ad-hoc basis in the year !989. He was made permanent in the year !990. When he was 
performing his duties to the satisfaction of the employer, fell ill on 09.08.20l0. being diagnosed with 
Tuberculosis, he was hospitalized and informed the said fact to the management over phone. Again the fact of 
his absence from duty on account of illness was duly intimated by him through a written intimation sent through 
a messenger. Receipt of the same was duly acknowledged by the management. After recovery from illness, the 
claimant on 05.03 20 reported for duty with the original medical certificate and fitness certificate issued on 
04.03.20lI. but he was not taken on duty and advised to come after one week as his service file need to be 
verified. Thereafter the claimant visited the office of the management on several occasions and received 
information that his service file is yet to be received. He was not allowed to join duty though he had fully 
recovered from illness. He was advised to meet the Honorary Secy of the establishment, who was a 
commanding officer. Having no other source, the claimant met the Honerary Secy, Col Prem Kumar and 
requested him to join duty. But he was not allowed. On the contrary, he was informed that the management is 
considering to initiate a court of inquiry against him and he will be intimated about the same. But intimation 
about inquiry was received. He was visiting the office of the management regularly till the year 206 and tried 
to represent the secy about his miserable condition and request to allow him to join duty. But all his efforts went 
in vain. Hence on 07.0.207, he made another representation to the management to allow him join his duty. 
But no reply was received. When the matter stood thus, he came to know about the Award passed by the CGIT 
Delhi in the ID No 33/20I] in which he was one of the claimants. In the said Award the Tribunal had directed 
for payment of appropriate wage and other benefits to the claimants. Thus the claimant made a representation to 
the management on 9.04.20!7 requesting to allow him to join duty and release the benefits as directed by the 
CGIT. Again the management did not respond and the claimant being wrongly advised, filed a case before the 
Hon,ble CAT, New Delhi seeking redress. But the Hon’ble CAT by order dt 30" May 207, passed in OA No 
866/207, gave liberty to the claimant to withdraw the application for want of jurisdiction and file the same 
before the appropriate authorities. The claimant thereafter raised the dispute before the Labour Commissioner, 
New Delhi. The attempts for conciliation failed and the appropriate Govt referred the matter to this Tribunal for 
adjudication in terms of the reference. In the claim petition filed, the claimant has made a prayer for a direction 
to the management to reinstate him in service granting continuity and release all other consequential benefits. 
Along with the claim petition, the claimant has filed copy of the medical certificate, fitness certificate, 
representations made to the management and the orders passed by the CGIT and CAT, New Delhi. 


Being noticed by this Tribunal, the management appeared and filed written statement denying the claim 
advanced by the claimant. But it has been admitted that the claimant was appointed as a waiter in the canteen of 
the Management in the year 989 but he was not made permanent in the year !990 as claimed by him. The 
management does not have any official record to justify the claim of the claimant. More over the claim is not 
maintainable as no demand notice was served on the management before filing the claim. No representation by 
the claimant was ever received by the management. It has been stated that a person when appointed on 
contractual basis is at liberty of leaving the employment at his wish.But in the written statement filed, no 
specific denial to the claim has been stated nor the management has filed any document to establish that the 
employment of the claimant in the year [989 was on contractual basis. However the management has denied to 
have received any representation from the claimant. Besides this the management has challenged the 
maintainability of the proceeding on the ground of limitation as the claim has been filed after a long delay. 


The claimant filed written replication to the written statement of the management stating that the he 
had sent two written representations dt 07.0.207 and 9.04.20!7, which was after the award passed by the 
Hon’ble CGIT. Copies of the representations have been placed on record. 


On these rival pleadings the following issues have been framed for adjudication. 
ISSUES 
l-whether the proceeding is maintainable? 


2-whether the Management had illegally prevented the workman from joining his duty from 
0I.0,200. 


3-what is the effect of that refusal and to what relief the claimant is entitled to. 


4- whether the claim is not maintainable being barred by limitation. 


924 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


The claimant examined himself as ५०४] and produced the documents like his prescription, medical 
certificate with the certificate of fitness, copies of the representations dt 0!.0.200, 07.0!.207 and 9.04 207. 
He has also filed the copy of the award passed by CGIT Delhi in ID No 33/20I] and the order passed by CAT 
New Delhi in OA No2954/2003. 


Similarly the management examined one of it’s officers who is currently working as the Asst Honorary 
Secy of Taurus Officers Institute. The witness has not produced any document referred to in WS .but a No of 
warning letters issued to the claimant between Sept 2008 to May 200 has been filed along with a rough 
calculation sheet showing the No of working days between January 2009 to Feb 200, the presence and absence 
of the workman for duty during that period. The documents have been produced by the witness for the 
Management as MW I/I(colly) At the out set of the argument the learned AR for the Management submitted 
that the claimant was engaged for work in the canteen of the management on contractual basis in the year 989. 
He had worked up to Feb 200. Being a contractual employee he himself stopped reporting for work and his 
service was neither terminated nor the management ever refused to take him on duty. More over, during his 
employment, he was very irregular in reporting for duty and on several occasions he was warned to mend his 
behavior, which is evident from the document marked as MWI/I colly. He also argued that the present 
proceeding , after such a long delay is barred by Limitation. 


The counter argument advanced by the claimant is that he was very regular for his duty and it is the 
first instance when he absented himself from duty for a long period on account of his illness. He also argued 
that the statute does not prescribe any period of limitation for reference of a dispute to the Tribunal in terms of 
the provision of sec l0() (d) of the ID Act unlike the time frame prescribed u/s 2A of the said Act. 


FINDINGS 
Issue nol&4 


The maintainability of the proceeding has been challenged by the management on the ground of 
limitation. It has been stated that the alleged termination of service happened in the year 200 and the dispute 
was raised by the claimant in the year 207 and reference by the Govt was made in the year 209. The learned 
AR for the management by pointing to the statement of the claimant recorder during cross examination pointed 
out that the claimant has admitted not to have raised any dispute during the intervening period between 20I0 to 
207. Hence the deliberate delay in raising the dispute dis entitles the claimant of the benefits prayed. 


But the pleading and evidence of the claimant clearly shows that he, for the refusal of the management 
to take him for duty made several oral and written representations to the management. He even once met the 
Honorary Secy of the establishment. 


The Claimant has also filed the copies of the representations made by him on 07.0!.20l7 and 
9.04.207 and the copy of the order passed in OA No 2954/2003, which shows that the claimant, after making 
representation to the person in authority was waiting for the outcome. Not only that he was also waiting for a 
favourable outcome in the case of the general demand raised by him and co workmen before the Hon’ble CAT. 
In his oral statement he has also stated that being wrongly advised he approached the Hon’ble CAT by filing OA 
00/866/207. The said proceeding was disposed of by order dt30™ May 20l7 as Annexure E_ issued to him 
by the Hon’ble CAT to approach the appropriate forum. This fact has not been disputed by the Management. 
Thus from the totality of the oral and documentary evidence it is amply clear that the claimant a person not so 
educated was waiting for a favorable decision by the management on his representation and later being mis 
advised filed a case before CAT and having withdrawn the same approached the conciliation officer leading to 
the present reference. Hence there was no deliberate delay on the part of the workman. More over the statute has 
not prescribed any time frame for reference u/s l0 of the Act unlike the period prescribed u/s 2A of the Act. 
Hence it is held that the proceeding is not barred by limitation. These two issues are accordingly answered in 
favour of the claimant. 


Issue No 2&3 


Before analyzing the evidence it is necessary to look into the facts admitted by both the parties. It is not 
disputed that the workman was appointed as a waiter in the canteen of the management in the year 989 on 
contractual basis and he continued to work till October 20l0. Where as the claimant has stated that his service 
was made permanent in the year 990, the management has denied the same in the WS. The claimant has not 
placed any document to prove that his service was made permanent in the year 990. It is also admitted by the 
parties that his last drawn salary was |,000/- per month. To support the fact the claimant has filed the copy of 
the Bank pass book. 


Now it is to be examined if the action of the management in not allowing the claimant to resume duty 
is legal and justified. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 925 


In his oral statement the claimant has stated that he fell ill on 09.0820l0 and was diagnosed with 
Tuberculosis and hospitalized. He gave intimation about the same over phone and again by writing sent through 
his messenger. The written intimation was received by the management. Personal copy of the intimation 
containing an endorsement of receipt has been filed by the claimant as WWI/l.management has simply denied 
this endorsement. But no evidence has been adduced to disprove the same. The claimant has filed documents on 
record to show that he was under treatment for Tuberculosis from 08.09. 200 to 04.03.20I.anddeclared fit to 
resume duty on 04.03.20I. The claimant has stated that he approached the management with the medical 
certificate requesting to allow him to join. But management made him to run to the office for a long period and 
ultimately refused his joining -hence he filed a case before the Hon’ble CAT. The management while examining 
the witness as ४७७४] has denied the said stand of the claimant. Very surprisingly, while examining ४७४] for 
the first time the management came up with a stand that the claimant was very irregular in his duty and for the 
same several warnings were issued to him. The documents supporting the statement were not filed with the WS 
nor the same was pleaded. Hence the veracity of those self serving documents can not be accepted to conclude 
that the claimant was an irregular person and had voluntarily absented himself from duty. This stand of the 
Management could have been accepted, had there been any document placed on record to show that on any 
occasion the claimant who was appointed on ad-hoc/ contractual basis was called to join duty forth with or any 
show cause notice was served on him. Merely because the workman during cross examination admitted about 
receipt of one show cause notice, it can not be accepted to justify the action of the management in not allowing 
him to join duty. It is worth mentioning that the management has chosen an officer to be the witness, who as per 
his own statement has joined the establishment in the year 202], whereas the dispute relates to the year 200. 
The witness has admitted that he has no knowledge if he claimant was working continuously from 989 to 200. 
He has admitted that no disciplinary action was taken against the claimant though he has stated that the witness 
voluntarily stopped reporting for work. The witness has admitted that no notice of termination or notice pay and 
termination compensation was paid to him. At least the management could have produced documents to show 
the nature and tenure of the appointment of the claimant. In absence of any documentary evidence, it is held that 
the claimant was working as a regular employee of the management as waiter and his service was illegally 
terminated in violation of the provisions of sec 25 F of the ID Act when for a situation beyond his control and 
on account of illness he remained absent from duty and was not allowed to rejoin duty after recovery amounting 
to dismissal from service. 


The claimant has all along pleaded and stated about his unemployment status. The law is well settled 
that the workman once discharges his primary burden of proving unemployment, the onus shifts on to the 
management to prove that the claimant has not been gainfully employed during the intervening period of loss of 
employment and legal proceedings. In this case the management has remained satisfied by pleading that an 
young person would not and can not remain unemployed for such a long period. 


Thus from the totality of the evidence it is concluded that the service of the claimant was illegally 
terminated by the management. Now it is to be decided, to what relief the claimant is entitled to. It is not 
disputed that the claimant had worked for the management for 2! long years , when his service was terminated 
by the management by not allowing him to join the duty. In the affidavit filed in this proceeding in the year 
209, he has described his age as 50 years and at present he must be 53 years old and has not attained the age of 
superannuation. The learned AR for the management during course of argument submitted that no identified 
post of waiter is available to accommodate the claimant if any order of re instatement is passed. On the other 
hand the learned AR for the claimant argued in favour of re instatement. 


In several pronouncements the Hon’ble SC have clearly held that when the termination of service is 
illegal for non compliance of the provisions of sec 25F of the ID Act, the most appropriate relief would be 
reinstatement. But the position changes if the said order is passed after a long delay and gap. In such situations 
the proper recourse is to compensate the workman with the loss suffered. 


In this case the termination was effected in the year 20I0 and this award is being passed after !3 years 
and the claimant is now 53 years old .considering the same it appears proper to allow compensation to the 
workman in lieu of re instatement. The Hon’ble SC in the case of Novatris India Ltd vs State of West Bengal 
and Others (2009) 3 SCC, have held that merely because the termination is held illegal, it would not justify 
automatic payment of back wages. For granting the back wages the court has to consider the employment status, 
length of service of the workman etc. In this case, the workman had worked in the establishment for more than 
20 years. No dispute has been raised with regard to his last drawn salary @!000/- per month. There is no 
evidence on record to believe that the workman has been gainfully employed. Considering all these aspects 
including the current age of the claimant, it is held proper to grant compensation to the claimant instead of a 
direction for reinstatement with back wages. The issues are accordingly answered. Hence ordered. 


926 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ORDER 


The claim be and the same is answered in favour of the workman/claimant. It is held that the service of the 
workman was illegally terminated by the Management in gross violation of the provisions of sec 25F of the ID 
Act. The workman since is aged about 53 years and there is a gap of about I] years between the termination 
and thi award, the management shall pay him a lumpsum amount of eight lakh in lieu of reinstatement with 
back wages. This amount shall be paid to the claimant within two months from the date of publication of the 
award without interest, failing which the amount shall carry interest @ 4% per annum from the date of accrual 
and till the payment is made. 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 7 
of the ID act 947. 


The reference is accordingly answered. 
Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 

का.आ. 942.— sirens विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार आयुक्त, पूर्वी दिल्‍ली नगर निगम, पटपड़गंज औद्योगिक क्षेत्र, शाहदरा, दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों 
और श्रीमती नरेश व 02 अन्य, द्वारा -एमसीडी जनरल मजदूर यूनियन , शाहजहाँ रोड, नई दिल्‍ली, के बीच अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 2(/2049) को 


जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
26.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, Wet-42072/203/208 -आईआर/(डीयू)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 92.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 27/209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court - वी New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The commissioner, East Delhi Muncipal Corporation, Patparganj Industrial Area, Shahdra, Delhi and 
Smt. Naresh & 02 Ors.,Through- MCD General Mazdoor Union, Shahjahan Road, New Delhi,, which was 
received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 26.05.2023. 


[No. L- 4202/203/208 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, NEW DELHI. 
Present: Smt. PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-Cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 2/209 
Date of Passing Award- 4/ May, 2023 
Between: 


Smt. Naresh & 02 Ors. 

As represented by MCD General Mazdoor Union, 

C/o Room No. 95, Jam Nagar House, 

Shahjahan Road, New Delhi-!00I] ...Workman 


Versus 


The commissioner 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 927 


East Delhi Muncipal Corporation, 

Udyog Sadan, Plot No. 49, 

Patparganj Industrial Area, 

Shahdra, Delhi-!0032 ... Management 


Appearances :- 


Shri B.K. Prasad, Ld .A/R for the claimant. 
Shri Arvind Kumar, Ld. A/R for the management. 


AWARD 


The Government of India in Ministry of Labour & Employment has referred the present dispute existing 
between employer i.e. the management of Tarus Officer Institute, Through- Honarary Secretary, The mall, Delhi 
Cantonment, and its workman/claimant herein, under clause (d) of sub section (l)and sub section (2A) of 
section |0 of the Industrial Dispute Act 947 vide letter No. L-4202/203/20l8 (R(DU)) dated 0.0.209 to 
this tribunal for adjudication to the following effect. 


“Whether the Smt. Naresh W/o Late Hira Lal, Smt. Rajesh Devi W/o Late Virendra 
Singh & Smt. Omwati w/o Late Sukhbir Singh are entitled for regular post of Mali 
w.e.f. 6.09.2009 with all consequential benefits including regular pay scale to each of 
the workmen instead of muster roll Mali? If yes, what directions are necessary in this 
respect?” 


It has been stated in the claim petition that the claimants of this proceeding are working under EDMC 
which came in to existence after trifurcation of MCD to EDMC,SDMC&NDMC. (now unified and merged by 
notification dtl9" May 202 ). They have been appointed as daily rated/ muster roll Malis on compassionate 
ground w. e. f. 6.09.2009, for the death of their husbands during service, who were the regular employees of 
the management. The appointment of the claimants on daily wage basis is illegal and they are entitled to be 
appointed on compassionate ground as regular employees and entitled to all the benefits available to the 
regular employees. Giving details of the employee status of their deceased husbands including the date of their 
death and post held at that time, the claimants have prayed for a direction to the management to appoint them 
as regular Malis w. e. f. 66.09.2009 with all consequential benefits and regular pay scale applicable to the 
said posts. 


It has been stated that the dispute was espoused by the union and raised before the conciliation 
officer. Though steps were taken for conciliation, the same failed and the appropriate Govt referred the dispute 
to this Tribunal for adjudication. Hence this proceeding. 


The management appeared and raised various objection including maintainability of the proceeding. 
It has been admitted that the husbands of the claimants through whom they are claiming compassionate 
appointment were the regular employees of the Management. It is true that on the death of a regular employee 
while in harness, one of the family member is entitled to compassionate appointment in a regular group C post 
subject to fulfillment of the prescribed criterion and availability of vacancy in the limited percentage as 
prescribed in the notification issued by DOP&T. the dependents of a regular employee who died in harness can 
apply for compassionate appointment which is limited to 5% of the annual direct Recruitment vacancies as 
decided by DOP&T. Thus, the compassionate appointment in all death cases can not be claimed as amatter of 
right and the same is regulated by the procedure and notification issued by the Govt. so far as the case of the 
claimants are concerned they have not been appointed on daily wage or on temporary Muster Roll as pleaded 
by them. The facts stated are misleading. In fact the claimants have been appointed on contract basis which is 
clearly evident from the documents filed. It is true that the dependants of a deceased employee has a right to 
apply for compassionate appointment against regular post as per the policy of the Govt. but the policy does not 
guarantee regular appointment to all such applicants which is limited to 5% of the regular vacancies created in 
a calendar year. Since good no of applications are received in a year for such compassionate appointment, the 
Management to obviate the difficulty and in order to help the family members of the deceased employee 
brought out a policy of it’s own to give appointment to one of the family member of the deceased employee on 
contractual basis which is to be renewed year after year, subject to the satisfactory performance. This scheme 
is independent of the compassionate appointment scheme of the Govt which is limited to 5% of the annual 
regular vacancies in group C cadre. The persons so appointed have no right to claim the status of regular 
employees. The management has also denied the claim for retrospective appointment on regular posts. Since 
the claimants have been granted contractual employment for want of vacancy under 5% quota, their claim is 
unjustified and liable to be dismissed. 


928 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


On these rival pleadings the following issues were framed for adjudication. 
ISSUES 
l-whether the proceeding is maintainable. 


2-whether the claimants appointed on compassionate ground as daily rated Muster Roll 
employeesare entitled to regular post of Mali w. e. f. 6.09.2009. 


3-to what other relief the claimants are entitled to. 


The claimants of the proceeding did not testify as witnesses. In stead the president of the MCD 
General Mazdoor Union who is the AR of the claimants too testified as WWI. He relied and filed few 
documents marked in a series of Ext WWI/l to WWI/4. Similarly the Administrative Officer of the 
management has been examined as MW]. He also produced the circulars issued by the management from time 
to time relating to implementation of compassionate appointment scheme as a welfare measure. The 
documents have been marked as MW ।/। TO 0४४७७ |/३. 


At the outset of the argument the learned AR for the management challenged the maintainability for 
want of espousal. He also argued that the entire claim is based upon misconceived facts and the claimants are 
asking for a relief as a matter of right. The management being a corporation is bound by Govt orders and 
circulars and can not travel beyond the same. No injustice was meted to the claimants at any point of time 
rather their interest was taken care of by giving them contractual appointments to save the family of the 
deceased employee from misery. The welfare scheme lunched by the management has well taken care of them 
and they have unjustifiably claimed appointment as regular employees. 


On the other hand the learned AR for the claimants argued that as per the order and notification of 
DOP&T, a family member of a regular employee, who dies while in service, is entitled to compassionate 
appointment as regular employee. In this case since the claimants have been given appointment on 
compassionate ground, can not be so appointed as daily rated muster roll employees. They should have been 
appointed as regular employees. The circular or any order issued by the management being opposed to the 
scheme framed by DOPT can not be given effect to. The Industrial adjudicator is empowered to interpret the 
said circular and grant appropriate relief to the claimants. He there by argued to reject the circular of the 
management and issue direction in terms of the compassionate appointment notification issued by the DOP&T. 


In view of the argument advanced, the short question which is required to be answered is if the 
claimants are entitled to be treated as regular employees with retrospective effect i.e from the date of their 
initial appointment. The admitted facts as per the pleadings of both the parties are that the husbands of the 
claimants through whom they are claiming compassionate appointment were the permanent and regular 
employees of the management and at the time of their death, they were working as permanent Malis. It is also 
admitted by both the parties that theclaimants have been appointed on compassionate ground since 6.09.2009. 
only dispute is that the claimants are describing the appointment on daily wage basis and the management 
while denying the same has stated that the appointment is on contractual basis. 


FINDINGS 
Issue No | 


The maintainability has been challenged by the management on the ground that the dispute is not an 
Industrial Dispute for want of espousal and the union representing the claimants is not the recognized Union of 
EDMC. But the witness for the claimants who is none but the president of MCD General Mazdoor Union, 
while giving evidence , proved the letter of espousal as ext १४५७४।/4 and added that the union in it’s meeting 
espoused the cause of the claimants and authorized him to represent the claimants. During course of argument 
the learned AR for the claimants also pointed out that before bi furcation of MCD, this union was the 
recognized union and continued to represent the workers even after tri furcation. Now that the MCD has again 
been unified, this union is the recognized union. This argument is accepted in absence of any other evidence 
adduced by the Management. The issue is answered in favour of the claimant. 


Issue No 2&3 


The grievance of the claimants is that, though they have been appointed in the management on 
compassionate ground after the death of their husbands, who were regular employees of the management, the 
later treated them unfairly by giving appointment as daily rated mustor roll employees in stead of regular 
employees. This is an unfair labour practice and stands contrary to the office memorandum dt 09/]0/998 and 
the Scheme for Compassionate Appointment under Central Government issued by the Ministry of Personnel, 
Public Grievance and Pension (DOP&T). Under this scheme, all the appointments are to be made against 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 929 


regular vacancies and persons so appointed are to be taken as regular employees of the establishment. Besides 
adducing oral evidence the claimants have filed the copy of the above mentioned scheme of DOP&T as ext 
१४५७४|/2 and the office order relating to the appointment of the claimants as ext ४४४७॥।/. 


The rival stand of the management in this regard is that the claimants were neither appointed under 
the scheme of compassionate appointment issued by DOP&T, nor their appointments are as daily rated Mustor 
Roll employees. While filing two circulars relating to the welfare scheme of the management to give support 
to the family of the deceased employees as ext MW [/3, the management has adduced evidence through MWl 
to say that the compassionate appointments are made as per the scheme of DOP&T. but the appointments are 
limited to 5% of the regular vacancies created for a calendar year. Hence all the applications received in a year 
can not be accommodated against the said 5%. Hence , as a welfare measure, the MCD has issued circular to 
give appointment to one of the family member of the deceased employee as daily wage workers and to 
consider their cases under the compassionate appointment scheme in phased manner subject to fulfillment of 
eligibility. This circular issued on !.0.2007 was later on modified by the circular dt l6.2.2008. under this 
new circular the appointment of the family member of the deceased employee is being made on contractual 
basis subject to renewal every year based upon the performance. 


The witness for the claimants during cross examination was confronted with these circulars. But the 
witness stated that the circulars stand contrary to the circular of DOP&T. when asked if the circular has been 
objected to by the Unions, he replied affirmatively, but no documents to that effect has been placed on record. 
There is also no evidence before this Tribunal to believe that the circular issued by the Management and 
marked as ext MW [/3 has been challenged by the unions in any proper court of Law. 


Admittedly the claimants are working as Malis in the establishment of the management. Their 
deceased husbands were the regular Malis and had died while in service. The office order of appointment filed 
by the claimants as WWI/Idt 6.09.2009, the date from which they are claiming regularization clearly shows 
that they have been appointed on contractual basis on compassionate ground and not as daily rated Mustor Roll 
employees as claimed by them. The oral evidence adduced by MW | shows that the claimants were appointed 
under the welfare measure taken by the management on compassionate ground with the sole intention of 
rendering support to the family of the deceased employee. The said appointment stands independent of the 
compassionate appointment scheme of DOPT. The management witness has also stated that the mechanism 
has been developed with a view to give respite and provide livelihood to the families of deceased employees as 
all the applicants can not be accommodated against the 5% vacancy as directed by DOPT. 


On a careful reading of the circulars dt I/l0/2007& 6/2 2008, it clearly appears that the 
appointment under the said circulars are independent of the scheme of DOPT. The evidence adduced by 
Management further reveals that from among the persons appointed on contractual basis the eligible persons 
are being appointed against the 5% regular vacancies in a phased manner subject to their eligibility. The other 
document filed by the management as MW [/] shows the procedure adopted in this regard. It also reveals that 
the candidature of the claimant Om wati was considered thrice and rejected being found unsuitable. The 
documents filed by the management further show that the appointments under the welfare mensure scheme 
were previously made on daily wage basis and now on contractual basis. 


The claimants as per their own document have been appointed don contractual basis and not as daily 
rated Mustor Roll Employees. 


The learned AR for the claimants forcefully argued that once the appointment is on compassionate 
ground the same should be against regular vacancies as directed by DOPT. While agreeing to the said 
guideline of DOPT, it is worth mentioning that these claimants were never appointed under the compassionate 
appointment scheme of DOPT , but as per the circular issued by the MCD management as a good gesture to 
provide support to the family of the deceased employee until their turn comes for regular appointment under 
the 5% quota of regular vacancy as directed by DOPT. It would be proper to mention that all the applications 
received in a year can not be considered by the management for compassionate appointment for the 5% 
restriction imposed by DOPT and the applicants like the claimants can not claim the same as a matter of right. 


In this case the evidence adduced by both the parties clearly proves that the claimants have been 
appointed on contractual basis by the management subject to renewal on year to year basis and their 
candidature is open for consideration under the scheme of DOPT. They can not misread their appointment as 
the appointment on compassionate ground under the scheme of DOPT and demand regularization. 


The learned AR for the claimants , during argument drew the attention of the Tribunal to the 
judgment of the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi passed in the case of Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Shri 
Rajesh (WPC No 2996/2009) and submitted that the Hon’ble court in that judgment have upheld the award 
passed by the Labour court directing the management to grant regular pay scale and all other consequential 


930 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : JUNE 3, 2023/JYAISHTHA 3, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


benefits to claimant appointed on compassionate ground. But the facts of the said case is distinguishable from 
the facts of the case in hand. In that case the compassionate appointment was made in the year 983, when the 
welfare measure circular of the MCD issued in 2007&2008 were not in existence and thus the appointment 
was treated to be one under the scheme of DOPT. But here the claimants having been appointed under welfare 
circular of 2008 issued by MCD, their appointment can not be held under the scheme of DOPT and thus no 
direction can be given to the management to treat them as regular employees and extend all the consequential 
benefits. This issue is answered against the claimants. Hence ordered. 


ORDER 


The reference be and the same is answered against the claimants. It is held that they are not entitled to 
the relief claimed in the claim petition. 


Send a copy of this award to the appropriate government for notification as required under section |7 
of the ID act 947. 


The reference is accordingly answered. 
Dictated & Corrected by me. 
PRANITA MOHANTY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 मई, 2023 


का.आ. 943.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार मुख्य महाप्रबंधक, ब्रिटिश इंडिया कॉर्पोरेशन लिमिटेड, कानपुर वूलेन Paes शाखा, सिविल लाइंस, कानपुर 
(यूपी); मुख्य महाप्रबंधक, भारत संचार निगम लिमिटेड, ललितपुर रोड, झांसी, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और 
श्री पति राम, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, कानपुर 
के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या (33/204) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, को प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय 
सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 24.05.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., Weat-400/44/2074-areare(e79)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30th May, 2023 


S.O. 9i3.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 ((4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 33/204) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court — Kanpur, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Chief General Manager, British India Corporation Ltd., Cawnpore Woolen Mills Branch, Civil 
Lines, Kanpur(U.P.) ; The Chief General Manager, Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited , Lalitpur Road,Jhansi, and 
Shri Pati Ram,Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
24.05.2023. 


[No. L-400/4/204 -IR (DU)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL—CUM-LABOUR COURT KANPUR 
Present: SOMA SHEKHAR JENA, HJS(Retd.) 
I.D.No. 33/204 
Ref.No.L-400] /4/20l4-IR(DU) dated: 30.09.204 
BETWEEN 

Shri Pati Ram S/O Shri Virkhe, 
Vill & PO-Uchiya, 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : जून 3, 2023/ ज्येष्ठ 3, 945 93] 


Datiya(M.P.)- 
AND 
l. The Chief General Manager, British India Corporation Ltd., 
Cawnpore Woolen Mills Branch, Civil Lines,Kanpur(U.P.)-20800]. 
2. The Chief General Manager, Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited , 
Lalitpur Road,Jhansi-28400]. 


AWARD 


This industrial dispute referred to this Tribunal for adjudication in Notification No.L-400/4/204- 
IR (DU) dated: 30.09.204 is stated in the schedule below:- 


“Whether the actions of the management of Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited, Jhansi 
in terminating the services of Shri Pati Ram S/O Shri Virkhe w.e.f. 0.0.995 is just 


and fair & legal? IF not, to what relief the workman concerned is entitled to?” 


After the notification was received in this Tribunal on behalf of the Claimant workman statement of 
claim was submitted before this Tribunal. In the statement of claim it was averred by the claimant workman that 
on 0I.0i.995 the job of the Claimant workman was terminated without compliance of the provisions 
mentioned in Section 25(F) of Industrial Dispute Act,l947(..D. Act). The claimant workman has prayed for 
declaration that termination of his job by O.P. management was illegal. Written statement has been filed by the 
O.P. (B.S.N.L.) Jhansi denying violation of any provision of the I.D. Act 947. O.P. has refuted employer 
servant relationship between the O.P. and the claimant workman Claimant workman has submitted rejoinder 
refuting the stand of O.P.This proceeding was fixed on the date 0.09.2l, 0..2l, 06.0i.22, 24.03.22, 
22.04.22, 0.05.22, 7.08.22 and on 20.0.22 but none appeared on behalf of the claimant workman side. 


The averments stated in the statement of claim and in rejoinder cannot be readas substantive evidence. 
From the above stated scenario it is presumable that the claimant workman is not interested in pursuing his case 


before this Tribunal. In such scenario, nil award is passed. 
Parties are left to bear their respective costs. 


SOMA SHEKHAR JENA, Presiding Officer 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-0064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-0054, mavoukumar 


