रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल०--(एन)04/0007/2003--26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


JN क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-06042026-271594 
CG-DL-E-06042026-271594 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


we 11] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, अप्रैल 06, 2026/85 16, 1948 (शक) 
No. 11] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, APRIL 06, 2026/CHAITRA 16, 1948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 6th April, 2026/Chaitra 16, 1948 (Saka) 


The Following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
6th April, 2026 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE 
(AMENDMENT) ACT, 2026 


NO. 6 OF 2026 
[6th April, 2026.] 


An Act further to amend the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 


India as follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code Short title and 
(Amendment) Act, 2026. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 


Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this 
Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall 
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Amendment of 
section 5. 


Amendment of 
section 7. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


2. In section 3 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act),— 


(a) after clause (27), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(27A) “registered valuer” shall have the same meaning as assigned 
to it under Chapter XVII of the Companies Act, 2013;’; 


(0) in clause (31), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified 
that the security interest shall exist only if it creates a right, title or 
interest or a claim to a property pursuant to an agreement or 
arrangement, by the act of two or more parties, and shall not include a 
security interest created merely by operation of any law for the time 
being in force;”; 


(c) after clause (3/), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(31A) “service provider” means an insolvency professional, 
insolvency professional agency, information utility, registered valuer 
and any person falling within the category of persons notified by the 
Central Government, for rendering services in relation to insolvency and 
bankruptcy processes under this Code and is registered with the Board;’. 


3. In section 5 of the principal Act,— 


(a) clause (2A) shall be re-numbered as clause (278) thereof and before 
clause (2B) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


‘(2A) “avoidance transaction” means a transaction as referred to in 
sections 43, 45, 49 and 50;’; 


(5) after clause (9), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(9A) “fraudulent or wrongful trading” means the fraudulent or 
wrongful trading as referred to in section 66;’; 


(c) in clause (1/), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that where multiple applications for initiation 
of the corporate insolvency resolution process in respect of a corporate 
debtor are pending before the Adjudicating Authority on the 
insolvency commencement date, the initiation date shall be the date on 
which the first such application was made before the Adjudicating 
Authority.”; 


(d) in clause (26), in the Explanation, for the words “merger, 
amalgamation and demerger”, the words “merger, amalgamation, demerger 
and sale of one or more assets of the corporate debtor through one or more 
plans proposed by one or more resolution applicants subject to such conditions 
as may be specified” shall be substituted; 


(e) in clause (28), after the words “owed by the corporate debtor” 
occurring at the end, the words 10 the members of the committee of creditors 
who are eligible to vote” shall be inserted. 


4. In section 7 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (4), the proviso shall be omitted; 


(6) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


31 of 2016. 


18 of 2013. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


“(5) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within fourteen days of the 
receipt of the application under sub-section (2), by an order— 


(a) admit the application, if it is satisfied that a default has 
occurred and the application under sub-section (2) is complete, and 
there is no disciplinary proceeding pending against the proposed 
resolution professional; or 


(5) reject the application, if it is satisfied that a default has 
not occurred or the application under sub-section (2) is incomplete 
or a disciplinary proceeding is pending against the proposed 
resolution professional: 


Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before 
rejecting the application under clause (b), give a notice to the 
applicant to rectify the defect in his application within seven days 
from the date of receipt of such notice from the Adjudicating 
Authority: 


Provided further that if the Adjudicating Authority has not 
passed an order under this sub-section within a period of fourteen 
days from the date of receipt of the application under 
sub-section (2), it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing. 


Explanation |—For the purposes of this sub-section, it is 
hereby clarified that where the requirements under clause (a) have 
been complied with, no other ground shall be considered to reject 
an application filed under this section. 


Explanation \.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
clarified that where a record of default in respect of a financial debt 
owed to a financial institution recorded with the information utility 
has been furnished along with the application filed by such 
financial institution under this section, such record shall be 
considered sufficient for the Adjudicating Authority to ascertain 
the existence of default under this section.” 


5. In section 9 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (3), in clause (e), for the words “such other 
information, as may be prescribed”, the words “any other information, as may 
be specified” shall be substituted; 


(8) in sub-section (5), after the existing proviso, the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided further that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed 
an order under this sub-section within a period of fourteen days from the 
date of receipt of application under sub-section (2), it shall record the 
reasons for such delay in writing.”. 


6. In section 10 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (3),— 


(i) in clause (a), for the words “for such period as may be 
specified;”, the words “and any other information, as may be specified; 
and” shall be substituted; 


(ii) clause (0) shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (4),— 


(i) in clause (a), the words “and no disciplinary proceeding is 
pending against the proposed resolution professional” shall be omitted; 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


Amendment of 
section 10. 


Amendment of 
section 11. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 12A. 


Withdrawal of 
application 
admitted under 
section 7, 9 

or 10. 


Amendment of 
section 14. 


Amendment of 
section 16. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(ii) in clause (5), the words “or any disciplinary proceeding is 
pending against the proposed resolution professional” shall be omitted; 


(iii) after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


“Provided further that if the Adjudicating Authority has not 
passed an order under this sub-section within a period of fourteen 
days from the date of receipt of the application under 
sub-section (2), it shall record the reasons for such delay in 
writing.” 


7. In section 11 of the principal Act, in clause (ba), after the words, figures 


and letter “under Chapter III-A”, the words, figures and letter “or Chapter IV-A” 
shall be inserted. 


8. For section 12A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“12A. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), the Adjudicating Authority may 
allow the withdrawal of an application admitted under section 7, 9 or 10, on 
an application made by the resolution professional, with the approval of ninety 
per cent. voting share of the committee of creditors in such manner as may be 
specified. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 
force, an application admitted under section 7, 9 or 10 shall not be 
withdrawn— 


(a) before the constitution of the committee of creditors under 
sub-section (/) of section 21; and 


(5) after the first invitation for submission of a resolution plan has 
been issued by the resolution professional. 


(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (/) 
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the application: 


Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order 
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing.”. 


9. In section 14 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words, brackets and figures 
“sub-sections (2) and (3), the words, brackets, figures and_ letter 
“sub-sections (2), (24) and (3)” shall be substituted; 


(5) in sub-section (3), in clause (0), the following Explanation shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


“Explanation —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified 
that the provisions of sub-section (/) shall also apply where the surety 
seeks to initiate or continue any action or proceedings against the 
corporate debtor pursuant to a contract of guarantee.” 


10. In section 16 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) Where the application for corporate insolvency resolution 
process is made by a financial creditor, the resolution professional, as 
proposed in the application under section 7, shall be appointed as the 
interim resolution professional, if no disciplinary proceedings are 
pending against him.”; 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(6) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


न (34) Where an application for the corporate insolvency 
resolution process is made under section 10, the Adjudicating Authority 
shall make a reference to the Board for the recommendation of an 
insolvency professional who may act as an interim resolution 
professional.”; 


(c) in sub-section (4), after the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (3)”, 
the words, brackets, figure and letter “or sub-section (3A), as the case may be,” 
shall be inserted. 


11. In section 18 of the principal Act, in clause (b),— 


(a) after the words “submitted by creditors to him”, the words “in such 
manner as may be specified” shall be inserted; 


(6) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified 
that the interim resolution professional, while collating the claims, 
shall verify them, and, if required, determine the value of such 
verified claims.”. 


12. In section 19 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “Personnel”, the word 
“Persons” shall be substituted; 


(b) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(1) Any person who is or has been a personnel of the corporate 
debtor or its promoter or associated with the management of the 
corporate debtor, or engaged in a contract for service with the corporate 
debtor, shall extend all assistance and cooperation to the interim 
resolution professional as may be required by him for the purposes of 
managing the affairs of the corporate debtor or performing the duties 
conferred on him under this Chapter.”’; 


(c) in sub-section (2), for the words “any personnel of the corporate 
debtor, its promoter”, the words, brackets and figure “any person referred to 
in sub-section (/)” shall be substituted; 


(d) in sub-section (3)— 


(i) for the words “direct such personnel”, the words, brackets and 
figure “direct such person referred to in sub-section (/)” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) for the words “resolution professional”, the words “interim 
resolution professional” shall be substituted; 


(e) after sub-section (3), the following Explanation shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Explanation—For the purposes of this section, it is hereby 
clarified that references to the interim resolution professional shall also 
include references to the resolution professional.”’. 


13. In section 21 of the principal Act, after sub-section (/0), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


Amendment of 
section 18. 


Amendment of 
section 19. 


Amendment of 
section 21. 


Amendment of 
section 22. 


Amendment of 
section 25. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 26. 


Application in 
respect of certain 
transactions or 
trading not to 
affect processes. 


Insertion of new 
section 28A. 


Transfer of 
assets of 
guarantor of 
corporate debtor 
during process. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


“(11) Where the liquidation process of the corporate debtor is initiated 
under Chapter III, the committee of creditors constituted under this section 
shall also supervise the conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator, 
and the provisions of this section and section 24 shall apply to such liquidation 
process under Chapter III as the context may require: 


Provided that the Board may specify any other class or classes of 
creditors, who may attend the meetings of the committee of creditors during 
liquidation process, but shall not have any right to vote in such meetings. 


Explanation —For the purposes of Chapter III, it is hereby declared that 
the provisions of sub-section (//) of this section, section 34A and 
sub-section (2) of section 35, as amended by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code (Amendment) Act, 2026, shall apply to— 


(a) the liquidation process of a corporate debtor initiated after the 
date of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2026; and 


(0) the ongoing liquidation process of a corporate debtor as on such 
date of commencement, where the liquidator has not made an application 
under section 54, for which the committee of creditors shall continue for 
the remainder of the liquidation process.”. 


14. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (a), for the 
words “it shall communicate its decision to the interim resolution professional, the 
corporate debtor and the Adjudicating Authority”, the words “such person shall be 
deemed to be appointed as the resolution professional from the date of such 
resolution, and this decision shall be communicated to the interim resolution 
professional, the corporate debtor, and the Board” shall be substituted. 


15. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (/), the 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Q) file an application to the Adjudicating Authority in respect of 
an avoidance transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading, if any; and”. 


16. For section 26 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“26. The filing of an application in respect of an avoidance transaction 
or fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47, shall not affect the 
proceedings of the corporate insolvency resolution process or the liquidation 
process, as the case may be. 


Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 
completion of the corporate insolvency resolution process or the liquidation 
process shall not affect the continuation of proceedings in respect of an 
avoidance transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47, 
as the case may be.”. 


17. After section 28 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“28A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or any other 
law for the time being in force, where a creditor of the corporate debtor has 
taken possession of an asset of a personal guarantor or corporate guarantor of 
the corporate debtor by enforcing its security interest over such asset under 
any law for the time being in force which empowers the creditor to transfer 
the asset, the creditor may, during the corporate insolvency resolution process 
of the corporate debtor, permit the transfer of such an asset as part of its 
insolvency resolution with prior approval of the committee of creditors in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified: 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


Provided that where the corporate guarantor is undergoing a corporate 
insolvency resolution process or the liquidation process, transfer of the asset 
under this sub-section shall take place upon approval of the committee of 
creditors of the corporate guarantor, by a vote of not less than sixty-six 
per cent. of the voting share, and the amount received pursuant to the transfer 
shall form part of the corporate insolvency resolution process or the 
liquidation estate of the corporate guarantor, as the case may be: 


Provided further that during the liquidation process of the corporate 
guarantor, the approval of the committee of creditors under the first proviso is 
required only where the creditor has relinquished such asset to the liquidation 
estate under section 52: 


Provided also that where the personal guarantor is undergoing an 
insolvency resolution process or the bankruptcy process and the creditor has 
forfeited or surrendered his right in relation to an asset, the transfer of such 
asset under this sub-section shall take place upon approval by a majority of 
more than three-fourths in value of the creditors of the personal guarantor, and 
the amount received pursuant to the transfer shall form part of the insolvency 
resolution process or the bankruptcy process of the personal guarantor, as the 
case may be. 


(2) The transfer of an asset referred to in sub-section (/) under a 
resolution plan shall vest in the transferee all rights in, or in relation to the 
asset, as if the transfer had been made by the owner of such asset. 


(3) The amount received pursuant to the transfer of the asset shall be 
adjusted towards the amount of debt owed by the guarantor in accordance with 
the applicable law, subject to any costs, charges and expenses incurred in 
respect of the preservation and protection of the asset before its transfer, and 
where such amount is more than the debt owed, the surplus shall be paid to 
the guarantor.”. 


18. In section 30 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (2),— 


(7) in clause (6), in the long line, the portion beginning with “, and 
provides for the payment of debts of financial creditors”, and ending 
with “liquidation of the corporate debtor” shall be omitted; 


(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ba) provides for the payment of debts of the financial 
creditors, who do not vote in favour of the resolution plan, in such 
manner as may be specified, which shall not be less than the lower 
of the amount— 


(7) to be paid to such creditors in the event of a 
liquidation of the corporate debtor under section 53; or 


(ii) that would have been paid to such creditors, if the 
amount to be distributed under the resolution plan had been 
distributed, in accordance with the order of priority in 
sub-section (/) of section 53, 


as the case may be. 


Explanation |_—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
clarified that a distribution in accordance with the provisions of 
this clause shall be fair and equitable to such creditors. 


Amendment of 
section 30. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Explanation I1—For the purposes of this sub-section, it is 
hereby declared that the provisions of this sub-section as amended 
by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2026, 
shall not apply to the corporate insolvency resolution process 
where any of the following acts have first occurred,— 


(i) the committee of creditors has approved a resolution 
plan under sub-section (4); 


(ii) the Adjudicating Authority has passed a liquidation 
order under sub-section (/) of section 33; or 


(iii) the committee of creditors has approved intimation 
to the Adjudicating Authority to initiate the liquidation under 
sub-section (2) of section 33, 


as the case may be, on and before the date of commencement of 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2026;”; 


(iii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(d) provides for the implementation and supervision of the 
resolution plan and constitution of a committee for this purpose 
consisting of a resolution professional or any other insolvency 
professional, representatives of a class or classes of creditors and 
the resolution applicant, subject to such conditions and in such 
manner as may be specified;”; 


(5) in sub-section (4), after the words “voting share of the financial 
creditors”, the words “and record reasons for its approval” shall be inserted. 
Amendment of 19. In section 31 of the principal Act,— 
section 31. 
(a) in sub-section (/), after the existing proviso, the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided further that the Adjudicating Authority may, on an 
application made by the resolution professional, with the approval of the 
committee of creditors, by a vote of not less than sixty-six per cent. of 
the voting share, in such form and manner, and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified, first approve the implementation of the 
resolution plan and thereafter approve the manner of distribution 
provided therein within a period of thirty days from the date of approval 
of implementation of such resolution plan.”; 


(5) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the Adjudicating Authority may, before rejecting 
the resolution plan, give notice to the committee of creditors to rectify 
any defects in the resolution plan.”; 


(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(2A) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under 
sub-section (/) or (2), within a period of thirty days from the date of 
receipt of the resolution plan: 


Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed 
an order within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in 
writing.”; 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(d) in sub-section (4), in the proviso, for the words “prior to the approval 
of such resolution plan by the committee of creditors”, the words, brackets and 
figures “before the resolution plan is submitted to the Adjudicating Authority 
under sub-section (6) of section 30” shall be substituted; 


(e) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force and subject to sub-section (6), where a resolution 
plan has been approved under sub-section (/), a licence, permit, 
registration, quota, concession, clearances or a similar grant or right 
given by the Central Government, State Government, local authority, 
sectoral regulator or any other authority constituted under any other law 
for the time being in force, associated with such resolution plan, shall 
not be suspended or terminated during the subsistence of the remaining 
period of such grants or rights, if the corporate debtor or, if applicable, 
the person whose resolution plan is approved under sub-section (J), 
complies with the obligations in respect of the remaining period of such 
grants or rights. 


(6) Where the Adjudicating Authority approves the resolution plan 
under sub-section (/),— 


(a) unless otherwise provided in the resolution plan, any 
claim, against the corporate debtor and its assets under any other 
law for the time being in force, prior to the date of approval, shall 
be extinguished; and 


(6) no proceedings shall be continued or instituted against 
the corporate debtor or its assets on the basis of such claims, 
including proceedings for assessment of the claims. 


Explanation |—F or the purposes of this section, it is hereby 
clarified that nothing in this section shall affect a claim or any 
proceeding in respect of a person who was a promoter or in the 
management or control of the corporate debtor, a guarantor of the 
corporate debtor or any person having a joint liability or a joint and 
several liability with the corporate debtor, as the case may be. 


Explanation I1.—F or the purposes of this section, it is hereby 
clarified that if a person has a joint liability or a joint and several 
liability with the corporate debtor for payment of debt owed to a 
creditor before the approval of resolution plan, and such person 
makes a payment for such debt after the approval of the resolution 
plan, then any right of such person to be indemnified by the 
corporate debtor shall be extinguished. 


Explanation \Wl.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
clarified that the provisions of sub-sections (5) and (6) shall be 
deemed to apply to the resolution plan that is approved under 
sub-section (/), on and from the date of commencement of this 
Code, except for matters that have attained finality under this 
Code.”. 


20. In section 33 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(0) in clause (a), the words and figures “or the fast-track corporate 
insolvency resolution process under section 56” shall be omitted; 


Amendment of 
section 33. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(ii) in clause (b),— 


(J) in sub-clause (ii), after the words “in liquidation,”, the 
word “and” shall be omitted; 


(77) after sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(iv) subject to the provisions of section 52, declare a 
moratorium for the purposes referred to in clauses (a) and (c) 
of sub-section (/) read with sub-section (3) of section 14, 
which shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the proceedings 
under this Chapter: 


Provided that provisions of this sub-clause shall not 
apply to legal proceedings in relation to such transactions as 
may be notified by the Central Government in consultation 
with any financial sector regulator or any other authority; and 


(v) pass an order appointing a liquidator for the 
liquidation process in accordance with section 34.”; 


(0) after sub-section (/), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (J), 
where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the grounds mentioned 
in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (/) of this section exist, it shall, 
before passing the liquidation order, consider an application made by the 
committee of creditors, in such manner and subject to such conditions as 
may be specified, by not less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, 
for restoring the corporate insolvency resolution process, and after 
considering such application, it may, by an order— 


(a) if the ground mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (/) 
exists, restore the corporate insolvency resolution process to be 
completed within such duration as it deems fit, but not exceeding 
one hundred and twenty days; or 


(5) if the ground mentioned in clause (5) of sub-section (/) 
exists,— 


(i) restore the corporate insolvency resolution process 
to the stage of invitation for submission of a resolution plan, 
which shall be completed in such manner and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified; and 


(ii) provide the duration for completion of such 
restored corporate insolvency resolution process as it deems 
fit, but not exceeding one hundred and twenty days. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, it is 
hereby declared that on and from the date of 
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2026, the provisions of 
sub-sections (/A) and (/B) shall also apply to the corporate 
insolvency resolution process of a corporate debtor initiated 
under Chapter II before such date of commencement, where 
the Adjudicating Authority has not passed a liquidation 
order under sub-section (/) of this section, and shall not 
apply where the liquidation order is passed. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


(1B) The corporate insolvency resolution process of a corporate 
debtor may be restored in accordance with sub-section (A) only once. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this section, it is hereby 
clarified that where the Adjudicating Authority does not receive a 
resolution plan under sub-section (6) of section 30 within the period 
provided under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (/A) or rejects the 
resolution plan received by it during such period under sub-section (2) 
of section 31, it shall pass a liquidation order under sub-section (/).”; 


(c) in sub-section (2),— 
(i) after the word “liquidate”, the words “or dissolve” shall be 
inserted; 


(ii) for the brackets, figures and word “(ii) and (iii)”, the brackets, 
figures and word “(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)” shall be substituted; 


(iii) for the words, brackets and figure “of 
sub-section (/).”, the words, brackets, figures and letter “of 
sub-section (J) or a dissolution order under sub-section (24) of 
section 54, as the case may be:” shall be substituted; 


(iv) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the committee of creditors shall, before taking the 
decision to dissolve the corporate debtor, comply with such conditions, 
as may be specified.” 


(v) in the Explanation, after the word “liquidate”, the words “or 
dissolve” shall be inserted; 


(d) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


“(2A) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass a liquidation order 
under this section within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt 
of an intimation or application, as the case may be, to initiate the 
liquidation process under this section: 


Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order 
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing.” 


(e) in sub-section (3), for the brackets, letters and word “(ii) and (iii)’”, 


the brackets, letters and word “‘(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)” shall be substituted; 


(f) in sub-section (4),— 


(i) for the words, brackets, letters and figure “sub-clauses (1), (i) 
and (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section (/)’, the words, brackets, letters and 
figure “sub-clauses (i), (ii), (di), (iv) and (v) of clause (0) of 
sub-section (/) and pass any other order as it deems fit” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that where an application under sub-section (3) is 
made, the Adjudicating Authority may, if it deems fit, reinstate the 
corporate insolvency resolution process and pass appropriate 
orders.” 


(g) sub-section (5) shall be omitted; 
(A) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


Amendment of 
section 34. 


Insertion of new 
section 34A. 


Replacement of 
liquidator by 
committee of 
creditors. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


“(6) Where a liquidation order has been passed, no suit or other legal 
proceeding shall be commenced, or if pending at the date of the liquidation 
order, shall be proceeded with by the liquidator, on behalf of the corporate 
debtor, except with the leave of the Adjudicating Authority and subject to 
such terms as the Adjudicating Authority may impose.”. 


21. In section 34 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


“(1) Where the Adjudicating Authority passes an order for liquidation 
of the corporate debtor under section 33, it shall refer to the Board for 
making recommendation of an insolvency professional to be appointed as 
the liquidator and on receipt of the recommendation, appoint such 
insolvency professional as the liquidator.” 


(6) for sub-sections (3), (4), (5) and (6), the following sub-sections shall 


be substituted, namely:— 


“(3) Any person who is or has been a personnel of the corporate 
debtor, or its promoter, or associated with the management of the 
corporate debtor, or engaged in a contract for service with the corporate 
debtor, shall extend all assistance and cooperation to the liquidator as 
may be required by him for the purposes of managing the affairs of the 
corporate debtor or performing the duties conferred on him under this 
Chapter and the provisions of section 19 shall apply in relation to 
liquidation and voluntary liquidation process as they apply in relation to 
corporate insolvency resolution process with the substitution of 
references to the liquidator for references to the interim resolution 
professional and resolution professional and references to the corporate 
insolvency resolution process with liquidation and voluntary liquidation 
process, respectively. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section and 
section 34A, an insolvency professional appointed as a resolution 
professional for the corporate insolvency resolution process under 
Chapter II, shall not be appointed or replaced as the liquidator for the 
liquidation process of such corporate debtor. 


(5) After an order of liquidation has been passed, the resolution 
professional shall forward to the liquidator, all records relating to the 
conduct of the corporate insolvency resolution process. 


(6) The Board shall propose the name of an insolvency 
professional, other than the resolution professional appointed for the 
corporate insolvency resolution process under Chapter II, along with 
written consent from such insolvency professional in the specified form, 
within ten days of the reference made by the Adjudicating Authority 
under sub-section (/).”; 


(c) in sub-section (7), the words “by an order” shall be omitted. 


22. After section 34 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“34A. (1) Where, at any time during the liquidation process, the 


committee of creditors is of the opinion that a liquidator appointed under 
section 34 or this section is required to be replaced, it may, by a vote of not 
less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, resolve to replace the 
liquidator with another insolvency professional, subject to a written consent 
from such proposed liquidator in such form as may be specified. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


(2) Where the committee of creditors resolves under sub-section (/) to 
replace a liquidator, it shall apply to the Adjudicating Authority for the 
appointment of the proposed liquidator, and if no disciplinary proceedings are 
pending against him, the Adjudicating Authority shall, by an order, replace the 
liquidator appointed under section 34 or this section and appoint the proposed 
liquidator as the liquidator.”’. 


23. In section 35 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(a) to maintain an updated list of claims of creditors in such 
manner as may be specified;”; 


(ii) in clause (7), the words “invite and” shall be omitted; 


(iii) for clause (/), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(7) continue or institute proceedings in respect of an 
avoidance transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading;”; 


(iv) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation —For the purposes of this Chapter, it is hereby 
declared that the provisions of clauses (a) and () of this 
sub-section and sections 38 to 42 as amended by the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2026, shall not apply to 
the liquidation process and voluntary liquidation process initiated 
on and before the date of commencement of the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2026.”; 


(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) The committee of creditors shall supervise the conduct of the 
liquidation process by the liquidator under Chapter III in such manner 
as may be specified.”. 


24. In section 36 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (7), for the 
words “proceedings for avoidance of transactions in accordance with this Chapter’, 
the words and figures “proceedings in respect of an avoidance transaction or 
fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47” shall be substituted. 


25. Sections 38, 39, 40, 41 and 42 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


26. In section 43 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), in clauses (a) and (6),— 


(i) for the words “period of’, the words “period starting from” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) for the words “insolvency commencement date”, the words 
““nitiation date and ending on the insolvency commencement date” shall be 
substituted. 


27. In section 46 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “avoidable”, the word 
“undervalued” shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (/),— 


(i) for the words “avoiding a transaction at undervalue”, the words 
“avoidance of an undervalued transaction” shall be substituted; 


Amendment of 
section 35. 


Amendment of 
section 36. 


Omission of 
sections 38 to 42. 


Amendment of 
section 43. 


Amendment of 
section 46. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 47. 


Application by 
creditors, 
member or 
partner in case 
of certain 
transactions or 
trading. 


Amendment of 
section 49. 


Amendment of 
section 50. 


Amendment of 
section 52. 


14 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(ii) in clauses (i) and (ii),— 


(A) for the words “period of’, the words “period starting 
from” shall be substituted; 


(B) for the words “insolvency commencement date’, the 
words “initiation date and ending on the _ insolvency 
commencement date” shall be substituted. 


28. For section 47 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“47. (1) Where— 
(a) a preferential transaction under section 43; 
(6) an undervalued transaction under section 45; 
(c) an extortionate credit transaction under section 50; or 
(d) fraudulent or wrongful trading under section 66, 


has occurred and the liquidator or the resolution professional, as the case may 
be, has not reported it to the Adjudicating Authority, a creditor, either by itself 
or jointly with other creditors, a member, or a partner of the corporate debtor, 
as the case may be, may make an application to the Adjudicating Authority to 
pass orders in accordance with the respective provisions of this Chapter or 
Chapter VI, as the case may be. 


(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority, after examination of the 
application made under sub-section (/), is satisfied that the relevant 
transaction or trading under clause (a) or (b) or (c) or (d) of sub-section (/) 
has occurred, it shall pass an order, for the avoidance of such transaction or 
trading, as the case may be, as if such an application had been filed by a 
liquidator or a resolution professional in accordance with the relevant 
provisions of this Chapter or Chapter VI. 


(3) After passing an order under sub-section (2), where Adjudicating 
Authority is satisfied that the liquidator or the resolution professional, as the 
case may be, after having sufficient information or opportunity to avail 
information of such transaction or trading, did not report such transaction or 
trading to the Adjudicating Authority, it shall pass an order requiring the 
Board to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the liquidator or the 
resolution professional, as the case may be.”. 


29. In section 49 of the principal Act, in the proviso, in clause (a), after the 


words “corporate debtor”, the words “or a related party of the corporate debtor, as 
the case may be,” shall be inserted. 


30. In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words 


“period within two years preceding”, the words “period starting from two years 
preceding the initiation date and ending on” shall be substituted. 


31. In section 52 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) Where the secured creditor intends to realise the 
security interest under clause (0) of sub-section (/), he shall 
inform the liquidator of such security interest and identify the asset 
subject to such security interest to be realised within a period of fourteen 
days from the liquidation commencement date, and if he fails to do so, 
such security interest shall be deemed to be relinquished to the 
liquidation estate: 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


Provided that where more than one secured creditor has any 
security interest over an asset of the corporate debtor, no secured 
creditor shall be entitled to realise its security interest, unless the 
realisation is agreed upon by the secured creditors representing not less 
than sixty-six per cent. of the value of all claims that are secured by 
such security interests.”’; 


(6) for sub-section (8), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


“(8) The amount of insolvency resolution process, costs and the 
liquidation costs, and workmen’s dues as referred to in clause (a) and 
sub-clause (i) of clause (0) of sub-section (/) of section 53, 
respectively, shall be deducted from the proceeds of any realisation by 
the secured creditors who realise their security interests in the manner 
provided in this section, and they shall transfer such amounts to the 
liquidator to be included in the liquidation estate in such manner, 
within such period and subject to such conditions to secure the 
payment as may be specified.”; 


(c) after sub-section (9), the following Explanation shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


“Explanation —For the purposes of this section, it is hereby 
declared that the provisions of sub-section (2) as amended by the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2026, shall not 
apply to the liquidation process initiated on and before the date of 
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) 
Act, 2026.”. 


32. In section 53 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(i) in clause (6), in sub-clause (ii), the following Explanation 
shall be inserted, namely: — 


“Explanation —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
clarified that where the value of the security interest relinquished 
by the secured creditor is less than the total debt owed to such 
secured creditor by the corporate debtor, he shall be a secured 
creditor to the extent of the value of such security interest, 
determined in such manner as may be specified, and for the 
remaining value of such debt, he shall be considered to be an 
unsecured creditor;”’; 


(ii) in clause (e), in sub-clause (7), the following Explanation shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
clarified that any amount, whether or not a security interest is 
created to secure such amount by an act of two or more parties or 
merely by operation of law, due to the Central Government and the 
State Government, in respect of the whole or any part of the period 
of two years preceding the liquidation commencement date, shall 
be distributed under this sub-clause and any remaining amount, 
whether or not such security interest is created to secure the 
amount, due to the Central Government and the State Government, 
shall be distributed under clause (f);”; 


Amendment of 
section 53. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(6) in sub-section (2), the following J//ustrations shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


‘Tlustration I. 


The workmen and the secured creditors of the corporate debtor 
have a contractual arrangement which provides that in the event of 
insolvency or liquidation of the corporate debtor, all debt owed to the 
secured creditors shall be cleared before clearing any debt owed to the 
workmen. Such a contractual arrangement shall be disregarded. 


Illustration (1. 


“X’’, a secured creditor of the corporate debtor, has a contractual 
arrangement with “Y”, another secured creditor of the corporate debtor. 
As per the contractual arrangement, in the event of insolvency or 
liquidation of the corporate debtor, the debt owed to ““X” shall be cleared 
before clearing any debt owed to “Y”. Such a contractual arrangement 
shall not be disregarded.’. 


Amendment of 33. In section 54 of the principal Act,— 
section 54. 


(a) for sub-section (/), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(1) The liquidator shall completely liquidate the assets of the 
corporate debtor and make an application for its dissolution to the 
Adjudicating Authority within a period of one hundred and eighty days 
from the liquidation commencement date in such manner as may be 
specified: 


Provided that the Adjudicating Authority may, on an application 
by the liquidator along with sufficient reasons, extend the stipulated time 
by such period as it deems fit, but not exceeding a period of ninety days. 


(1A) Where a proceeding in respect of an avoidance transaction or 
fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47 is pending before an 
application is made under sub-section (/) or a decision is made to dissolve 
the corporate debtor under sub-section (2) of section 33, the committee of 
creditors shall determine the manner of pursuing such proceedings and the 
distribution of the proceeds arising out of such proceedings, in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified. 


(1B) Where any suit or other legal proceeding against the corporate 
debtor in respect of any proceeds to be distributed under section 53 is 
pending before application is made under sub-section (/) or a decision 
is made to dissolve the corporate debtor under sub-section (2) of 
section 33, the committee of creditors shall make appropriate 
arrangements for pursuing such suit or proceeding, and distribution of 
proceeds to the parties in such suit or proceedings, in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be specified.”; 


(6) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(2A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the 
Adjudicating Authority may, on receipt of the decision of the committee 
of creditors to dissolve the corporate debtor under sub-section (2) of 
section 33, order that the corporate debtor shall be dissolved from the 
date of that order and the corporate debtor shall be dissolved 
accordingly: 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


Provided that if, on the passing of an order under this sub-section, 
any asset of the corporate debtor remains with it, such asset may be 
disposed of in such manner as may be specified, and the proceeds thereof 
shall be distributed for payment of the insolvency resolution process 
costs and any surplus remaining after payment of such costs shall be 
credited to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund formed under 
section 224. 


(2B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) and 
sub-section (2A), the passing of the dissolution order shall not affect the 
continuation of proceedings referred to in sub-sections (7A) and (/B).”; 


(c) in sub-section (3), after the word, brackets and figure 


“sub-section (2)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter “or sub-section (24)” 
shall be inserted; 


(d) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


“(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass a dissolution order 
under this section within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt 
of the application under sub-section (/) or the intimation of the decision 
of the committee of creditors to dissolve the corporate debtor under 
sub-section (2) of section 33: 


Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed 
an order within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in 
writing.” 


34. In section 54A of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2),— 


(7) in clause (a), for the words “pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process 07, the words “pre-packaged insolvency resolution process or 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, or” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (0), after the words “resolution process”, the words 
“or a creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process” shall be inserted; 


(iii) in clause (e), for the words “sixty-six per cent.”, the words 
“fifty-one per cent.” shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (3), for the words “sixty-six per cent.”, the words 


“fifty-one per cent.” shall be substituted. 
35. In section 54C of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following 


sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(3) The corporate applicant shall, along with the application, furnish 


such information as may be specified.”. 


36. In section 54F of the principal Act, for sub-section (5), the following 


sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(5) Any person who is or has been a personnel of the corporate 


debtor or its promoter or associated with the management of the 
corporate debtor or engaged in a contract for service with the corporate debtor, 
shall extend all assistance and cooperation to the resolution professional as may 
be required by him to perform his duties and exercise his powers, and for such 
purposes, the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 19 shall, 
mutatis mutandis, apply in relation to the proceedings under this Chapter.”. 


Amendment of 
section 54A. 


Amendment of 
section 54C. 


Amendment of 
section 547. 


Amendment of 
section 54L. 


Amendment of 
section 54N. 


Omission of 
Chapter IV of 
Part II. 


Insertion of new 
Chapter IV-A in 
Part II. 


Corporate 
debtors eligible 
for creditor- 
initiated 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 


Initiation of 
creditor-initiated 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 


18 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


37. In section 54L of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2), for the word, brackets and figure “and (4)”, the 
brackets, figures and word “, (4), (5) and (6)” shall be substituted; 


(5) in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the Adjudicating Authority may, before rejecting 
the resolution plan, give notice to the committee of creditors to rectify 
any defects in the resolution plan.” 


(c) in sub-section (4), in clause (b), for the brackets, figures and word 
“(ii) and (iii)”, the brackets, figures and word “(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)” shall 
be substituted. 


38. In section 54N of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), in clause (a), for the 


brackets, figures and word “(ii) and (iii)”, the brackets, figures and word “(ii), 
(iii), (iv) and (v)” shall be substituted. 


39. In Part II of the principal Act, Chapter IV shall be omitted. 


40. After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“CHAPTER IV-A 
CREDITOR-INITIATED INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION PROCESS 


58A. (J) A creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process may be 
initiated in respect of the following corporate debtors under this Chapter, 
namely:— 


(a) a corporate debtor with assets or income or both, below such 
levels; 


(b) a corporate debtor with such class of creditors or such amount 
of debt; or 


(c) such other category of corporate debtors, 
as may be notified by the Central Government. 


(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (/), a creditor-initiated insolvency 
resolution process shall not be initiated in respect of a corporate debtor— 


(a) for which an insolvency resolution or liquidation proceeding 
has been commenced and is still undergoing under the provisions of 
Part I; and 


(6) that has undergone a creditor-initiated insolvency resolution 
process, pre-packaged insolvency resolution process or completed a 
corporate insolvency resolution process, during the period of three years 
preceding the creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date. 


58B. (J) A financial creditor, belonging to such class of financial 
institutions as may be notified by the Central Government, in respect of which 
a default is committed by a corporate debtor, may initiate the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process for such corporate debtor by appointing a 
resolution professional in accordance with the provisions of this section, and 
subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The financial creditor seeking to initiate the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process shall, before appointing the resolution 
professional,— 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


(a) obtain the approval of the financial creditors of the corporate 
debtor belonging to the class of financial institutions notified under 
sub-section (/), who represent not less than fifty-one per cent. in value 
of the debt due to such financial creditors, in such manner as may be 
specified; 


(b) inform the corporate debtor of its intention to initiate the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process and give it a period of at 
least thirty days to make any representation in such form and manner as 
may be specified; and 


(c) after consideration of the representation received under 
clause (b), if any, where the financial creditor continues to pursue the 
initiation of the process, it shall obtain approval of the financial creditors 
of the corporate debtor belonging to such class as notified under 
sub-section (/), who represent not less than fifty-one per cent. in value 
of the debt due to such financial creditors, within a period of thirty days 
from the date of receipt of the representation, in such manner as may 
be specified: 


Provided that where no approval is obtained under clause (c) 
within the stipulated period of thirty days, the financial creditor shall, if 
it seeks to initiate the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, 
obtain fresh approval under clause (a) and comply with the procedure 
under this sub-section. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified 
that where the corporate debtor does not make a representation within the 
period given by the financial creditor under clause (b), the financial creditor 
may, after the expiry of such period proceed to appoint the resolution 
professional in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3). 


(3) Where the financial creditor, who seeks to initiate the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, meets the requirements under 
sub-sections (/) and (2), it may appoint an insolvency professional as the 
resolution professional, if no disciplinary proceedings are pending against 
him, immediately after fulfilling all the requirements under sub-section (2). 


(4) Where the resolution professional is appointed under sub-section (3), 
he shall— 


(a) make a public announcement of the initiation of the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process; and 


(b) communicate the same along with a report confirming whether 
the financial creditor meets the requirements under sections 58A and 
58B, to the Adjudicating Authority and the Board, 


within such period and in such form and manner as may be specified, and the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process shall be deemed to have 
commenced from the date of such public announcement. 


(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 7, 9, 10 and 54C, no 
application for initiation of the corporate insolvency resolution process or the 
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process in respect of the corporate debtor 
shall be filed or admitted during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution 
process period. 


Explanation —F or the purposes of this Chapter,— 


(0) “creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date” means the date 
of the public announcement referred to in sub-section (4) of section 58B; and 


Objections to 
commencement 
of process. 


Period for 
completion of 
creditor-initiated 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 


Duties and 
powers of 
resolution 
professional. 


20 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(ii) “creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period” 
means the period beginning from the creditor-initiated insolvency 
commencement date and ending on the date on which an order is passed 
under sub-section (/) of section 58H or under sub-section (/) of 
section 58-I or under section 58J read with section 31. 


58C. (7) If the corporate debtor has any objection to the commencement 
of the process under section 58B, it may file an application to the Adjudicating 
Authority within a period of thirty days from the creditor-initiated insolvency 
commencement date in such form and manner as may be specified, 
accompanied with such fee as may be prescribed. 


(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority, pursuant to an application under 
sub-section (/) is satisfied that— 


(a) a default has not occurred or both a default has not occurred 
and the initiation of the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process 
was in contravention of section 58A or 583, it may, by order, declare 
the commencement of the process to be void ab-initio; 


(b) a default has occurred, however, the initiation of the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process was in 
contravention of section 5880 or 58B, it shall, convert the 
creditor-initiated insolvency’ resolution process to corporate 
insolvency resolution process and pass an order as referred to in 
sub-clauses (i) to (v) of sub-section (/) of section 58H. 


(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (2), 
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the application under 
sub-section (/): 


Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order 
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing. 


58D. (7) Subject to sub-section (2), the creditor-initiated insolvency 
resolution process shall be completed within a period of one hundred and fifty 
days from the creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date. 


(2) The Adjudicating Authority may, on the application made by the 
resolution professional, with the approval of the committee of creditors, by a 
vote of not less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, extend the period 
under sub-section (/), by a period of not more than forty-five days: 


Provided that any extension of the period of the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process under this section shall not be granted more 
than once. 


(3) Where no resolution plan is approved by the committee of creditors 
within the period stipulated in sub-section (/) or the extended period under 
sub-section (2), the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under 
sub-section (/) of section 58H. 


58E. (J) The resolution professional, shall exercise and perform the 
following powers and duties during the creditor-initiated insolvency 
resolution process period, in such manner and subject to such conditions as 
may be specified, namely:— 


(a) call for the submission of claims; 


(6) prepare the information memorandum; 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


(c) prepare a report in such form as may be specified, confirming 
whether the conduct of the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution 
process is in accordance with the procedural requirements and that the 
resolution plan, filed along with it, complies with the requirements of 
sections 29A and 30 which shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the 
proceedings under this Chapter; 


(d) duties referred to in clauses (a) to (c) of section 18 and 
clauses (e) to (7) of sub-section (2) of section 25 which shall, mutatis 
mutandis, apply to the proceedings under this Chapter; 


(e) powers as referred to in sub-sections (3) and (4) of 
section 54F which shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the proceedings 
under this Chapter; 


(f) file such report and documents with the Board, as may be 
specified; and 


(g) perform such other duties, as may be specified. 


(2) Any person who is or has been a personnel of the corporate debtor, 
or its promoter, or associated with the management of the corporate debtor, or 
engaged in a contract for service with the corporate debtor, shall extend all 
assistance and cooperation to the resolution professional, as may be required 
by him to perform his duties and exercise his powers, and for such purposes, 
the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 19 shall, mutatis mutandis, 
apply in relation to the proceedings under this Chapter. 


58F. (J) Subject to the provisions of this section, during the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period, the management of the 
affairs of the corporate debtor shall continue to vest in the Board of Directors or 
the partners, of the corporate debtor as the case may be, and the provisions of 
section 54H shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the proceedings under this Chapter. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, from the 
creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date, the resolution professional 
shall attend meetings of members, Board of Directors and committee of 
directors, or partners, of the corporate debtor, and he shall have the right to 
reject any resolutions passed in these meetings, subject to such conditions and 
in such manner as may be specified, and once he rejects a resolution, it shall 
not be approved. 


(3) The promoter and personnel of the corporate debtor shall provide 
relevant information related to the corporate debtor for preparing the 
information memorandum to the resolution professional in such form and 
manner and within such period as may be specified, and where any person has 
sustained loss or damage as a consequence of the omission of any material 
information or inclusion of any misleading information or false information 
provided by such persons, they shall be liable and in this regard, the provisions 
of sub-sections (2) to (4) of section 54G and section 77A, shall, mutatis 
mutandis, apply to the proceedings under this Chapter. 


580. (/) During the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process 
period, the resolution professional may, after obtaining the approval of the 
committee of creditors, make an application to the Adjudicating Authority for 
a moratorium for the purposes referred to in sub-section (/) read with 
sub-section (3) of section 14, which shall, mutatis mutandis apply, to the 
proceedings under this Chapter: 


Management of 
affairs of 
corporate 
debtors and 
cooperation of 
its personnel. 


Moratorium. 


Conversion of 
creditor-initiated 
insolvency 
resolution 
process to 
corporate 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Provided that the resolution professional may file such application 
before the constitution of the committee of creditors, after obtaining approval 
of the financial creditors of the corporate debtor belonging to the class of 
financial institutions notified under sub-section (/) of section 58B, who 
represent not less than fifty-one per cent. in value of the debt due to such 
financial creditors, in such manner as may be specified. 


(2) Where an application has been made in sub-section (/), a moratorium 
for the purposes referred to in sub-section (/) read with sub-section (3) of 
section 14 shall commence from the date of the application and continue to be 
in operation during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period, 
and the Adjudicating Authority may confirm the moratorium, if it is satisfied 
that the moratorium is required for the proper and efficient conduct of the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, or reject the application. 


(3) The resolution professional shall make public announcement of the 
following, in such form and manner as may be specified, namely:— 


(a) filing of application under sub-section (/); and 


(b) order of the Adjudicating Authority rejecting the application 
under sub-section (2), if any. 


58H. (/) Where the Adjudicating Authority,— 


(a) does not receive a resolution plan for approval, within the 
period stipulated under section 58D; 


(8) is satisfied that the corporate debtor or its personnel have failed 
to assist or cooperate with the resolution professional; or 


(c) rejects the resolution plan under sub-section (2) of section 58J 
read with sub-section (2) of section 31, 


it shall, by an order,— 


(i) convert the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process to 
corporate insolvency resolution process under Chapter II and provisions 
of such Chapter shall apply; 


(ii) decide the stage from which the corporate insolvency 
resolution process shall commence, after considering any 
recommendation of the committee of creditors, made in such manner as 
may be specified; 


(iii) appoint the resolution professional for the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process, as the interim resolution professional or 
the resolution professional for the corporate insolvency resolution 
process, as the case may be; 


(iv) declare a moratorium for the purposes referred to in section 14; and 


(v) declare that the costs incurred during the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process, if any, shall be included as part of 
insolvency resolution process costs for the purposes of the corporate 
insolvency resolution process of the corporate debtor. 


(2) Where the committee of creditors, at any time during the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period, by a vote of not less 
than sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, resolves to convert the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process to the corporate insolvency resolution process 
in respect of the corporate debtor, the resolution professional shall make an 
application for this purpose to the Adjudicating Authority in such form and 
manner as may be specified, and the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an 
order as referred to in sub-clauses (7) to (v) of sub-section (/). 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority passes an order to convert the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process to the corporate insolvency 
resolution process under Chapter II— 


(a) the proceedings initiated for an avoidance transaction or 
fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47, if any, during the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process shall continue during the 
corporate insolvency resolution process; 


(b) such order shall be deemed to be an order of admission of an 
application under section 7 and the financial creditor who initiated the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process under section 58B, shall 
be considered as the applicant for that purpose; and 


(c) for the purposes of sections 43, 46 and 50, the references to 
“initiation date and ending on the insolvency commencement date” shall 
be construed as “creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date and 
ending on the insolvency commencement date.”. 


58-I. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), the Adjudicating Authority may 
allow the withdrawal of the public announcement made under sub-section (4) 
of section 58B and close the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process 
on an application made by the resolution professional with the approval of 
ninety per cent. voting share of the committee of creditors, in such manner as 
may be specified. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 
force, the public announcement made under sub-section (4) of section 58B 
shall not be withdrawn— 


(a) before the constitution of the committee of creditors; and 


(5) after the first invitation for submission of a resolution plan has 
been issued by the resolution professional. 


(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (/), 
within a period of fourteen days from the date of receipt of the application: 


Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order 
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay 
in writing. 

58J. (J) Where the committee of creditors, by a vote of not less than 
sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, approves the resolution plan in 
accordance with the provisions of section 30, the resolution professional shall 
submit such approved resolution plan to the Adjudicating Authority, along 
with a report referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 58E. 


(2) On receipt of the resolution plan, the Adjudicating Authority, shall, 
pass an order in accordance with the provisions of section 31, which shall, 
mutatis mutandis apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter. 


58K. (J) Save as provided in this Chapter, the provisions of 
sections 21, 24, 25A, 26, 27, 28, 28A, 29, 32, 32A, 43 to 51, and the 
provisions of Chapters VI and VII of this Part shall, mutatis mutandis apply, 
to the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, subject to the 
modifications that the references to— 


(a) “corporate insolvency resolution process” shall be construed as 
reference to “creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process”; 


(b) “insolvency commencement date” shall be construed as 
reference to “creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date”; 


Withdrawal of 
public 
announcement 
made under 
section 58B. 


Application for 
approval of 
resolution plan. 


Application of 
provisions of 
Chapters II, HI, 
VI and VII to 
this Chapter. 


Amendment of 
section 59. 


Insertion of new 
Chapter VA. 


Power to make 
tules for initiating 
proceedings for 
coordination and 
cooperation of 
corporate debtors 
of group. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(c) “insolvency resolution process period” shall be construed as 
reference to “creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period”; and 


(d) the references to “period starting from” shall be construed as 
“period of’ and “initiation date and ending on the insolvency 
commencement date” shall be construed as “creditor-initiated 
insolvency commencement date” under sections 43, 46 and 50. 


(2) The creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process of a corporate 
person under this Chapter shall meet such conditions and procedural 
requirements as may be specified.’. 


41. In section 59 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2), for the words “procedural requirements as may 
be specified by the Board”, the words “procedural requirements, and be 
completed within such period which shall not be more than one year, as may 
be specified” shall be substituted; 


(5) in sub-section (4), for the word “notify”, the word “inform” shall be 
substituted; 


(c) after sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(5A) Any time after the commencement of a voluntary liquidation 
proceeding under sub-section (5) but before an application under 
sub-section (7) is filed, the voluntary liquidation proceeding shall be 
terminated if the following conditions are satisfied, namely:— 


(a) the members of the company have passed a special 
resolution for terminating the voluntary liquidation proceeding; 


(6) where the company owes debt to any person on the date 
of the resolution under clause (a), creditors representing two-thirds 
in value of such debt have approved the resolution passed under 
clause (a) within a period of seven days of such resolution; and 


(c) such other conditions as may be specified. 


(5B) The liquidator shall intimate the Board and the Registrar of 
Companies regarding the special resolution under clause (a) of 
sub-section (5A) within a period of seven days of passing the resolution 
or subsequent approval of the creditors under clause (b) thereof, as the 
case may be. 


(5C) A voluntary liquidation proceeding shall be deemed to have 
been terminated from the date on which the liquidator intimates the 
Registrar of Companies under sub-section (58), and such termination 
shall bring the term of the liquidator to an end and have such other 
consequences as may be specified.” 


(d) in sub-section (6), after the words “provisions of”, the words, brackets, 
letter and figures “clause (b) of section 18 of Chapter II,” shall be inserted. 


42. In the principal Act, in Part II, after Chapter V, the following Chapter shall 
be inserted, namely:— 
‘CHAPTER VA 
GROUP INSOLVENCY 
59A. (J) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this 
Code, the Central Government may, prescribe the manner and conditions for 


conducting insolvency proceedings under Part II, where these proceedings are 
initiated against two or more corporate debtors that form part of a group. 


18 of 2013. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of foregoing provision, such rules 


may, provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) a common Bench for the insolvency proceedings of the 
corporate debtors that form part of a group and the manner of the transfer 
of pending proceedings of such corporate debtors to such Bench, and for 
proceedings under the rules made under this section; 


(b) coordination between the insolvency proceedings of the 
corporate debtors that form part of a group, including the coordination 
between their committee of creditors and interim resolution professionals, 
resolution professionals, or liquidators; 


(c) appointment and replacement of a common insolvency 
professional to facilitate coordination between the insolvency 
proceedings of the corporate debtors that form part of a group; 


(d) formation of a committee comprising of the committee of 
creditors of the corporate debtors that form part of a group; 


(e) making of an agreement that provides measures 10 
coordinate and synchronise different aspects of the insolvency 
proceedings of the corporate debtors that form part of a group, which 
shall be binding on the corporate debtors approving the same including 
their committees of creditors, and the Adjudicating Authority may issue 
necessary orders to implement the approved agreement; and 


(f) treatment of the costs incurred for taking measures to coordinate 
the insolvency proceedings of the corporate debtors that form part of a 


group. 


(3) The rules made by the Central Government under this section may 


provide that any of the provisions of the Code shall apply with such 
modifications, as may be required to administer and implement the provisions 
of this section. 


Explanation—F or the purposes of this Chapter, the expressions— 


(a) “control” includes the right to appoint majority of the directors 
or other key managerial personnel entitled to manage the affairs of the 
corporate person or to control the management or policy decisions 
exercisable by a person or persons acting individually or in concert, 
directly or indirectly, including by virtue of their shareholding, 
management rights, ownership interest, shareholders agreements, voting 
agreements, articles of association, limited liability partnership 
agreements or in any other manner; 


(6) “group” means two or more corporate debtors that are 
interconnected by control or significant ownership, and include a 
holding company, a subsidiary company and an associate company of a 
corporate debtor, as defined under the Companies Act, 2013; 


(c) “insolvency proceedings’ means the corporate 
insolvency resolution process and liquidation process under Part II of 
this Code; 


(व) “significant ownership” includes the right to exercise 
twenty-six per cent. or more voting rights. 


Amendment of 
section 61. 


Insertion of new 
section 64A. 


Penalty for 
initiating frivolous 
or vexatious 
proceedings under 
Part II. 


Amendment of 
section 65. 


Amendment of 
section 66. 


Amendment of 
section 67A. 


Insertion of new 
sections 67B and 
67C. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 241, a draft of every 
rule proposed to be issued under this section, shall be laid before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if both Houses agree in disapproving the 
issue of rule or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
rule, the rule shall not be notified or shall be notified only in 
such modified form, as may be agreed upon by both the Houses 
of Parliament. 


(5) The period of thirty days referred to in sub-section (4) shall not 
include any period during which the House referred to in sub-section (4) is 
prorogued or adjourned for more than four consecutive days. 


(6) Every rule notified under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.’. 


43. In section 61 of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(6) The National Company Law Appellate Tribunal shall dispose of the 
appeal within three months from the date of its receipt.”’. 


44. After section 64 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“64A. If any person has initiated a frivolous or vexatious proceeding 
before the Adjudicating Authority under this Part, it may impose upon such 
person a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend 
to two crore rupees.”. 


45. In section 65 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words 
“pre-packaged insolvency resolution process” the words “pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process or creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process” shall be 
substituted. 


46. In section 66 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“Fraudulent or wrongful trading.” 


(0) in sub-section (/), after the words “resolution professional”, the 
words “or the liquidator,” shall be inserted; 


(c) in sub-section (2), after the words “during the corporate insolvency 
resolution process”, the words “or by a liquidator’ shall be inserted. 


47. In section 67A of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process”, the words “pre-packaged insolvency resolution process or 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process” shall be substituted; 


(6) for the words “pre-packaged insolvency commencement date”, the 
words “pre-packaged insolvency commencement date or creditor-initiated 
insolvency commencement date” shall be substituted. 


48. After section 67A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


“678. (1) Where a corporate debtor or any of its officer contravenes the 
provisions of section 14, the Adjudicating Authority may, on an application 
made by the Board or the Central Government or any person authorised by the 
Central Government in this behalf, as the case may be, impose penalty upon 
the officer, who committed or authorised or permitted such contravention, 
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to two crore 
rupees. 


(2) Where any creditor contravenes the provisions of section 14, the 
Adjudicating Authority may, on an application made by the Board or the 
Central Government or any person authorised by the Central Government in 
this behalf, as the case may be, impose penalty upon any person who 
authorised or permitted such contravention by a creditor, which shall not be 
less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to two crore rupees. 


(3) Where a corporate debtor, any of its officers or creditors or any 
person on whom the approved resolution plan is binding under section 31, 
contravenes any of the terms of such resolution plan or abets such 
contravention, the Adjudicating Authority may, on an application made by the 
Board or the Central Government or any person authorised by the Central 
Government in this behalf, as the case may be, impose penalty upon such 
corporate debtor, officer, creditor or person, which shall not be less than one 
lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees or twenty per cent. of the 
amount to be distributed under the resolution plan, whichever is higher. 


67C. Where— 
(a) an operational creditor has concealed in an application under 
section 9, the fact that the corporate debtor had notified him of a dispute 


in respect of the unpaid operational debt or the full and final payment 
thereof; or 


(6) any person who authorised or permitted such concealment 
under clause (a); or 
(c) any person who acted on such authorisation or permission, 


the Adjudicating Authority may, on an application made by the Board or the 
Central Government or any person authorised by the Central Government in 
this behalf, as the case may be, impose penalty upon such operational 
creditor or person, which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but may 
extend to two crore rupees.”. 


49. Section 74 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


50. Section 76 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


51. In section 96 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply where an application 
is filed for initiating an insolvency resolution process in respect of a personal 
guarantor to a corporate debtor.”. 


52. In section 99 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “ten days”, the words “twenty-one 
days” shall be substituted; 


(5) in sub-section (0), for the words “or the creditor, as the case may 
be”, the words “and the creditor” shall be substituted. 


Contravention of 
moratorium or 
resolution plan. 


Contravention 
for non-disclosure 
of dispute or 
payment of debt 
by operational 
creditor. 


Omission of 
section 74. 


Omission of 
section 76. 


Amendment of 
section 96. 


Amendment of 
section 99. 


Amendment of 
section 106. 


Amendment of 
section 121. 


Amendment of 
section 124. 


Insertion of new 
section 164A. 


Transactions 
defrauding 
creditors. 


28 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


53. In section 106 of the principal Act,— 


(a) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“([A) Where no repayment plan is submitted within the 
period stipulated under sub-section (/), the resolution professional 
shall submit a report to the Adjudicating Authority, and the 
Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order terminating the 
insolvency resolution process of the debtor and the debtor or the 
creditors shall be entitled to file an application for bankruptcy 
under Chapter IV.”; 


(6) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(3A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the 
provisions of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3), where the repayment 
plan is in respect of the debtor who is a personal guarantor to a corporate 
debtor, the resolution professional shall summon the meeting of the 
creditors by issuing a notice in writing specifying therein the date, time 
and place of such meeting.”; 


(c) in sub-section (4), after the words, brackets and figure “For the 
purposes of sub-section (3)”’, the words, brackets, figure and letter “and 
sub-section (3A4)” shall be inserted. 


54. In section 121 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(a) in clause (c), for the word and figures “section 118.”, the words and 
figures “section 118; or” shall be substituted; 


(5) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(d) where an order has been passed by an Adjudicating Authority 
under sub-section (/A) of section 106.”. 


55. In section 124 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply where an application 
is filed for initiating a bankruptcy process in respect of a personal guarantor 
to a corporate debtor.”. 


56. After section 164 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“164A. Where the debtor has entered into an undervalued transaction as 
referred to in sub-section (6) of section 164 and the Adjudicating Authority is 
satisfied that such transaction was deliberately entered into by such debtor— 


(a) for keeping its assets beyond the reach of any person who is 
entitled to make a claim against the debtor; or 


(b) in order to adversely affect the interests of such a person in 
relation to the claim, 


the Adjudicating Authority shall make an order,— 


(i) restoring the position as it existed before such transaction, as if the 
transaction had not been entered into; and 


(zi) protecting the interests of persons who are victims of such transactions: 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


Provided that an order under this section— 


(a) shall not affect any interest in property which was acquired 
from a person other than the debtor or his associate, as the case may be, 
and was acquired in good faith, for value and without notice of the 
relevant circumstances, or affect any interest deriving from such an 
interest; and 


(0) shall not require a person who received a benefit from the 
transaction in good faith, for value and without notice of the relevant 
circumstances to pay any sum, unless he was a party to the transaction.”. 


57. In section 178 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in clause (d), the 


following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that any 
amount, whether or not a security interest is created to secure such amount by an 
act of two or more parties or merely by operation of law, due to the Central 
Government and the State Government, in respect of the whole or any part of the 
period of two years preceding the bankruptcy commencement date, shall be 
distributed under this clause and any remaining amount, whether or not such 
security interest is created to secure the amount, due to the Central Government 
and the State Government, shall be distributed under clause (e);”. 


58. After section 183 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“183A. If, any person has initiated a frivolous or vexatious proceeding 
before the Adjudicating Authority under this Part, it may impose upon such 
person a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may 
extend to two crore rupees.”. 


59. In section 196 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(a) for the words “insolvency professional agencies, insolvency 
professionals and information utilities”, wherever they occur, the words 
“service providers” shall be substituted; 


(b) for the words “insolvency professionals, insolvency professional 
agencies and information utilities”, wherever they occur, the words “service 
providers” shall be substituted; 


(c) in clause (2), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation —For removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 
levy of fee or other charges under this clause also includes any fee or other 
charges levied by the Board in relation to the processes under this Code.” 


(d) after clause (७), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(sa) specify the standards of conduct for the committee of 
creditors and its members, including the timelines within which 
the committee of creditors shall take decisions, while acting under 
Part वी and Part III of this Code, as the case may be;”; 


(e) in clause (70), for the words “under this Code”, the words “for the 
purposes of this Code” shall be substituted. 


60. In section 208 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after clause (ca), the 


following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(cb) creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process under Chapter IVA 
of Part II;”. 


Amendment of 
section 178. 


Insertion of new 
section 183A. 


Penalty for 
initiating 
frivolous or 
vexatious 
proceedings 
under Part III. 


Amendment of 
section 196. 


Amendment of 
section 208. 


Amendment of 
section 214. 


Amendment of 
section 215. 


Amendment of 
section 217. 


Amendment of 
section 218. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 219, 
Show cause 
notice to service 
provider. 


Amendment of 
section 220. 


30 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


61. In section 214 of the principal Act, in clause (e), after the words “such 


information”, the words “in such manner as may be specified” shall be inserted. 


62. In section 215 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“Submission and authentication of financial information to 
information utilities.”; 


(b) in sub-section (3), for the words “An operational creditor 1997, the 
words and figure “An operational creditor shall, before filing an application 
under section 9 of the Code,” shall be substituted; 


(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(4) The corporate debtor or debtor, as the case may be, in respect 
of whom any information is submitted under this section, shall 
authenticate the information in such manner and within such period, as 
may be specified: 


Provided that where the corporate debtor or debtor does not 
respond to the information submitted to the information utility in the 
manner and period as has been specified, such information shall be 
deemed to be authenticated.” 


63. In section 217 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the marginal heading, the marginal heading “Complaints against 
service providers.” shall be substituted; 


(6) for the words “an insolvency professional agency or insolvency 
professional or an information utility”, the words “a service provider” shall be 
substituted. 


64. In section 218 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the marginal heading, the marginal heading “Investigation of 
service providers.” shall be substituted; 


(8) in sub-section (/), for the words “insolvency professional agency or 
insolvency professional or an information utility”, occurring at both the 
places, the words “service provider” shall be substituted. 


65. For section 219 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely: — 


“219. Where the Board, upon completion of an inspection or 
investigation under section 218 or on the basis of material available on record, 
is of the prima facie opinion that sufficient cause exists to take action under 
section 220, it may issue a show cause notice to a service provider in such 
manner, providing such period for giving reply, as may be specified.”. 


66. In section 220 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(1) The Board shall constitute one or more disciplinary 
committees consisting of one or more persons from amongst its 
Chairperson, whole-time members or officers not below the rank of 
the Executive Director for the purposes of this section.”; 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31 


(6) after sub-section (/) as so substituted, the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(1A) The show cause notice issued under section 219 shall be 
referred to a disciplinary committee constituted under sub-section (/).”; 


(c) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) Where the disciplinary committee, after giving the service 
provider an opportunity of being heard, is satisfied that sufficient cause 
exists, it may, impose a penalty as provided in sub-section (3), or 
suspend or cancel the registration of the service provider, or direct 
disgorgement under sub-section (4).”; 


(d) in sub-section (3),— 


(i) for the opening portion, the following opening portion shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“Where any service provider has contravened any 
provisions of this Code or rules or regulations made thereunder, 
the disciplinary committee may impose penalty which shall 
be up to—”; 


(ii) in the proviso, for the words “more than one crore rupees”, the 
words “two crore rupees” shall be substituted; 


(e) in sub-sections (4) and (5), for the word “Board”, wherever it 
occurs, the words “disciplinary committee” shall be substituted; 


(f) after sub-section (6), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(7) Any person aggrieved by an order of the disciplinary 
committee, under sub-sections (2) to (5), may prefer an appeal to the 
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal within a period of thirty 
days from the date of receipt of the order. 


(8) The National Company Law Appellate Tribunal may, if it is 
satisfied that a person was prevented by sufficient cause from filing an 
appeal within thirty days, allow the appeal to be filed under 
sub-section (7) within a further period not exceeding fifteen days.”. 


67. In section 224 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (2),— 


(a) in clause (2), after the words “‘any other source;”, the word 
“and” shall be omitted; 


(0) in clause (d), for the word “Fund.”, the words “Fund; and” shall 
be substituted; 


(c) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely— 


“(e) amounts from such other sources as may be prescribed.”; 


(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The sums credited to the Fund may be utilised— 


Amendment of 
section 224. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 235A. 
Power of 
Adjudicating 
Authority to 
impose 
penalties. 


Amendment of 
section 239, 


32 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(a) by a person who has contributed any amount to the 
Fund under clause (6) of sub-section (2), in the event of 
proceedings initiated in respect of such person under this Code 
before an Adjudicating Authority, by making an application to 
such Adjudicating Authority for withdrawal of funds not 
exceeding the amount contributed by it, for making payment to 
workmen, protecting the assets of such persons, meeting the 
incidental cost during the proceedings or such purposes as may be 
prescribed; and 


(6) for such other purposes and in such manner as may be 
prescribed.”. 


68. For section 235A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“235A. If a person has contravened any provision of this Code or any 
rules or the regulations made thereunder, the Adjudicating Authority may, on 
an application made by the Board or the Central Government or any person 
authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, impose upon such 
person, a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees for each day 
during which the contravention continues, but which may extend up to— 


(a) three times the amount of loss caused, or likely to have been 
caused, to persons concerned on account of such contravention; 


(6) three times the amount of the unlawful gain made on account 
of such contravention, 


whichever is higher: 


Provided that where such loss or unlawful gain is not quantifiable, the 
total amount of the penalty imposed shall not exceed five crore rupees: 


Provided further that where the Adjudicating Authority is of the opinion 
that sufficient cause exists to do so, it may, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, impose a penalty which may be less than one lakh rupees for each day 
that the failure continues. 


Explanation. I—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 
Adjudicating Authority for the purposes of this section shall be the same as 
referred to in section 60 or section 179, as the case may be. 


Explanation. —For the purposes of this Code, it is hereby declared that 
the omission of sections 74 and 76, and the amendment of this section by the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2026, shall not affect:— 


(i) any prosecution instituted under these sections on and before 
the date of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2026 and pending immediately before such date of 
commencement before any court, which shall continue to be heard and 
disposed of by the said court as if the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2026 had not been enacted; and 


(ii) any punishment imposed under these sections on and before 
the date of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2026.”. 


69. In section 239 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the word “provisions”, the word “purposes” 
shall be substituted; 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


(b) in sub-section (2),— 
(7) clause (ea) shall be omitted; 


(ii) after clause (fe), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ff) the conditions under sub-section (/) of section 58B; 


(fg) the fee for filing an objection under sub-section (/) of 
section 58C; 


(fh) the manner and conditions under sub-section (/) of 
section 59A;”; 


(iii) for clause (zi), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(zi) the other sources of amounts to be credited to 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund under clause (e) of 
sub-section (2) of section 224;”; 


(iv) after clause (zi) as so substituted, the following clauses shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“(zia) the purposes under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of 
section 224; 


(zib) the other purposes and the manner under clause (8) of 
sub-section (3) of section 224;”; 


(v) after clause (zm), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zma) the manner and conditions under sub-section (/) of 
section 240C;”. 


70. In section 240 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the word “provisions”, the word “purposes” 
shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (2),— 


(0) after clause (ea), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(eb) the conditions under Explanation to clause (26) of 
section 5;”; 


(ii) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(fa) other information under clause (e) of sub-section (3) of 
section 9;”; 


(zit) for clause (A), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(h) the other document or any other information under 
clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 10;”; 


(iv) after clause (A), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ha) the manner under sub-section (/) of section 12A;”; 


Amendment of 
section 240. 


34 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(v) in clause (n), after the words, brackets and letter “of 
clause (a),”, the words, brackets and letter “the manner under clause (b),” 
shall be inserted; 


(vi) after clause (0), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(oa) any other class or classes of creditors who may attend 
the meetings of committee of creditors under the proviso to 
sub-section (//) of section 21;”; 


(vii) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ta) the manner and conditions under sub-section (/) of 
section 28A;”; 


(viii) in clause (w), for the words, brackets, letters and figures “the 
manner of payment of debts under clause (5), and the other requirements 
to which a resolution plan shall conform to under clause (d) of 
sub-section (2) of section 30;”, the words, brackets, letters and figures 
“the manner of payment of debts of operational creditors under 
clause (b), the manner of payment of debts of financial creditors who do 
not vote in favour of the resolution plan under clause (ba), the conditions 
and manner for constitution of a committee under clause (d) and the 
other requirements to which a resolution plan shall conform to under 
clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 30;” shall be substituted; 


(ix) after clause (wa), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(wb) the form, manner and the conditions under the second 
proviso to sub-section (/) of section 31; 


(wc) the manner and conditions for making an application 
by the committee of creditors for restoring the corporate 
insolvency resolution process and manner and conditions for 
completing the restored corporate insolvency resolution process 
under sub-section (/A) of section 33; 


(wd) the conditions under the proviso to sub-section (2) of 
section 33;”; 


(x) for clause (x), the following clauses shall 96 substituted, 
namely:— 


“(x) the form of written consent from insolvency professional 
under sub-section (6) of section 34; 


(xa) the fee for the conduct of the liquidation proceedings 
and proportion to the value of the liquidation estate assets under 
sub-section (8) of section 34;”; 


(xi) after clause (xa) as so substituted, the following clause, shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(xb) the form for giving written consent under 
sub-section (/) of section 34A;”; 


(xii) in clause (y), for the words, brackets and letter “the manner of 
evaluating the assets and property of the corporate debtor under 
clause (c)”, the words, brackets and letters “the manner of maintaining 
an updated list of claims of creditors under clause (a), the manner of 
evaluating the assets and property of the corporate debtor under 
clause (c)” shall be substituted; 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


(xiii) for clause (z), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(z) the manner in which the committee of creditors shall 
supervise the conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator 
under sub-section (2) of section 35;”; 


(xiv) clauses (ze), (zf) and (zg) shall be omitted; 


(xv) after clause (zi), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zia) the manner, period and _ conditions under 
sub-section (8) of section 52;”; 


(xvi) after clause (2), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zja) the period and the manner of distribution of proceeds 
of sale under sub-section (/) of section 53; 


(zjb) the manner of determining the value of security interest 
under the Explanation to sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of 
sub-section (/) of section 53; 


(zjc) the manner in which the liquidator shall make an 
application to the Adjudicating Authority for the dissolution of the 
corporate debtor under sub-section (/) of section 54; 


(zjd) the manner and conditions under sub-section (/A) of 
section 54; 


(zje) the manner and conditions under sub-section (/B) of 
section 54;”; 


(xvii) for clause (zk), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(zk) the manner under the proviso to sub-section (24) of 
section 54;”; 


(xviii) for clause (zke), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(zke) the information to be furnished under sub-section (3) 
of section 54C;”; 


(xix) clause (z/) shall be omitted; 


(xx) after clause (z/) as so omitted, the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(zla) the manner under clause (a), the form and manner 
under clause (b), and the manner under clause (c) of 
sub-section (2) of section 58B; 


(z/b) the period, form and manner under sub-section (4) of 
section 58B; 


(22) the form and manner under sub-section (/) of 
section 58C; 


(zid) the manner and conditions for exercising the 
powers and performing duties by the resolution professional 
under section 58E; 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(zle) the form in which the report to be prepared under 
clause (c), the report and documents to be filed with the Board 
under clause (f), and such other duties to be performed under 
clause (g) of section 58E; 


(zif) the conditions and manner for the resolution 
professional to attend the meetings and exercise the right to 
reject under sub-section (2) and the form, manner and period under 
sub-section (3) of section 58F; 


(zig) the manner under the proviso to sub-section (/) of 
section 58G; 


(zlh) the form and manner in which the resolution 
professional shall make public announcement under 
sub-section (3) of section 58G; 


(zli) the manner under sub-clause (ii) of sub-section (/) of 
section 58H; 


(20) the form and manner under sub-section (2) of 
section 58H; 


(z/k) the manner under sub-section (/) of section 58-I; 


(207) the conditions and procedural requirements under 
sub-section (2) of section 58K;”; 


(xxi) in clause (zm), for the words “conditions and procedural 
requirements”, the words “conditions, procedural requirements, and 
period” shall be substituted; 


(xxii) after clause (zm), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zma) the other conditions under clause (c) of 
sub-section (5A) of section 59; 


(zmb) the other consequences under sub-section (5C) of 
section 59;”; 


(xxiii) in clause (zv), after the words, brackets and letter “utilities 
under clause (r),” the words, brackets and letters “standards of conduct 
of the committee of creditors and its members under clause (sa),” shall 
be inserted; 


(xxiv) after clause (zzs), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zzsa) the manner under clause (e) of section 214;”; 


(xxv) after clause (zzw), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zzwa) the manner and period under sub-section (4) of 
section 215;”; 


(xxvi) for clause (zzza), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(zzza) the manner and period under section 219;”. 


Insertion of new 71. After section 240A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 


sections 240B insert a 
जात 2400: inserted, namely: 


18 of 2013. 


18 of 2013. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


“2408. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code, 
the Central Government may, by notification, provide an electronic portal and 
the procedures related to the insolvency and bankruptcy processes under this 
Code, which shall be carried out on such electronic portal. 


240C. (J) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this 
Code and the Companies Act, 2013, the Central Government may prescribe 
the manner and conditions for administering and conducting cross-border 
insolvency proceedings under this Code, including the process for recognition 
of proceedings, granting relief, judicial cooperation, assistance and 
coordination in connection with such proceedings, for such class or classes of 
debtors or corporate debtors involving such countries or territories outside 
India, as may be notified by the Central Government in this regard. 


(2) The rules made under this section may provide that any of the 
provisions of this Code or the Companies Act, 2013 shall apply with such 
exceptions, modifications and adaptations, as may be required to administer 
and implement the provisions of this section and rules made thereunder, 
including designating one or more Benches for dealing with proceedings 
under this section. 


(3) A draft of every rule proposed under this section shall be laid before 
each House of Parliament in such manner as provided under sub-sections (4) 
to (6) of section 59A, which shall, mutatis mutandis apply, to the rules made 
under this section. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression 
“corporate debtor” shall also include any person incorporated with limited 
liability outside India.’. 


72. In section 242 of the principal Act, after sub-section (/), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(IA) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), if any 
difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Code, as amended by 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2026, the Central 
Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, as may appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient for removing such difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the 
expiry of a period of five years from the date of commencement of the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2026.”. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


Electronic portal 
for facilitating 
procedures. 


Power to make 
rules for 
cross-border 
insolvency. 


Amendment of 
section 242. 


MGIPMRND—10 GI—06.04.2026. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 


AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


KSHITIZ Distal sianed by 


KSHITIZ MOHAN 


Date:2026.0405 
MOHAN 2issi60530 


