रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल० -(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


प्यारत 
The Gazette of Gudia 


Ot. GH. -S7. Wet. -37.-22082025-26565 
CG-DL-E-22082025-26565 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We ॥7] नई दिल्‍ली, बुधवार, अगस्त 20, 2025/श्रावण 29, 947 (शक) 
No. 77] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 2025/SHRAVANA 29, 947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on 20th August, 2025:— 


BILL No. 0 OF 2025 


A Bill to promote and regulate the online gaming sector including e-sports, educational 
games and social gaming; to provide for the appointment of an Authority for 
coordinated policy support, strategic development and regulatory oversight 
of the sector; to prohibit the offering, operation, facilitation, advertisement, 
promotion and participation in online money games through any computer 
resource, mobile device or the internet, particularly where such activities 
operate across State borders or from foreign jurisdictions; to protect 
individuals, especially youth and vulnerable populations, from the adverse 
social, economic, psychological and privacy-related impacts of such games; 
to ensure the responsible use of digital technologies; to maintain public order 
and protect public health; to safeguard the integrity of financial systems and 
the security and sovereignty of the State; to establish a uniform, national-level 
legal framework in the public interest; and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


WHEREAS the online gaming sector has rapidly evolved into one of the most 
dynamic and fastest-growing segments of the digital and creative economy, offering 
significant opportunities for innovation, cognitive development, employment 
generation, technological advancement and global competitiveness; 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


AND WHEREAS India possesses a large and growing pool of young 
professionals with technological capabilities and rapidly expanding domestic 
market, which together enable the country to assume a leadership role in the global 
online gaming value chain; 


AND WHEREAS the online gaming ecosystem comprises diverse segments, 
including e-sports, casual and social games educational games and online money 
games, and is currently operating in the absence of a dedicated institutional and legal 
framework necessary for strategic coordination, capacity building, common 
infrastructure, research and responsible innovation; 


AND WHEREAS the lack of a coherent and enabling legal framework has 
hindered the sector’s structured development and the promotion of responsible 
gaming practices, requiring urgent policy intervention and support mechanisms; 


AND WHEREAS the parallel proliferation of online money games accessible 
through mobile phones, computers and the internet, and offering monetary returns 
against user deposits has led to serious social, financial, psychological and public 
health harms, particularly among young individuals and _ economically 
disadvantaged groups; 


AND WHEREAS such games often use manipulative design features, addictive 
algorithms, bots and undisclosed agents, undermining fairness, transparency and 
user protection, while promoting compulsive behaviour leading to financial ruin; 


AND WHEREAS platforms offering online gaming system are often aggressively 
marketed through pervasive advertising campaigns, including celebrity and 
influencer endorsements, thereby amplifying their reach and impact especially 
among the youth and vulnerable groups; 


AND WHEREAS the unchecked expansion of online money gaming services has 
been linked to unlawful activities including financial fraud, money-laundering, tax 
evasion, and in some cases, the financing of terrorism, thereby posing threats to 
national security, public order and the integrity of the State; 


AND WHEREAS considering the deleterious and negative impact of online 
money games on the individuals, families, society and the nation and given the 
technical aspects including the very nature of the electronic medium used for online 
money games, the algorithms applied and the national and transnational networks 
involved therein; 


AND WHEREAS many such services operate from offshore jurisdictions, 
bypassing domestic laws, undermining state-level regulations, and presenting 
significant enforcement challenges in terms of extra-territorial jurisdiction and 
inter-State inconsistencies; 


AND WHEREAS it is expedient in the public interest for the Union Government 
to assume legislative competence over the online gaming sector to ensure the 
creation of a secure, structured and innovation-friendly digital environment, while 
addressing the associated risks to public health, consumer safety, public morality 
and financial sovereignty; 


AND WHEREAS it is necessary to clearly delineate and categorise the various 
forms of online games and to provide a tailored legal framework to govern each 
sub-sector of the industry appropriately; 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 


as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
2226४ हा fea ) This Act may be called the Promotion and Regulation of Online Gaming 


commencement. 


35 of 209. 


25 of 2025. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(2) It extends to the whole of India and also applies to online money gaming 


service offered within the territory of India or operated from outside the territory of 
India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 


notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. (J) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “advertisement” shall have the meaning as assigned to it in the 
Consumer Protection Act, 209; 


(6) “Authority” means an Authority constituted under section 8; 
(c) “e-sport” means an online game which— 
(i) is played as part of multi-sports events; 


(ii) involves organised competitive events between individuals or 
teams, conducted in multiplayer formats governed by predefined rules; 


(iii) is duly recognised under the National Sports Governance 
Act, 2025, and registered with the Authority or agency under section 3; 


(iv) has outcome determined solely by factors such as physical 
dexterity, mental agility, strategic thinking or other similar skills of users 
as players; 


(v) may include payment of registration or participation fees solely 
for the purpose of entering the competition or covering administrative 
costs and may include performance-based prize money by the 
player; and 


(vi) shall not involve the placing of bets, wagers or any other stakes 
by any person, whether or not such person is a participant, including any 
winning out of such bets, wagers or any other stakes; 


(d) “internet” means the combination of computer facilities and 
electromagnetic transmission media, and related equipment and software, 
comprising the interconnected worldwide network of computer networks that 
transmits information based on a protocol for controlling such transmission; 


(e) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
and the term “notify” shall be construed accordingly; 


(f) “online game” means any game, which is played on an electronic or 
a digital device and is managed and operated as a software through the internet 
or any other kind of technology facilitating electronic communication; 


(g) “online money game” means an online game, irrespective of whether 
such game is based on skill, chance, or both, played by a user by paying fees, 
depositing money or other stakes in expectation of winning which entails 
monetary and other enrichment in return of money or other stakes; but shall 
not include any e-sports; 


(A) “online money gaming service” means a service offered by a person 
for entering or playing the online money game; 


(7) “online social game” means an online game which— 


(i) does not involve staking of money or other stakes or 
participation with the expectation of winning by way of monetary gain 
in return of money or other stakes; 


Definitions. 


Recognition and 
promotion of 
e-sport. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(ii) may allow access through payment of a subscription fee or 
one-time access fee, provided that such payment is not in the nature of a 
stake or wager; 


(iii) is offered solely for entertainment, recreation or 
skill-development purposes; and 


(iv) is not an online money game or e-sport; 


(j) “other stakes” means anything recognised as equivalent or 
convertible to money and includes credits, coins, token or objects or any other 
similar thing, by whatever name called and whether it is real or virtual, which 
is purchased by paying money directly or by indirect means or as part of, or in 
relation to, an online game; 


(k) “person” includes— 

(7) an individual; 

(ii) a Hindu undivided family; 

(iii) a company; 

(iv) a firm; 

(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not; 

(vi) the State; and 

(vii) every artificial juristic person, not falling within any of the 
preceding sub-clauses; 
(J) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(m) “user” means any person who accesses or avails online game. 


(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 and rules made thereunder shall have the same 
meaning as respectively assigned to them in that Act and the said rules. 


CHAPTER II 
DEVELOPMENT AND RECOGNITION 
3. (7) The Central Government shall take steps as it considers necessary to 


recognise and register e-sports with the Authority or agency, as the case may be, as 
a legitimate form of competitive sport in India and to promote and develop e-sports. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (/), such steps may 
include— 


(a) formation of guidelines and standards for the organisation and 
conduct of e-sports events; 


(6) establishment of training academies, research centres and other 
institutions dedicated to advancement of e-sports; 


(c) introduction of incentive schemes, awareness campaigns and public 
outreach programmes to encourage innovation and establishment of new 
enterprises to create e-sport technology platforms; 


(d) coordination with State Governments and recognised sporting 
federations for integration of e-sports within broader sporting policy 
initiatives; and 

(e) such other measures which are necessary to promote the sector, as 
may be prescribed. 


2] of 2000. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


4. (/) The Central Government shall take steps as it considers necessary to 
recognise, categorise and register online social games with the Authority or agency, 
as the case may be, and facilitate the development and availability of online social 
games for recreational and educational purposes. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (/), such steps may 
include— 


(a) creation of mechanism for the registration of online social games; 


(b) creation of platforms or programmes to support the development and 
distribution of online social games; 


(c) supporting initiatives aimed at increasing public access to safe and 
age-appropriate social gaming content; 


(d) undertaking awareness programmes to highlight the positive use of 
social games for recreation, skill-development and digital literacy; 


(e) coordination with State Governments and educational or recreational 
institutions for promotion of social gaming as part of broader digital 
engagement strategies; and 


(f) such other measures which are necessary to promote the sector, as 
may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER III 
PROHIBITION 


5. No person shall offer, aid, abet, induce or otherwise indulge or engage in 
the offering of online money game and online money gaming service. 


6. No person shall make, cause to be made, aid, abet, induce, or otherwise be 
involved in the making or causing to be made any advertisement, in any media 
including electronic means of communication, which directly or indirectly promotes 
or induces any person to play any online money game or indulge in any activity 
promoting online money gaming. 


7. No bank, financial institution, or any other person facilitating financial 
transactions or authorisation of funds shall engage in, permit, aid, abet, induce or 
otherwise facilitate any transaction or authorisation of funds towards payment for 
any online money gaming service. 


CHAPTER IV 
AUTHORITY ON ONLINE GAMING 
8. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute an Authority 
consisting of a Chairperson and such number of other Members or designate any 


existing Authority or Authorities or any agency to assist it in performing any of the 
functions under this Act. 


(2) The Central Government may vest the Authority or agency, as the case 
may be, with all or any of the following powers, namely:— 


(a) to determine, on the receipt of an application from any person 
offering an online game or on suo motu basis, whether a particular online game 
is an online money game or otherwise, after making such inquiry as it deems 
necessary; 


(b) to recognise, categorise and register online games in such manner as 
may be prescribed; and 


(c) such other powers and functions as may be prescribed. 


Recognition and 
development of 
online social 
games. 


Prohibition of 
online money 
game and online 
money gaming 
service. 
Prohibition of 
advertisement 
related to online 
money game. 


Prohibition of 
transfer of fund. 


Establishment of 
an Authority 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(3) Every person offering, organising or facilitating any online game shall 
comply with the directions, orders, guidelines or codes of practice issued by the 
Central Government or the Authority or agency in discharge of their functions under 
this Act. 


(4) The Central Government may prescribe the following, namely:— 


(a) composition and qualification for appointment of Chairperson and 
Members; 


(b) salary, allowances payable to them and their term of office; 


(c) disqualification for appointment and continuation as Chairperson and 
Members; 


(d) resignation by Members and filling of vacancy; 
(e) proceedings of the Authority; 

(f) officers and employees of the Authority; 

(g) powers to be exercised by the Chairperson; 


(A) handling of complaints and grievances related to online games 
including manner of inquiry; and 


(i) any other matter to further the objective of this Act. 


(5) The Authority or agency, as the case may be, may respond to the 
complaints relating to online games which are prejudicial to the interests of users, 
forwarded either in writing or in electronic mode. 


CHAPTER V 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
Penalty for 9. (/) Any person who offers online money gaming service in contravention 
SeenON: of section 5 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 


three years or with fine which may extend to one crore rupees or with both. 


(2) Any person who makes or causes to make advertisement in any media, in 
contravention of section 6, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees or with 
both. 


(3) Any person who engages in any transaction or authorisation of funds in 
contravention of section 7 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to one crore rupees or with 
both. 


(4) If any person convicted of an offence under sub-section (/) or 
sub-section (3) is again convicted of an offence under the same provision, he shall 
be punished with imprisonment for the second and for every subsequent offence for 
a term which shall not be less than three years, but may extend to five years and 
shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one crore rupees, but may 
extend to two crore rupees. 


(5) If any person convicted of an offence under sub-section (2) is again 
convicted of an offence under the same provision, he shall be punished with 
imprisonment for the second and for every subsequent offence for a term which 
shall not be less than two years, but may extend to three years and shall also be liable 
to fine which shall not be less than fifty lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore 
rupees. 


46 of 2023. 


2] of 2000. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


0. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, offences under section 5 and section 7 shall be cognizable and 
non-bailable. 


Il. (J) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person 
who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of that part of the business of the company as well 
as the company, shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (/) shall render any such person liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly under this Act, if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (J), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence 
has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any 
neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall hold an independent director or 
a non-executive director of a company who is not involved in the actual decision 
making, liable for such offence. 


Explanation—F or the purposes of this section, the expressions— 
(a) “company” means a body corporate, and includes— 
(i) a firm; and 


(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals whether 
incorporated or not; and 


(0) “director”, in relation to— 
(i) a firm, means a partner in the firm; 


(ii) any association of persons or a body of individuals, means any 
member controlling its affairs thereof. 


2. (J) Any person who fails to comply with any direction or order issued by 
the Central Government or the Authority or agency under sub-section (3) of 
section 8 shall be liable to penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees or may 
include suspension or cancellation of registration, and prohibition from offering, 
facilitating or promoting such games for such period as may be determined by the 
Central Government or the Authority. 


(2) No action under sub-section (/) shall be taken without giving an 
opportunity of being heard. 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


3. Every person shall comply with any direction issued by the Central 
Government in relation to online money gaming services. 


4. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of section 5, section 6 and 
section 7, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in section 69A of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000, any information generated, transmitted, 
received or hosted in any computer resource in relation to online money gaming 
service shall be liable to be blocked for access by the public in such manner as 
provided in that Act. 


Cognizance of 
offences. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Non-compliance 
by any other 
person. 


Compliance with 
direction of 
Central 
Government. 
Blocking of 
online money 
gaming service. 


Power to 
investigate 
offences. 


Search and 
seizure of 


property. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
make rules. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


5. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the 
time being in force, the Central Government may, by notification, authorise any 
officer or class of officers of the Central Government, Authority or State 
Government to exercise the powers of investigation in respect of offences under 
this Act. 


6. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, any officer authorised under section |5 may enter any place, whether 
physical or digital, and search and arrest without warrant any person found therein 
who is reasonably suspected of having committed or of committing or of being 
about to commit any offence under this Act. 


(2) Where any person is arrested under sub-section (/) by an officer other than 
a police officer as referred to in sub-section (/), such officer shall, without 
unnecessary delay, take or send the person arrested before a magistrate having 
jurisdiction in the case or before the officer-in-charge of a police station. 


(3) The provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 shall, 
subject to the provisions of this section, apply, so far as may be, in relation to any 
entry, search or arrest made under this section. 


Explanation —F or the purposes of this section, “any place” shall include any 
premises, building, vehicle, computer resource, virtual digital space, electronic 
records or electronic storage device and the officer may, if necessary, gain access to 
such computer resource, virtual digital space, electronic records or electronic 
storage device by overriding any access control or security code, where such code 
thereof is not available. 


7. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central 
Government or the Authority or any officer of the Central Government or any 
member, officer or other employees of the Authority for anything which is done in 
good faith or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder. 


8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of 
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force and in case of any 
inconsistency of this Act with any other Act, the provisions of this Act shall, to the 
extent of such inconsistency, have overriding effect over any such Act. 


9. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out 
the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) such other measures as may be necessary to promote the sector 
relating to e-sports under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 3; 


(6) such other measures as may be necessary to promote the sector 
relating to online social gaming under clause () of sub-section (2) of 
section 4; 


(c) the manner of recognising, categorising and registering online games 
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 8; 


(d) such other powers and functions relating to powers of the Authority 
or agency under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 8; 


(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in 
respect of which provision is to be or may be made by rules. 


46 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(3) Every rule made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


20. (/) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to any provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty. 


(2) No order under sub-section (/) shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the date of the commencement of this Act. 


(3) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECT AND REASONS 
The unprecedented expansion of information and communication 
technologies in recent years has resulted in the emergence of new forms of digital 
entertainment and competitive participation, most prominently in the form of online 
gaming. These activities have become an important means of engagement for the 
youth of the country. 


2. The online gaming sector has emerged as one of the fastest-growing 
components of the creative economy, contributing significantly to innovation, 
employment generation and export earnings. India possesses a large pool of skilled 
young professionals, strong technological capabilities and a rapidly growing 
domestic market, which together provide an opportunity for the country to assume 
a leadership role in the global value chain of online gaming. 


3. At present, the online gaming sector ecosystem has multiple segments. 
These include e-sports; online social games including casual games; and education 
games; and online money games. The sector operates without a dedicated 
institutional mechanism for strategic support, co-ordination and capacity building. 
The absence of an enabling legal framework has adversely impacted the sector’s 
assured growth, development of common infrastructure, provision of specialised 
training and research in emerging technologies in the sector. Therefore, there is an 
urgent need to establish a structured mechanism for policy formulation, stakeholder 
engagement and facilitation of development of the sector in a transparent and 
coherent manner. 


4. Parallelly, the unchecked and widespread proliferation of online money 
games which readily accessible through mobile devices, computers, and the internet, 
and offering monetary returns in exchange for deposited funds has led to grave 
social, economic, and psychological consequences across the country. These 
platforms often promote compulsive and addictive behaviour, resulting in financial 
ruin, mental health disorders, and increasing incidents of fraud and exploitation. 


5. A significant number of young persons and economically vulnerable 
individuals have been adversely impacted by the seamless availability of these 
games, driven by the low cost of internet access, the ubiquity of mobile and 
computing devices, and the ease of app-based participation. This problem is further 
exacerbated by aggressive promotional campaigns, including the use of celebrity 
endorsements, which enhance the appeal and reach of such platforms. 


6. The algorithms used in online money games are often opaque and may be 
designed to manipulate user engagement surreptitiously. These games can also be 
operated by bots or undisclosed agents, undermining fairness and transparency. 
Reports and studies, both national and international, have highlighted the strong 
association between such games and compulsive behaviours, psychological distress, 
financial hardship, and the disruption of family and social life, thereby posing a 
serious public health risk. 


7. Beyond the individual, the proliferation of online money games had 
deleterious affect on families, society, and the economy. In certain cases, these 
platforms have been linked to illegal activities including money-laundering, 
financial fraud, the financing of terrorism, and use as messaging platform for 
terrorist and terrorist organisations, thereby affecting the security and sovereignty 
of the State. 


8. A plethora of online money gaming service providers operating from 
offshore locations often circumvent state-specific regulations, evade taxation, and 
create enforcement challenges pertaining to extra-territorial concerns for domestic 
authorities and has raised complex challenges with respect to user safety, consumer 
protection, cross-border operations, and inter-State regulatory inconsistencies. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY I] 


9. Considering the deleterious and negative impact of online money games on 
the individuals, families, society and the nation as outlined in the foregoing 
paragraphs and given the technical aspects including the very nature of the 
electronic medium used for online money games, the algorithms applied and the 
national and transnational networks involved, it is prudent and practical in the 
interest of general public to completely prohibit the activity of online money 
gaming, rather than attempts to regulation. 


l0. In light of the scope of the development of online gaming sector on one 
hand, it requires support and facilitation for an upright growth and on the other hand 
due to increasing social, financial, and regulatory risks posed to the interest of the 
general public by the online money gaming sector, including those relating to 
consumer protection, public health, public order, and national security, it is 
expedient in the public interest for the Union Government to assume control over 
this emerging industry. 


ll. There is a need to clearly delineate and categorise the different types of 
online games that are being offered and also to ensure that an appropriate enabling 
and legal framework is created to address the issues and concerns of each of the 
sub-sectors of online gaming. 


2. Accordingly, the Bill proposes to establish a robust legal framework, not 
only prohibit online money gaming in the country but also to regulate, promote and 
encourage the sector for innovation and economic growth and ensure a developed, 
safe and responsible digital environment for all citizens. 


NEw DELHI; ASHWINI VAISHNAW. 
The \9th August, 2025. 


PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 7 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 


[Letter No. CLDG/3/2025-CL and DG dated 49 August, 2025 from 
Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw, Minister of Railways, Information & Broadcasting 
and Electronics & Information Technology to the Secretary General, 
Lok Sabha] 


The President, having been informed of the subject matter of “the Promotion 
and Regulation of Online Gaming Bill, 2025”, recommends the introduction of the 
Bill in Lok Sabha under article 7() of the Constitution and recommends to 
Lok Sabha the consideration of the Bill under article 7(3) of the Constitution. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the establishment of an Authority to regulate 
online gaming. The Bill if enacted would involve about fifty crore rupees towards 
initial capital expenditure and twenty crore rupees annually towards recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The expenditure is not 
quantifiable at this stage as the structure of the Authority and other aspects are not 
final. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the 
matter in respect of which rules may be made. These matters include—(a) such other 
measures as may be necessary to promote the sector relating to e-sports under 
clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 3; (b) such other measures as may be 
necessary to promote the sector relating to online social gaming under clause (f) of 
sub-section (2) of section 4; (c) the manner of recognising, categorising and 
registering online games under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 8; (व) such 
other powers and functions relating to powers of the Authority or agency under 
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 8; and (e) any other matter which is required 
to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be or may be 
made by rules. 


2. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative details, and as such it is not practicable to provide for 
the same in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a 
normal character. 


l4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


BILL No. Il] OF 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


Short title and l. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Thirtieth 
commencement. Amendment) Act 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY I5 


2. In article 75 of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause shall 


be inserted, namely:— 


“(5A) A Minister, who for any period of thirty consecutive days during 
holding the office as such, is arrested and detained in custody, on allegation of 
committing an offence under any law for the time being in force, which is 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or 
more, shall be removed from his office by the President on the advice of the 
Prime Minister to be tendered by the thirty-first day, after being taken in such 
custody: 


Provided that if the advice of the Prime Minister, for the removal of such 
Minister is not tendered to the President by the thirty-first day, he shall cease 
to be a Minister, with effect from the day falling thereafter: 


Provided further that in case of the Prime Minister, who for any period 
of thirty consecutive days during holding the office as such, is arrested and 
detained in custody, on allegation of committing an offence under any law for 
the time being in force, which is punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years or more, shall tender his resignation by the 
thirty-first day after such arrest and detention, and if he does not tender his 
resignation, he shall cease to be the Prime Minister with effect from the day 
falling thereafter: 


Provided also that nothing in this clause shall prevent such Prime 
Minister or Minister from being subsequently appointed as the Prime Minister 
or a Minister, by the President, on his release from custody, as per clause ().”. 


3. Inarticle 64 of the Constitution, after clause (4), the following clause shall 


be inserted, namely:— 


“(4A) A Minister, who for any period of thirty consecutive days during 
holding the office as such, is arrested and detained in custody, on allegation of 
committing an offence under any law for the time being in force, which is 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or more, 
shall be removed from his office by the Governor on the advice of the Chief 
Minister to be tendered by the thirty-first day, after being taken in such custody: 


Provided that if the advice of the Chief Minister, for the removal of such 
Minister is not tendered to the Governor by the thirty-first day, he shall cease 
to be a Minister, with effect from the day falling thereafter: 


Provided further that in case of a Chief Minister, who for any period of thirty 
consecutive days during holding the office as such, is arrested and detained in 
custody, on allegation of committing an offence under any law for the time being 
in force, which is punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five years or more, shall tender his resignation by the thirty-first day after such 
arrest and detention, and if he does not tender his resignation, he shall cease to be 
the Chief Minister, with effect from the day falling thereafter: 


Provided also that nothing in this clause shall prevent such Chief 
Minister or Minister from being subsequently appointed as the Chief Minister 
or a Minister, by the Governor, on his release from custody, as per clause ().”. 


4. In article 239AA of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause 


shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(5A) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, if a Minister, who 
for any period of thirty consecutive days during holding the office as such, is 
arrested and detained in custody, on allegation of committing an offence under 
any law for the time being in force, which is punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to five years or more, shall be removed from his 
office, by the President on the advice of the Chief Minister to be tendered by 
the thirty-first day, after being taken in such custody: 


Amendment of 
article 75. 


Amendment of 
article 64. 


Amendment of 
article 239AA. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


Provided that if the advice of the Chief Minister for removal of such 
Minister is not tendered to the President by the thirty-first day, he shall cease 
to be a Minister, with effect from the day falling thereafter: 


Provided further that in case of the Chief Minister, who for any period 
of thirty consecutive days during holding the office as such, is arrested and 
detained in custody, on allegation of committing an offence under any law for 
the time being in force, which is punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years or more, shall tender his resignation by the 
thirty-first day after such arrest and detention, and if he does not tender his 
resignation, he shall cease to be the Chief Minister, with effect from the day 
falling thereafter: 


Provided also that nothing in this clause shall prevent such Chief 
Minister or Minister from being subsequently appointed as the Chief Minister 
or a Minister, by the President, on his release from custody, as per clause (5).”. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The elected representatives represent hopes and aspirations of the people of 


India. It is expected that they rise above political interests and act only in the public 
interest and for the welfare of people. 


2. It is expected that the character and conduct of Ministers holding the office 
should be beyond any ray of suspicion. 


3. A Minister, who is facing allegation of serious criminal offences, arrested 
and detained in custody, may thwart or hinder the canons of constitutional morality 
and principles of good governance and eventually diminish the constitutional trust 
reposed by people in him. 


4. There is however, no provision under the Constitution for removal of a 
Minister who is arrested and detained in custody on account of serious criminal 
charges. 


5. In view of the above, there is a need to amend articles 75, 64 and 239AA 
of the Constitution, for providing legal framework for removal of the Prime Minister 
or a Minister in the Union Council of Ministers and the Chief Minister or a Minister 
in the Council of Ministers of States and the National Capital Territory of Delhi in 
such cases. 


6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The \9th August, 2025. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


BILL No. !3 OF 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, |963. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


Short title and 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territories 
commencement. 


(Amendment) Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


20 of 963. 2. In section 45 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 963, after pias of 
sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— ila 


“(5A) A Minister, who for any period of thirty consecutive days during 
holding the office as such, is arrested and detained in custody, on allegation of 
committing an offence under any law for the time being in force, which is 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or 
more, shall be removed from his office, by the President on the advice of the 
Chief Minister to be tendered by the thirty-first day, after being taken in such 
custody: 


Provided that if the advice of the Chief Minister, for the removal of such 
Minister is not tendered to the President by the thirty-first day, he shall cease 
to be a Minister, with effect from the day falling thereafter: 


Provided further that in case of the Chief Minister, who for any period 
of thirty consecutive days during holding the office as such, is arrested and 
detained in custody, on allegation of committing an offence under any law for 
the time being in force, which is punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years or more, shall tender his resignation by the 
thirty-first day after such arrest and detention, and if he does not tender his 
resignation, he shall cease to be the Chief Minister, with effect from the day 
falling thereafter: 


Provided also that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent such 
Chief Minister or Minister from being subsequently appointed as the 
Chief Minister or a Minister, by the President, on his release from custody, as 
per sub-section (/).”. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The elected representatives represent hopes and aspirations of the people of 


India. It is expected that they rise above political interests and act only in the 
public interest and for the welfare of people. 


2. It is expected that the character and conduct of Ministers holding the 
office should be beyond any ray of suspicion. 


3. A Minister, who is facing allegation of serious criminal offences, arrested 
and detained in custody, may thwart or hinder the canons of constitutional 
morality and principles of good governance and eventually diminish the 
constitutional trust reposed by people in him. 


4. There is, however, no provision under the Government of Union 
Territories Act, 963 (20 of 963) for removal of the Chief Minister or a Minister 
who is arrested and detained in custody on account of serious criminal charges. 


5. In view of the above, there is a need to amend section 45 of the 
Government of Union Territories Act, 963, for providing legal framework for 
removal of the Chief Minister or a Minister in such cases. 


6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The \9th August, 2025. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2. 


BILL No. 2 OF 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 209. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (7) This Act may be called the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Short title and 


(Amendment) Act, 2025. aca ea 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
34 of 209. 2. In section 54 of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 209, after Amendment of 


sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 00048 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


“(5A) A Minister, who for any period of thirty consecutive days during 
holding the office as such, is arrested and detained in custody, on allegation 
of committing an offence under any law for the time being in force, which is 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or 
more, shall be removed from his office, by the Lieutenant Governor on the 
advice of the Chief Minister to be tendered by the thirty-first day, after being 
taken in such custody: 


Provided that if the advice of the Chief Minister, for the removal of 
such Minister is not tendered to the Lieutenant Governor by the 
thirty-first day, he shall cease to be a Minister, with effect from the day 
falling thereafter: 


Provided further that in case of the Chief Minister, who for any period 
of thirty consecutive days during holding the office as such, is arrested and 
detained in custody, on allegation of committing an offence under any law 
for the time being in force, which is punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years or more, shall tender his resignation by the 
thirty-first day after such arrest and detention, and if he does not tender his 
resignation, he shall cease to be the Chief Minister, with effect from the day 
falling thereafter: 


Provided also that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent such Chief 
Minister or Minister from being subsequently appointed as the Chief 
Minister or a Minister, by the Lieutenant Governor, on his release from 
custody, as per sub-section (/).”. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The elected representatives represent hopes and aspirations of the people of 


India. It is expected that they rise above political interests and act only in the 
public interest and for the welfare of people. 


2. It is expected that the character and conduct of Ministers holding the office 
should be beyond any ray of suspicion. 


3. A Minister, who is facing allegation of serious criminal offences, arrested 
and detained in custody, may thwart or hinder the canons of constitutional morality 
and principles of good governance and eventually diminish the constitutional trust 
reposed by people in him. 


4. However, there is no provision under the Jammu and Kashmir 
Reorganisation Act, 20l9 (34 of 20l9) for removal of the Chief Minister or a 
Minister who is arrested and detained in custody on account of serious criminal 
charges. 


5. In view of the above, there is a need to amend section 54 of the Jammu 
and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 209, for providing legal framework for removal 
of the Chief Minister or a Minister in such cases. 


6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The \9th August, 2025. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-—!0054. 


KSHITIZ 
MOHAN 


MGIPMRND—(67GI(S4)—22-8-2025. 


