रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. 0. L.-33004/99 


Vita & राजपत्र 
Che Gazette of Jtndia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-11092024-257072 
CG-DL-E-11092024-257072 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग प---खण्ड 3---उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं. 3541] नई दिल्ली, मंगलवार, सितम्बर 10, 2024/भाद्र 19, 1946 
No. 3541] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 2024/BHADRA 19, 1946 


गृह मंत्रालय 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्ली, 10 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 3873(अ).-- केंद्रीय सरकार ने, विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिनियम, 1967 (1967 का 37) 
(जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिनियम कहा गया है) की धारा 3 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते 
हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग Il, खंड 3, उपखंड (ii), तारीख 28 फ़रवरी, 
2024 में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 935(अ), तारीख 28 फ़रवरी, 2024 (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात Sa 
अधिसूचना कहा गया है) के द्वारा मुस्लिम कॉन्फ्रेंस जम्मू और कश्मीर (सुमजी गुट) (एमसीजेके-एस) को विधिविरुद्ध संगम 
के रूप में घोषित किया था; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (1) के साथ पठित धारा 5 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा 
प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग ॥, खंड 3, 
उपखंड (ii), तारीख 18 मार्च, 2024 में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 1462(अ), तारीख 18 मार्च, 2024 के द्वारा 
विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिकरण कहा गया है) का गठन किया था, 
जिसमें दिल्ली उच्च न्यायालय की न्यायाधीश न्यायमूर्ति नीना बंसल कृष्णा थीं; 

और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, 
इस न्यायनिर्णयन के प्रयोजन के लिए कि क्‍या मुस्लिम कॉन्फ्रेंस जम्मू और कश्मीर (सुमजी गुट) (एमसीजेके-एस) को 
विधिविरुद्ध संगम के रूप में घोषित किए जाने का पर्याप्त कारण था या नहीं, तारीख 26 मार्च, 2024 को उक्त अधिकरण 
को Sat अधिसूचना निर्दिष्ट की थी; 


5811 (1/2024 (1) 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


और, Set अधिकरण ने, उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (3) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, 
उक्त अधिसूचना में की गई घोषणा की पुष्टि करते हुए तारीख 23 अगस्त, 2024 को एक आदेश पारित किया था; 


अतः, अब, केंद्रीय सरकार Sat अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (4) के अनुसरण में, THT अधिकरण के आदेश 
को प्रकाशित करती है, अर्थात्‌:- 


---: अधिकरण का आदेश अंग्रेजी भाग में छपा है :--- 
(न्यायमूर्ति नीना बंसल कृष्णा) 
विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण” 
[फा. सं. 14017/53/2024/एन.आई.-एम.एफ.ओ..] 


अभिजीत सिन्हा, संयुक्त सचिव 


MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 10th September, 2024 


59.0. 3873(E).— Whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of 
section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967) (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), 
declared the Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) (MCJK-S) as an unlawful association vide 
notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, number S.O. 935(E), dated the 28" February, 
2024 (hereinafter referred to as the said notification) published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 
3, Sub-section (ii), dated the 28" February, 2024; 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 5 
read with sub-section (1) of section 4 of the said Act constituted the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal 
(hereinafter referred to as the said Tribunal) consisting of Justice Neena Bansal Krishna, Judge, High Court of Delhi 
vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, number S.O. 1462(E), dated the 18" 
March, 2024 published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (ii), dated the 18" March, 
2024; 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 4 of 
the said Act referred the said notification to the said Tribunal on 26" March, 2024 for the purpose of adjudicating 
whether or not there was sufficient cause for declaring the Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) 
(MCJK-S) as an unlawful association; 


And, whereas, the said Tribunal in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of section 4 of the said 
Act, passed an order on 23" August, 2024, confirming the declaration made in the said notification; 


Now, therefore, in pursuance of sub-section (4) of section 4 of the said Act, the Central Government hereby 
publishes the order of the said Tribunal, namely : - 


“UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL, 
HIGH COURT OF DELHI, NEW DELHI 


Date of Decision: 2377 August 2024 


IN THE MATTER OF: 
Gazette Notification No. S.O. 935 (E) dated 28" February, 2024 declaring the Muslim Conference Jammu and 
Kashmir (Sumji faction) as an unlawful association under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


AND IN THE MATTER OF: 
Reference under Section 4 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 made to this Tribunal by the Government 
of India through Ministry of Home Affairs vide Gazette Notification No. 5.0. 1462 (E) dated 18" March, 2024. 


Present : Dr. Ajay Gulati, Registrar, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal. 
Ms. Aishwarya Bhati (Additional Solicitor General) with Mr. Amit 
Prasad, Mr. Sabarish Subramaniam, Mr. Rajat Nair, Ms. Poornima 
Singh, Ms. Manisha Chava & Mr. Abhijeet Singh, Id. Advocates for 
the Union of India. 
Mr. Parth Awasthi & Ms. Deepika Gupta, Advocates for Union 
Territory of Jammu & Kashmir. 
Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gupta, Director, Mr. Brijesh Kumar, Under 
Secretary and Mr. Sameer Shukla, Asstt. Section Officer, Ministry 
of Home Affairs. 
Mr. Arjun Chopra, Law Researcher. 
CORAM: 
HON’BLE Ms. JUSTICE NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA 
ORDER 
1. This order answers a Reference under Section 4(3) read with Section 3(3) of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’ or ‘UAPA’, for short) made to this Tribunal constituted 
vide Gazette Notification No. 5.0. 1462 (E) dated 18 March, 2024 under Section 5(1) of the Act, for adjudicating 


whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) / 
(MCJK-S hereinafter) as an “unlawful association”. 


I. THE NOTIFICATION 
2. The Central Government published a Gazette Notification (extra-ordinary) bearing No. 8.0. 935 (E) dated 
287 February, 2024 in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 3(1) of the Act and declared MCJK-S to be an 
“unlawful association”. A copy of the said Notification has been sent to this Tribunal, as contemplated under Rule 50) 


of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 (“UAP Rules” in short). The said Notification dated 287 
February, 2024 reads as under: 


“S.O. 935(E)-Whereas, the Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) / 
(hereinafter referred to as the MCJK-S), chaired by Ghulam Nabi Sumji is known for its anti India 
and pro-Pakistan propaganda; 


And whereas, the members of MCJK-S have remained involved in supporting terrorist 
activities and providing logistic support to terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir; 


And, whereas, the leaders and members of MCJK-S have been involved in raising funds 
through various sources including Pakistan and its proxy organizations for perpetrating unlawful 
activities, including supporting terrorist activities, sustained stone-pelting on Security Forces in 
Jammu and Kashmir; 


And, whereas, MCJK-S has constantly asked to the people of Kashmir to refrain from 
taking part in elections and thereby targeted and hampered the very basic constitutionally 
recognized fundamentals of Indian democracy ; 


And, whereas, the MCJK-S and its members by their activities show sheer disrespect 
towards the constitutional authority and constitutional set up of the country; 


And, whereas, the MCJK-S and its members, have been indulging in unlawful activities, 
which are prejudicial to the integrity, sovereignty, security and communal harmony of the country; 


And whereas, MCJK-S is involved in promoting, aiding and abetting secession of Jammu 
and Kashmir from India by involving the anti-national and subversive activities; sowing seeds of 
dis-affection amongst people; exhorting people to destabilize law and order; encouraging the use of 
arms to separate Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India; and promoting hatred against 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


established Government by giving clarion call to boycott elections on multiple occasions in Jammu 
and Kashmir; 


And, whereas, the Central Government is of the opinion that if there is no immediate curb 
or control of unlawful activities of the Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction), it 
will use this opportunity to- 


(i) continue with the anti-national activities which are detrimental to the territorial integrity, 
security and sovereignty of the country; 


(ii) continue advocating the secession of the Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India 
while disputing its accession to the Union of India; and 


(iii) continue propagating false narrative and anti-national sentiments of the people of Jammu 
and Kashmir with the intention to cause disaffection against India and disrupt public order; 


And, whereas, the Central government for the above-mentioned reasons is firmly of the 
opinion that having regard to the activities of the Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji 
faction), it is necessary to declare the Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) 
(MCJK-S) as an ‘unlawful association’ with immediate effect; 


Now, Therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967), the Central Government hereby declares 
the Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) (MCJK-S) as an unlawful association; 


The Central Government, having regard to the above circumstances, is of firm opinion that 
it is necessary to declare the Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) (MCJK-S) as 
an ‘unlawful association’ with immediate effect, and accordingly, in exercise of the powers 
conferred by the proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the said Act, the Central Government 
hereby directs that this notification shall, subject to any order that may be made under Section 4 of 
the said Act, have effect for a period of five years from the date of its publication in the Official 
Gazette.” 


3 As can be seen, the notification also enumerates the reasons/ circumstances, as contemplated under proviso to 
Section 3(3) of the Act, for declaring the MCJK-Sumji (hereinafter to be referred to as MCJK - S) as unlawful, with 
immediate effect. 


Il. THE BACKGROUND NOTE 


4. Along with the Reference to this Tribunal under Section 4 of the UAPA, the Central Government has 
submitted and filed before this Tribunal a Background Note, as contemplated under Rule 5(ii) of the UAP Rules, 
1968. 


5. The Background Note states that Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir, a Pakistan backed secessionist 
organization, was formed in year 1985. Since the formation, Muslim Conference has been supporting terrorism and 
anti-India propaganda for fueling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir and started its campaign by resorting to 
radicalization of the youth towards religious fundamentalism and questioning the accession of Jammu and Kashmir 
with India. Muslim Conference later got split into three factions; one led by Abdul Gani Bhat of Sopore, another by 
Ghulam Nabi Sumji of Bijebehera and the third by Shabir Ahmad Dar of Sopore. MCJK-Sumji started functioning as 
an over ground workers group to provide logistic support to terrorists and Ghulam Nabi Sumji turned up as a hardcore 
pro-Pakistan supporter and provocateur. Adil Mushtaq Wani is a representative of MCJK-S in Pakistan Occupied 
Kashmir (‘POK’ hereinafter). 


6. The Background Note further states that MCJK-S was established as an upper ground organization to 
provide background and logistic support in Jammu and Kashmir to terrorists operating in Kashmir and to popularize 
and strengthen the terrorist and secessionist networks. 


de The Note further states that objective of MCJK (Sumji faction) has been to separate Jammu and Kashmir 
from India. According to MCJK-S, the Jammu and Kashmir is a disputed territory and India’s control on it is not 
justified. MCJK-S is directly involved in anti-India propaganda besides fuelling and causing law-and-order incidents 
in Jammu and Kashmir. Its primary role is to provide a negative image of counter insurgency operations in Jammu 
and Kashmir, glorifying the terrorist activities, mobilizing public opinion against India, propagating false narrative 
and to incite youth towards violence and terrorism. 


8. The Note further states that MCJK-S under the patronage of Ghulam Nabi Sumji has left no stone unturned 
to spread hatred and disaffection against India, vilifying Indian State, launching calculated attacks on the government 
of the day, provoking and inciting youth into violence, spawning protests disclaiming and disrupting the sovereignty 
and integrity of India and extending covert and overt support to anti-national organizations. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


9. Present Leadership/Executive Members of MCJK-S - As per the Background note, the leadership of 
MCJK-S is as under: 
SL Name Designation Address 
No. 
1 Ghulam Nabi Sumji s/o Haji | Chairman Botengo, Bijbehara 


Mohammad Ramzan 


2 Ghulam Nabi Shaheen s/o Ghulam | General Secretary Tral, Pulwama 
Mohidin Thokar 


3 Manzoor Ahmed Misgar alias Gazi | Chief Organiser Kadipora, Anantnag 


10. As per the background note, MCJK-S has been actively involved in glorifying the activities of terrorists 
including killing of civilians/ security personnel and the induction of youth into terrorism. It provides the youth a 
sense of homogeneity and has been inciting and provoking youth to indulge in stone pelting, arson and street violence. 
MCIJK-S is a secessionist group which not only propagates secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir but also glorifies 
terrorism by expressing solidarity with the killed terrorists and by visiting their places to pay tribute to the terrorists 
killed by Security Forces during anti-terrorist operations in Jammu and Kashmir. \ 


11. As per the background note, MCJK-S mulled to carry out an effective anti-election campaign by way of 
organizing meetings, addressing people from Masjid’s and distribution of printed material. In order to fulfill the 
agenda of seceding Jammu and Kashmir from India, MCJK-S, since its inception, has been at the forefront for 
spreading false narrative, inciting youth, generating feelings of hatred and disaffection against India, supporting 
terrorist organizations besides causing large scale street violence and arson within the valley. 


12. As per the background note, MCJK-S along with other separatist organizations fanned the sentiments of the 
people against the Government over Amarnath Land Row through their misinformation campaign and by spreading 
false information which resulted in Amarnath Land Row agitation causing large scale violence and damage to the 
public and private properties. MCJK-S played a pivotal role in coordination, facilitation, organizing and addressing 
mobs across the valley during Muzaffarabad chalo call given by separatist organisations. There were around 449 
stone pelting incidents, in which 53 civilians died and 522 got injured besides 170 Police/ Security Forces personnel 
were also injured. 


13. In order to give a massive thrust to Pakistani agenda in sustaining its terrorist and secessionist ecosystem in 
Jammu and Kashmir, as per the background note, MCJK-S in a calculated manner portrayed the death of two ladies in 
Shopian in the year 2009 by describing it as rape and murder perpetrated by the security forces. The entire design 
was to create a false narrative against the Central Government and its law enforcement agencies, so as to generate 
hatred and disaffection against India among general masses. MCJK-S played a significant role in issuing Hartal and 
Shopian Chalo calls which resulted in intense law and order issues. 


14. In the year 2010, death of some stone pelting youth in Kashmir valley, during handling of law and order, was 
exploited by the separatist to accelerate momentum to their ‘Quit Kashmir’ campaign. Ghulam Nabi Sumji circulated 
protest posters and shut-down programs from time to time to create valley wide disturbances. MCJK-S played a 
pivotal role in instigating youth to continue and fuel up mass unrest by issuing various protest calendars brazenly 
which resulted in long drawn protests during the year. The trouble in the State was fomented by elements who were 
sponsored, aided and patronized by Muslim Conference lead by Ghulam Nabi Sumji. A total of around 2794 stone 
pelting incidents were reported in which 112 civilians lost their lives, 1047 got injured while 1 police personnel 
attained martyrdom and around 5188 police/ Security Forces personnel got injured in these incidents. 


15. Further, MCJK-S, after the killing of Burhan Wani and acting on the instructions of Pakistan and its Inter- 
Services Intelligence (ISI), exploited the situation intensely and actively provoked, incited and lured the youth of 
Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in order to keep the anti-India pot bolling, 
announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars which resulted in the death of 86 persons and injuries to 8932 
civilians. 2 Police Jawans were also martyred and about 8370 police/ Security Forces personnel got injured in these 
riots. 


6 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(4i)] 


Ii. 
16. 


Criminal Cases against MCJK-S activists 


The background note mentions the complicity of MCJK-S cadres in criminal and anti-national activities 
which is evident from the series of criminal cases that stand registered against them. Cases have been registered 
against the MCJK-S and its activists under various provisions of law including the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Act and other substantive offences. The cases registered against the MCJK-S activists/ members provide clinching 
evidence regarding their involvement in various unlawful activities. A list of cases registered by the Government of 


Jammu & Kashmir is given as under: 


SI. FIR No. & Police | Brief of Investigation Details of accused 
No. Station persons 
1 FIR no. 255/2013 On 03-11-2013 Police Station Bijbehara received | Mohd Rafiq Ganai 
u/s 13 (a,b), 16, 18, | an information through reliable sources to the (Sumi Imti 
20, 40 of UAPA effect that in the jurisdiction of police station | SU) soup), Imtiyaz 
Bijbehara some terrorists including Mubarak मी 54101. Suni 
PS Bijebehara J हे ae na group) & 7 others 
Ahmad Wani and others lodged in different jails of 
J&K and outside states were motivating the youths 
to join the terrorist ranks which resulted in 
induction of one local released terrorist namely Ab 
Haq Malik s/o Gh Hassan into terrorists ranks. 
Their aim was to separate Jammu and Kashmir 
from the union of India and to collect money for 
terror activities etc. 
2 FIR no. 49/2015 u/s | On 17-07-2015 P.S. Zainapora received an | Ghulam Nabi Sumji & 
13 of UAPA under | information to the effect that at Molu Chitragam, | 3 others 
P.S. Zainapora Shopian, separatist leaders including Ghulam Nabi 
Sumji were addressing people and raising anti India 
slogans due to which disaffection against India had 
arisen among the masses. The speakers had also 
stressed for continuance of armed struggle. 
3 FIR no. 173/2018 | On 18/09/2018 at about 18:50 hours, this P.S. | Ghulam Nabi Sumji 
u/s 149, 153, 143 | Anantnag received information through reliable | and 5 others 
RPC 13 UAPA sources that a video has gone viral on social media 
५ wherein Ghulam Nabi Sumji and others delivered 
ae: inflammatory speech to a mob/crowd at the 
Anantnag residence of one Rouf Ahmad Ganie s/o Ab 
Saleem Ganie r/o Kotwal Chowk Anchidoora who 
had died a couple of days before at Chowgam 
Qazigund. They insisted upon people to be ready 
for sacrifice to separate the State of J&K from the 
Union of India and also raised anti India and pro- 
Pakistan slogans in their speeches. 
4 FIR no. 248/2016 | On 04.09.16, miscreants headed by Gh. Nabi Sumji | Ghulam Nabi Sumji 
u/s 147, 148, 149, | and others pelted stones upon CRPF/ Police Nafri 
307, 336, 332, 427 | at Sadoora. 
RPC at PS. 
Anantnag 
5. FIR no. 224/15 u/s | On 24-11-2015 two terrorists Adil Ahmed Sheikh | Ghulam Nabi Sumji & 
13 UAPA at P.S. and Tanveer Ahmed Bhat were killed in an | 4 others. 
Bijebehara encounter with security forces at Seligam 
Ashmuqam. At their funeral, thousands of people 
gathered and guided by five separatists leaders 
including Gh Nabi Sumji, raised anti-India slogans, 
thereby endangering the sovereignty of India. 
laa FIR no. 225/2015 On 24/11/2015, SDPO Bijbehara alongwith escort | Ghulam Nabi Sumji & 


party, while performing law and order duty at Baba 


8 others. 


[भाग [avs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


u/s 13 UAPA 
at P.S. Bijebehara 


Mohalla Bijbehara, reported that terrorists namely 
Adil Ahmed Sheikh and Tanveer Ahmed Bhat got 
eliminated during encounter at Saligam 
Ashmuqam. As the dead bodies of the slain 
militants were brought to town Bijbehara for last 
rites, the gathering of about 10000 thousand people 
led by separatist leaders including Gh. Nabi Sumji 
raised anti-national slogans. The violent mob pelted 
stones on the residence of Mufti Mohammad Syed 
and on security forces/police, resulting in injuries 
to some police personnel. 


FIR no. 249/2009 
u/s 147, 336, 323 


RPC 13 UAPA 
at P.S. Bijebehara 


On 22.10.2009, P.S. Bijbehara received an 
information that accused persons were raising anti- 
national Slogans at Baba Mohalla Bijbehara and 
resorted to stone pelting resulting in injury to 
Police personnel. 


Ghulam Nabi Sumji & 
5 others. 


FIR no. 152/2013 
ws 153-A, 148, 
149, 353, 336, 3(1) 


PPD ACT at PS. 
Shopian 


On 06.11.2013, police station Shopian received a 
docket from SHO P/S Shopian stating that during 
patrolling duty, they found that at Gol Chakri 
Shopian, Chairman Hurriyat (G) Syed Ali Shah 
Geelani was delivering speech to a gathering 
insisting people to boycott election and was 
instigating people against the integrity and 
sovereignty of India on religious basis and on the 
nod of Hurriyat activists namely Moammad Ashraf 
Sehraie , Ghulam Nabi Sumji, Advocate Zahid Ali 
Bhat and Peer Saifullah, the enraged mob pelted 
stones on the building of DC office which got 
damaged and restrained employees from discharge 
of their duties. 


Ghulam Nabi Sumji & 
20 others. 


FIR no. 12/2006 u/s 
153-B RPC at P.S. 
Rajbagh 


The accused along with others raised slogans 
against the Constitution of India and in favour of 
Pakistan. 


Ghulam Nabi Sumji & 
5 others. 


FIR no. 70/2007 u/s 
13 UAPA at PS. 
Safakadal 


On 22-04-2007 P.S. Safakadal received a written 
docket from IC PP Noorbagh stating therein that 
during patrolling at Eidgah, it was found that 
members of Hurriyat (G) were addressing a 
gathering at Eidgah which was headed by Syed Ali 
Shah Geelani, Gh. Nabi Sumji, Mohmmad Ashraf 
Khan and during their address, they said that 
accession of State with India is temporary and by 
this address, anti Govt. sentiments got provoked. In 
the rally, Masrat Alam, Firdous Ahmad Shah, 
Mushtaq Ahmad Sofi and other invited people to 
raise slogans against India. They further praised the 
terrorists’ organisations and also raised slogans in 
favour of Pakistan. Thus by these acts on the part 
of accused persons, there was threat to the 
integrity and security of State and Country. 


Ghulam Nabi Sumji & 
10 others. 


FIR no. 54/2010 u/s 


153-B RPC, and 13 
of UAPA at 
P.S.Shergari 


On 18/06/2010, Chairman of Hurriyat "G" Group 
was addressing people in Iqra Masjid Magarmal 
Bagh, Srinagar to boycott Panchayat election, and 
also raised slogans against India. 


Ghulam Nabi 
Sumji & 3 others. 


FIR no. 13/2005 u/s 


147, 148, 341, 336, 
427 RPC at PS. 
Shaheed Gunj 


That the complainant along with municipal 
candidates namely Shameena Iqbal and Reyaz 
Ahmed Misgar were conducting rally in the area of 
Habba kadal. While proceeding towards Zandar 
Mohalla, a group of Hurriyat activists headed by 


Ghulam Nabi Sumji & 
4 others. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Gh. Nabi Samji attacked the rally and pelted stones 
on vehicles. In reply security force (PSOs) fired 20 
rounds in the air to save the candidates. One Sumo 
vehicle bearing no. JKO1G-9781 got damaged. The 
attackers were shouting slogans against election 
campaign due to which it affected the rally 


13. | FIR no. 19/2010 u/s | On 21-07-2010 P.S. CIK Srinagar received reliable | Ghulam Nabi Sumji 
13 UAPA at 7.8. | information that Gh. Nabi Sumji a self-styled 
CIK. chairman of Hurriyat (G) has secretly convened 
meeting at various places in which he instigated 
public to join protest against India. On behest of 
calls given by said Gh. Nabi Sumji people resorted 
to protest, stone pelting and other violent activities 
including suspension of transport etc. 


14. | FIR no. 139/2010 On 09.07.2010 at Sanat Nagar, Gh. Nabi Sumji | Ghulam Nabi Sumji & 
ws 13 UAPA, and Chairman : of the Hurriyat Conference Geelani 1 others. 

Cc S Faction informed the people to strictly comply with 
121-A RPC at PS. 
the programme भाव students, employees, 


Seddre businessman, transporters were instructed to protest 
against the Government from morning prayers to 
evening, tried to disturb the peace and tranquility 
and created law and order problem by his activities. 
17. The above referred facts, circumstances and acts of the MCJK-S lead to the conclusion that this organisation 


is bent upon to work towards secession and separation of the State of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. It 
has continuously encouraged the armed insurgency aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by 
promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and is indulging and acting in a manner 
prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Indian Union. Thus, the activities of MCJK-S fall within 
the purview of unlawful activities. 


DECLARATION OF MCJK-S AS AN UNLAWFUL ASSOCIATION 


18. Background Note further states that keeping in view the gravity of the situation and commission of unlawful 
activities by the organization, the Central Government decided to ban Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji 
faction)/ MCJK-S under the provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. Accordingly, Notification 
No. S.O. 935 (E) dated 28" February, 2024 declaring MCJK-S as an unlawful association was issued. Subsequently, 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal has been constituted vide Notification No. 5.0. 1462 (E) dated 18" 
March, 2024. 


MW. STATUTORY PROVISIONS 
The relevant statutory provisions governing the present Reference proceedings are detailed as under. 
19. Section 2 (0) and (9) of the UAPA, reads as follows: 
“2. Definitions. — (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 


(०) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or association, means any action taken by such 
individual or association (whether by committing an act or by words, either spoken or written, or by 
signs or by visible representation or otherwise), - 


(i) Which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground 
whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India or, the secession of a part of the 
territory of India from the Union, or which incites any individual or group of individuals to 
bring about such cession or secession; or 


(ii) Which disclaims, questions, disrupts, or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of India; or 


(iii) Which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India; 


(p) “unlawful association” means any association, - 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9 


(i) which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids 
persons to undertake any unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such 
activity; or 


(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable under Section 153-A or 
Section 153-B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or which encourages or aids persons 
to undertake any such activity, or of which the members undertake any such activity: 


Provided that nothing contained in sub-clause (ii), shall apply to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir”. 


20. Section 2(0) of the Act defines ‘unlawful activity’. It means “any action taken” by an association or an 
individual of the kind mentioned in clauses (i), (1) and (iii) of the said sub-section. Any action taken has reference to 
and must be of the kind stipulated in and covered by clauses (i), (ii) or (iii). Action can be either written or spoken, by 
sign or by visible representation or even otherwise. Clause (i) refers to “action taken” with the intent or which 
supports any claim for secession or cession of any part of India or incites any individual or group of individuals to 
bring about secession or cession. Clause (ii) refers to “action taken” which has the effect of disclaiming, questioning, 
disrupting or intending to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. Clause (iii) refers to “action taken” 
which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India. 


21. Unlawful association has been defined in Section 2(p) of the Act and consists of two parts; (i) and (ii). Part 
(i) refers to unlawful activity defined in Section 2(0) and encompasses associations which have the object that 
encourage or even aid persons to undertake the said activity. The last part of Part (i) widens the definition of the term 
“unlawful association” to include an association of which members undertake unlawful activity. In a way, therefore, 
the association is vicariously liable and can be regarded as an unlawful association if members of an association 
undertake unlawful activity. 


22. Section 2(p)(i) does not refer to unlawful activities defined in Section 2(0) of the Act, but refers to Sections 
153A and 153B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC for short). An association which encourages or aids or the object 
of which is to encourage or aid persons to undertake activities punishable under Section 153A or 153B is an unlawful 
association. “Object” for which an association is formed can in many cases be in writing but encouragement and aid to 
persons to undertake activities under Sections 153A and 153B may be oral or in writing. The last part of Section 
2(p)(i) widens and expands the scope of the term “unlawful association”, when it stipulates that an association of 
which members undertake activities which are punishable under Section 153A or 153B of the IPC is an unlawful 
association. An association, therefore, can become an unlawful association if its members undertake any activity 
covered by Section 153A or 153B of the IPC. 


IV. NATURE AND SCOPE OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE PRESENT TRIBUNAL 


23. The nature of the proceedings before this Tribunal and the scope of inquiry in the present proceedings have 
been laid down by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind vs. Union of India (1995) 1 SCC 428 in the specific 
context of the provisions of the UAPA, 1967. The proceedings before this Tribunal are civil in nature and the standard 
of proof is the standard prescribed by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). This lis has to be decided 
by objectively examining which version is more acceptable and credible. In this regard, reference may be made to 
following observations in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra): 


“30. The allegations made by the Central Government against the Association - Jamaat-E-Islami 
Hind - were totally denied. It was, therefore, necessary that the Tribunal should have adjudicated 
the controversy in the manner indicated. Shri Soli J. Sorabjee, learned counsel for the Association, 
Jamaat-E-Islami Hind, contended that apart from the allegations made being not proved, in law 
such acts even if proved, do not constitute "unlawful activity" within the meaning of that expression 
defined in the Act. In the present case, the alternative submission of Shri Sorabjee does not arise for 
consideration on the view we are taking on his first submission. The only material produced by the 
Central Government to support the notification issued by it under Section 3(1) of the Act, apart from 
a resume based on certain intelligence reports, are the statements of Shri T.N. Srivastava, Joint 
Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and Shri N.C. Padhi, Joint Director, IB. Neither Shri Srivastava 
nor Shri Padhi has deposed to any fact on the basis of personal knowledge. Their entire version is 
based on official record. The resume is based on intelligence reports submitted by persons whose 
names have not been disclosed on the ground of confidentiality. In other words, no person has 
deposed from personal knowledge whose veracity could be tested by cross-examination. Assuming 
that it was not in public interest to disclose the identity of those persons or to produce them for 
cross-examination by the other side, some method should have been adopted by the Tribunal to test 
the credibility of their version. The Tribunal did not require production of those persons before it, 
even in camera, to question them and test the credibility of their version. On the other hand, the 
persons to whom the alleged unlawful acts of the Association are attributed filed their affidavits 
denying the allegations and also deposed as witnesses to rebut these allegations. In such a situation, 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


the Tribunal had no means by which it could decide objectively, which of the two conflicting 
versions to accept as credible. There was thus no objective determination of the factual basis for the 
notification to amount to adjudication by the Tribunal, contemplated by the statute. The Tribunal 
has merely proceeded to accept the version of the Central Government without taking care to know 
even itself the source from which it came or to assess credibility of the version sufficient to inspire 
confidence justifying its acceptance in preference to the sworn denial of the witnesses examined by 
the other side. Obviously, the Tribunal did not properly appreciate and fully comprehend its role in 
the scheme of the statute and the nature of adjudication required to be made by it. The order of the 
Tribunal cannot, therefore, be sustained." 


24. The present Tribunal, constituted under the UAPA, has been vested with certain powers and the procedure to 
be adopted by it under Section 5 read with Section 9 of the said Act, which are reproduced as under: 


“5. Tribunal. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, as 
and when necessary, a tribunal to be known as the "Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal" 
consisting of one person, to be appointed by the Central Government: Provided that no person shall 
be so appointed unless he is a Judge of a High Court. 


(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the 
presiding officer of the Tribunal, then, the Central Government shall appoint another person in 
accordance with the provisions of this section to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be 
continued before the Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled. 


(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Tribunal such staff as may be necessary for 
the discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 


(5) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of its functions including the place or places at 
which it will hold its sittings. 


(6) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this Act, have the same powers as 
are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, 
in respect of the following matters, namely: 


(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 


material object producible as evidence; 


(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 

(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or 
Office ; 

(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 


(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).” 


“9. Procedure to be followed in the disposal of applications under this Act.—Subject to any rules 
that may be made under this Act, the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding any 
inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 4 or by a Court of the District Judge in disposing of any 
application under sub-section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section 8 shall, so far as may be, 
be the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the investigation of 
claims and the decision of the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall 
be final.” 


23. Further, under Section 4(1) of Act, the Central Government refers the notification (issued under Section 3(1) 
of the Act) to the Tribunal for “adjudicating” whether or not there is “sufficient cause” for declaring the association 
unlawful. Section 4(2) requires issuance of notice on the association affected to show cause why the association 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 11 


should not be declared as unlawful. Section 4(3) mandates an inquiry in the manner specified in Section 9 after calling 
for such information as may be necessary from Central Government or from office bearers or members of the 
association. The Tribunal under Section 4(3) is required to adjudicate and make an order, as it may deem fit, either 
confirming the declaration made in the notification or cancelling the same. After interpreting the said provisions of the 
UAPA in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), it was held by the Supreme Court as under: 


“11.... The entire procedure contemplates an objective determination made on the basis of material 
placed before the Tribunal by the two sides; and the inquiry is in the nature of adjudication of a lis 
between two parties, the outcome of which depends on the weight of the material produced by them. 
Credibility of the material should, ordinarily, be capable of objective assessment. The decision to 
be made by the Tribunal is “whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the Association 
unlawful”. Such a determination requires the Tribunal to reach the conclusion that the material to 
support the declaration outweighs the material against it and the additional weight to support the 
declaration is sufficient to sustain it. The test of greater probability appears to be the pragmatic test 
applicable in the context.” 


26. On the question of confidential information that is sought to be withheld, the Supreme Court emphasized that 
the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose of assessing credibility of the information and the Tribunal should 
satisfy itself whether it can safely rely upon it. This was necessary as in certain situations, source of information or 
disclosure of full particulars may be against public interest. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality 
of information and its source in public interest, enables the Tribunal to test the credibility of confidential information 
for objectively deciding the Reference. It was emphasized that the unlawful activities of an association may quite 
often be clandestine in nature and, therefore, material or information for various reasons may require confidentiality. 
Disclosure, it was held, can jeopardize criminal cases pending investigation and trial. 


27. On the question of nature and type of evidence which can be relied upon by the Tribunal, the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court referred to Rule 3 of UAP Rules, 1968. Rule 3(1) stipulates that the Tribunal subject to sub-rule (2) 
shall follow, “as far as practicable”, the rules of evidence laid down in Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (‘Evidence Act’, 
hereinafter). In this regard, reference can be made to the following observations in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra): 


“22. ...The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a 
procedure would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in 
controversy after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without abdicating 
its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a course would 
satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, 
while protecting the rights of the association and its members, without jeopardizing the public 
interest. This would also ensure that the process of adjudication is not denuded of its content and 
the decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by it on all points in controversy after 
adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion already formed by the Central Government. 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer [408 US 471: 33 L Ed 2d 484 
(1972)] the United States Supreme Court, in a case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum 
requirements to be followed, as under: (L Ed pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They include (a) 
written notice of the claimed violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of evidence 
against him; (c) opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and 
documentary evidence; (d) the right to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses 
(unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing confrontation); (e) 
a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a traditional parole board, members of 
which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement by the factfinders 
as to the evidence relied on and reasons for revoking parole. We emphasise there is no 
thought to equate this second stage of parole revocation to a criminal prosecution in any 
sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the process should be flexible enough to consider evidence 
including letters, affidavits, and other material that would not be admissible in an 
adversary criminal trial.”’. 


XXX XXX XXX 


26. ......The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a show-cause notice, of existence 
of sufficient cause to justify the declaration must necessarily imply and import into the inquiry, the 
minimum requirement of natural justice to ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is its own 
opinion, formed on the entire available material, and not a mere imprimatur of the Tribunal affixed 
to the opinion of the Central Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a fair procedure to prevent the 
vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure in a given case, would depend on the 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


materials constituting the factual foundation of the notification and the manner in which the 
Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to be determined by the Tribunal keeping in view the 
nature of its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of natural justice, the fact that the materials in such 
matters are not confined to legal evidence in the strict sense, and that the scrutiny is not a criminal 
trial. The Tribunal should form its opinion on all the points in controversy after assessing for itself 
the credibility of the material relating to it, even though it may not be disclosed to the association, if 
the public interest so requires.” 


28. Before assessing the credibility of material and analyzing evidence adduced, it is apposite to take note of 
Sections 25, 26 and 27 of the Evidence Act, as well as Sections 161 and 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
The same are reproduced hereunder: 


Indian Evidence Act, 1872 


25. Confession to police-officer not to be proved.—No confession made to a police-officer, shall be 
proved as against a person accused of any offence. 


26. Confession by accused while in custody of police not to be proved against him.—No confession 
made by any person whilst he is in the custody of a police-officer, unless it be made in the immediate 
presence of a Magistrate4 , shall be proved as against such person. 


Explanation.—In this section “Magistrate” does not include the head of a village discharging 
magisterial functions in the Presidency of Fort St. George 6 *** or elsewhere, unless such headman is 
a Magistrate exercising the powers of a Magistrate under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18827 (10 
of 1882). 


27. How much of information received from accused may be proved.—Provided that, when any fact 
is deposed to as discovered inconsequence of information received from a person accused of any 
offence, in the custody of a police-officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a 
confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved. 


Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 


“161. Examination of witnesses by police.—(1) Any police officer making an investigation under this 
Chapter, or any police officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special 
order, prescribe in this behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine orally any 
person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case. 


(2) Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put to him by such 
officer, other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal 
charge or to a penalty or forfeiture. 


(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course of an 
examination under this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and true record of the 
statement of each such person whose statement he records. 


Provided that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded by audio-video 
electronic means: 


Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under section 354, 
section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 376, 3 section 376A, section 376AB, 
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB], section 376E or section 
509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is alleged to have been committed or attempted shall be 
recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer. 


162. Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements in evidence.—(1) No statement made by 
any person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to 
writing, be signed by the person making it; nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, 
whether in a police diary or otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any 
purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made: 


Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose 
statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved, may be 
used by the accused, and with the permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to contradict such 
witness in the manner provided by section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); and when 
any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be used in the re-examination of such 
witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his crossexamination. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 13 


(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the provisions of 
clause (1) of section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); or to affect the provisions of 
section 27 of that Act. 


Explanation.—An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement referred to in 
sub-section (1) may amount to contradiction if the same appears to be significant and otherwise 
relevant having regard to the context in which such omission occurs and whether any omission 
amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be a question of fact.” 


29. As per Section 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act, confessions made to a police officer or while in custody shall 
not be proved against a person accused of any offense during the trial of that offense. As per Section 162 of the 
Cr.P.C., no statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII 
(which includes Section 161 Cr.P.C.) can be used, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation 
at the time when such statement was made. However, these sections do not prohibit the use of such statements in 
proceedings where the accused is not being tried for the specific offense in question, or in civil proceedings or 
ancillary proceedings. 


30. The Supreme Court in Mahesh Kumar v. State of Rajasthan, 1990 Supp SCC 541 (2), noted the possible use 
of statement made to the police by the accused persons for being used as evidence against the accused in an “enquiry” 
although inadmissible as evidence against them at the trial for the offence with which they were charged. Relevant 
extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“3. In Queen Empress v. Tribhovan Manekchand a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court laid 
down that the statement made to the police by the accused persons as to the ownership of property 
which was the subject matter of the proceedings against them although inadmissible as evidence 
against them at the trial for the offence with which they were charged, were admissible as evidence 
with regard to the ownership of the property in an enquiry held by the Criminal Procedure Code. 
The same view was reiterated in Pohlu v. Emperor where it was pointed out that though there is a 
bar in Section 25 of the Evidence Act, or in Section 162 CrPC for being made use of as evidence 
against the accused, this statement could be made use of in an enquiry under Section 517 CrPC 
when determining the question of return of property. These two decisions have been followed by the 
Rajasthan High Court in Dhanraj_ Baldeokishan y. State and the Mysore High Court 
in Veerabhadrappa v. Govinda. In the present case, the amount in question was seized from the 
accused in pursuance of statements made by them under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. The High 
Court as well as the courts below have found the property to be the subject of theft and the acquittal 
of the accused is upon benefit.” 


31. The Supreme Court in Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar, (1981) 2 SCC 493 with reference to the bar under 
Section 162 of the Cr.P.C. against use in evidence of a statement made before a police officer in the course of 
investigation, held, the same would not apply where court calls for such statement in a civil proceeding provided the 
statement is otherwise relevant under the Evidence Act, 1872. Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“3. Before we refer to the provisions of Sections 162 and 172 of the Criminal Procedure Code, it 
would be convenient to set out briefly a few relevant provisions of that Code. Section 2 is the 
definition section and clause (g) of that section defines “inquiry” to mean “every inquiry, other than 
a trial conducted under this Code by a Magistrate or court”. Clause (a) of Section 2 gives the 
definition of “investigation” and it says that investigation includes “all the proceedings under this 
Code for the collection of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person (other than a 
Magistrate) who is authorised by a Magistrate in this behalf”. Section 4 provides: 


“4. (1) All offences under the Penal Code, 1860 shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, 
and otherwise dealt with according to the provisions hereinafter contained. 


(2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and 
otherwise dealt with according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the 
time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or 
otherwise dealing with such offences.” 


It is apparent from this section that the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code are applicable 
where an offence under the Penal Code, 1860 or under any other law is being investigated, inquired 
into, tried or otherwise dealt with. Then we come straight to Section 162 which occurs in Chapter 
XII dealing with the powers of the police to investigate into offences. That section, so far as material, 
reads as under: 


“162. (1) No statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an 
investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed by the person 
making it; nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or 


14 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any purpose, save as 
hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at 
the time when such statement was made: 


Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose 
statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly 
proved, may be used by the accused, and with the permission of the court, by the 
prosecution, to contradict such witness in the manner provided by Section 145 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872; and when any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may 
also be used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only of explaining 
any matter referred to in his cross-examination. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the 
provisions of clause (1) of Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, or to affect the 
provisions of Section 27 of that Act.” 


It bars the use of any statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under 
Chapter XII, whether recorded in a police diary or otherwise, but, by the express terms of the 
section, this bar is applicable only where such statement is sought to be used “at any inquiry or trial 
in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made”. If the 
statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII is sought 
to be used in any proceeding other than an inquiry or trial or even at an inquiry or trial but in 
respect of an offence other than that which was under investigation at the time when such statement 
was made, the bar of Section 162 would not be attracted. This section has been enacted for the 
benefit of the accused, as pointed out by this Court in Tahsildar Singh v. State of U.P. it is intended 
“to protect the accused against the user of statements of witnesses made before the police during 
investigation, at the trial presumably on the assumption that the said statements were not made 
under circumstances inspiring confidence”. This Court, in Tahsildar Singh case approved the 
following observations of Braund, J. in Emperor v. Aftab Mohd. Khan: 


“As it seems to us it is to protect accused persons from being prejudiced by statements 
made to police officers who by reason of the fact that an investigation is known to be on 
foot at the time the statement is made, may be in a position to influence the maker of it, and, 
on the other hand, to protect accused persons from the prejudice at the hands of persons 
who in the knowledge that an investigation has already started, are prepared to tell 
untruths ” 


and expressed its agreement with the view taken by the Division Bench of the Nagpur High Court 
in Baliram Tikaram Marathe v. Emperor that “the object of the section is to protect the accused both 
against overzealous police officers and untruthful witnesses”. Protection against the use of 
statement made before the police during investigation is, therefore, granted to the accused by 
providing that such statement shall not be allowed to be used except for the limited purpose set out 
in the proviso to the section, at any inquiry or trial in respect of the offence which was under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made. But, this protection is unnecessary in any 
proceeding other than an inquiry or trial in respect of the offence under investigation and hence the 
bar created by the section is a limited bar. It has no application, for example in a civil proceeding or 
in a proceeding under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution and a statement made before a police 
officer in the course of investigation can be used as evidence in such proceeding, provided it is 
otherwise relevant under the Indian Evidence Act. There are a number of decisions of various High 
Courts which have taken this view and amongst them may be mentioned the decision of Jaganmohan 
Reddy, J. in Malakala Surya Rao v. G. Janakamma. The present proceeding before us is a writ 
petition under Article 32 of the Constitution filed by the petitioners for enforcing their Fundamental 
Rights under Article 21 and it is neither an “inquiry” nor a “trial” in respect of any offence and 
hence it is difficult to see how Section 162 can be invoked by the State in the present case. The 
procedure to be followed in a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution is prescribed in 
Order XXXV of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966, and sub-rule (9) of Rule 10 lays down that at the 
hearing of the rule nisi, if the court is of the opinion that an opportunity be given to the parties to 
establish their respective cases by leading further evidence, the court may take such evidence or 
cause such evidence to be taken in such manner as it may deem fit and proper and obviously the 
reception of such evidence will be governed by the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act. It is 
obvious, therefore, that even a statement made before, a police officer during investigation can be 
produced and used in evidence in a writ petition under Article 32 provided it is relevant under the 
Indian Evidence Act and Section 162 cannot be urged as a bar against its production or use. The 
reports submitted by Shri L.V. Singh setting forth the result of his investigation cannot, in the 
circumstances, be shut out from being produced and considered in evidence under Section 162, even 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 15 


if they refer to any statements made before him and his associates during investigation, provided 
they are otherwise relevant under some provision of the Indian Evidence Act.” 


32. With reference to police diaries and Section 172 of the Cr.P.C., the Supreme Court in Khatri (supra) held as 
under: 


“|. These reports are clearly relevant under Section 35 of the Indian Evidence Act which reads as 
follows: 


“35. An entry in any public or other official book, register or record, stating a fact in issue 
or relevant fact, and made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by 
any other person in performance of a duty specially enjoined by the law of the country in 
which such book, register or record is kept, is itself a relevant fact.” 


These reports are part of official record and they relate to the fact in issue as to how, and by whom 
the twenty-four under-trial prisoners were blinded and they are admittedly made by Sh L.V. Singh, a 
public servant, in the discharge of his official duty and hence they are plainly and indubitably 
covered by Section 35. The language of Section 35 is so clear that it is not necessary to refer to any 
decided cases on the interpretation of that section, but we may cite two decisions to illustrate the 
applicability of this section in the present case. The first is the decision of this Court in Kanwar Lal 
Gupta v. Amar Nath Chawla. There the question was whether reports made by officers of the CID 
(Special Branch) relating to public meetings covered by them at the time of the election were 
relevant under Section 35 and this Court held that they were, on the ground that they were (SCC p. 
667) “made by public servants in discharge of their official duty and they were relevant under the 
first part of Section 35 of the Evidence Act, since they contained statements showing what were the 
public meetings held by the first respondent”. This Court in fact followed an earlier decision of the 
Court in P.C.P. Reddiar v. S. Perumal. So also in Jagdat v. Sheopal, Wazirhasan, J. held that the 
result of an inquiry by a Kanungo under Section 202 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 
embodied in the report is an entry in a public record stating a fact in issue and made by a public 
servant in the discharge of his official duties and the report is therefore admissible in evidence under 
Section 35. We find that a similar view was taken by a Division Bench of the Nagpur High Court 
in Chandulal v. Pushkar Raj where the learned Judges held that reports made by Revenue Officers, 
though not regarded as having judicial authority, where they express opinions on the private rights 
of the parties are relevant under Section 35 as reports made by public officers in the discharge of 
their official duties, insofar as they supply information of official proceedings and historical facts. 
The Calcutta High Court also held in Lionell Edwards Limited v. State of W.B. that official 
correspondence from the Forest Officer to his superior, the Conservator of Forests, carried on by 
the Forest Officer in the discharge of his official duty would be admissible in evidence under Section 
35. There is therefore no doubt in our mind that the reports made by Sh L.V. Singh setting forth the 
result of the investigation carried on by him and his associates are clearly relevant under Section 35 
since they relate to a fact in issue and are made by a public servant in the discharge of his official 
duty. It is indeed difficult to see how in a writ petition against the State Government where the 
complaint is that the police officials of the State Government blinded the petitioners at the time of 
arrest or whilst in police custody, the State Government can resist production of a report in regard 
to the truth or otherwise of the complaint, made by a highly placed officer pursuant to the direction 
issued by the State Government. We are clearly of the view that the reports made by Shri L.V. Singh 
as a result of the investigation carried out by him and his associates are relevant under Section 35 
and they are liable to be produced by the State Government and used in evidence in the present writ 
petition. Of course, what evidentiary value must attach to the statements contained in these reports 
is a matter which would have to be decided by the court after considering these reports. It may 
ultimately be found that these reports have not much evidentiary value and even if they contain any 
statements adverse to the State Government, it may be possible for the State Government to dispute 
their correctness or to explain them away, but it cannot be said that these reports are not relevant. 
These reports must therefore be produced by the State and taken on record of the present writ 
petition. We may point out that though in our order dated February 16, 1981 we have referred to 
these reports as having been made by Shri L.V. Singh and his associates between January 10 and 
January 20, 1981 it seems that there has been some error on our part in mentioning the outer date 
as January 20, 1981 for we find that some of these reports were submitted by Shri L.V. Singh even 
after January 20, 1981 and the last of them was submitted on January 27, 1981. All these reports 
including the report submitted on December 9, 1980 must therefore be filed by the State and taken as 
forming part of the record to beconsidered by the court in deciding the question at issue between the 
parties.” 


33. The Supreme Court in Vinay D. Nagar v. State of Rajasthan, (2008) 5 SCC 597, again held that bar of 
Section 162 of the Cr.P.C. is with regard to the admissibility of the statement recorded of a person by the police 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


officer under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and by virtue of Section 162 Cr.P.C. would be applicable only where such statement 
is sought to be used at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such 
statement was made. The relevant extract of the said decision is as under: 


“14. On account of Section 162 CrPC, a statement made by any person to a police officer in the 
course of investigation under Chapter XII, if reduced into writing, will not be signed by the person 
making it, nor such statement recorded or any part thereof be used for any purpose at any inquiry or 
trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made. Such 
statement may be used by an accused and with the permission of the court by the prosecution to 
contradict the witness whose statement was recorded by the police in the manner provided under 
Section 145 of the Evidence Act and can also be used for re-examination of such witness for the 
purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination. Bar of Section 162 CrPC 
of proving the statement recorded by the police officer of any person during investigation however 
shall not apply to any statement falling within the provision of Clause (1) of Section 32 of the 
Evidence Act, nor shall it affect Section 27 of the Evidence Act. Bar of Section 162 CrPC is in 
regard to the admissibility of the statement recorded of a person by the police officer under Section 
161 CrPC and by virtue of Section 162 CrPC would be applicable only where such statement is 
sought to be used at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time 
when such statement was made. 


15. In Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar this Court has held that Section 162 CrPC bars the use of any 
statement made before the police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII, 
whether recorded in the police diary or otherwise. However, by the express terms of Section 162, 
this bar is applicable only where such statement is sought to be used “at any inquiry or trial” in 
respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made. If the 
statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII is sought 
to be used in any proceeding, inquiry or trial in respect of an offence other than which was under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made, the bar of Section 162 will not be 
attracted.” 


34. After examining the aforementioned provisions, as well as the legal principles established in a catena of 
judgments, and considering that the inquiry before this Tribunal does not entail adjudicating the guilt of the accused 
but rather assessing the adequacy of material before the Central Government to designate MCJK-S as an unlawful 
association, the statements of witnesses recorded by the police officers, the statements made by the accused before 
police officers, along with the lists of items seized and seizure memos, are deemed admissible before this Tribunal. 
They can be utilized to ascertain the sufficiency of material placed before the Central Government for making the 
declaration under Section 3(1) of UAPA. 


V. PROCEDURE FOLLOWED BY THIS TRIBUNAL 


35. Consequently, upon due consideration of the aforesaid Notification No. 8.0. 935 (E) dated 28th February, 
2024 and Notification S.O. 1462(E) dated 18th March, 2024, this Tribunal held a preliminary hearing on 15.04.2024, 
whereupon on a consideration of the material placed on record by the Central Government, notice under Section 4(2) 
of the Act was issued to the MCJK-S to show cause, within a period of 30 days, as to why they ought not to be 
declared as unlawful association. The notices issued were given due publicity as required under Section 3(4) of the 
Act. 


36. The Gazettee Notification dated 28.02.2024 was also published in two National Newspapers (all India 
Edition), out of which one was in English while the other was in Hindi. The said notification was also published in 
two local newspapers one of which was in vernacular language and the other was in English, both having wide 
circulation in Kashmir Division where the activities of the MCJK-S were or are believed to be ordinarily carried out. 
The method of affixation and proclamation by beating of drums, as well as loudspeakers, was also adopted. 


37. The notice issued by the Tribunal along with the Gazette Notification dated 28.02.2024 was displayed on the 
notice board of the Deputy Commissioner/District Magistrate/Tehsildar of Kashmir Zone where the activities of the 
association were or are believed to be ordinarily carried on. Help of All-India Radio and Electronic Media of the 
Kashmir Division was also taken. Announcements were made through Radio / Electronic Media at prime time. 


38. Apart from above, notice was also issued to the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir through its Chief 
Secretary. 


39. The Registrar attached to the Tribunal was directed to ensure the compliance of the service of notice issued to 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 17 


the MCJK-S in the manner indicated. The Registrar was directed to file an independent report in that behalf before 
the next date of hearing, i.e. 20.05.2024. 


40. Accordingly, the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir filed its affidavit of service dt. 17.5.2024, affirming 
that service had been effected as directed by the Tribunal. The Registrar, vide his report dated 18.05.2024, also 
confirmed service of notice issued by the Tribunal. 


41. This Tribunal having satisfied itself that service had been effected on MCJK-S as per the directions contained 
in the order dated 15.04.2024, coupled with the fact that no appearance was entered by and on behalf of MCJK-S, was 
constrained to proceed further with the inquiry even without the participation of the concerned association. 


42. However, in order to afford an opportunity to both the Central and the Union Territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir to lead evidence in support of their respective averments, allegations and/or grounds set out in the 
Notification dated 28.02.2024, as also to give another opportunity to MCJK-S to rebut the material placed on record 
by the Central and the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, by the same order i.e. order dated 20.05.2024, further 
proceedings to the Tribunal were fixed for 20.06.2024, 21.06.2024 and 24.06.2024 at Srinagar with due consent of the 
counsels appearing for the UOI and the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir. Accordingly, a public notice was 
issued for the hearing at Srinagar, in the premises of High Court of J & K, and Ladakh. However, a prior hearing at 
Delhi was also scheduled on 05.06.2024 for necessary directions. 


43. Learned Additional Solicitor General informed the Tribunal on 05.06.2024 that affidavits in evidence of 2 
witnesses from UT of J & K had been filed on 05.06.2024 and that additional affidavits were proposed to be filed of 
other witnesses who would be deposing on behalf of the Central Government in support of the notification. The 
matter was thereafter posted to 13.06.2024 for further directions. On 13.06.2024, the Tribunal was informed that 
affidavits in evidence of 3 witnesses on behalf of the Central Govt. had been filed and the affidavit of the 4" witness 
shall be filed by 15.06.2024. The Tribunal was further informed that affidavit of the 5" witness i.e. from MHA, GOI, 
shall be filed by 28.06.2024. The matter was thereafter directed to be listed for further hearing at Srinagar, as already 
scheduled. 


44. On 20.06.2024 statement of the following witness was recorded at Srinagar: 
S. Name of Witness Details of Affidavit along Affidavits kept in File no. 
No. with date 
1. Mr. Kuldeep Raj, Dy. S.P. Hars, Ex. PW-1/A dated 03.06.2024 | File - Vol. IV 


nanos कक Affidavit from pages | to 6, 


and exhibits from pages 7 to 
14. 


The witness was not cross-examined as none had appeared on behalf of MCJK-S at any stage of the proceedings. 


45. On 21.06.2024 statements of the following witnesses were recorded at Srinagar: 
S. Name of Witness Details of Affidavit along Affidavits kept in File no. 
No. with date 
2. Mr. Vikram Nag, Sub-Divisional Ex. PW-2/A dated 4.06.2024 File — Vol. IV 


Police Officer, Shaheedgunj, 
Sunabat Affidavit from pages 1 to 9, 
and exhibits from pages 10 to 
29 


3. Mohammad Ashrif, Sub-Divisional Ex. PW-3/A dated 02.06.2024 | File — Vol. IV 
Police Officer, Sadder, Srinagar 


Affidavit from pages 1 to 9, 
and exhibits from pages 10 to 
34 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


These witnesses were also not cross-examined. 


46. Further, on 24.06.2024 statements of the following witnesses were also recorded at Srinagar: 
S. Name of Witness Details of Affidavit along Affidavits kept in File no. 
No. with date 


4. Smt. Ruksana Chowdhary, Deputy Ex. PW-4/A dated 22.06.2024 | File - Vol. IV 
Superintendent of Police, CIK, 


Kashmir 
Affidavit from pages | to 7, 
and exhibits from pages 8 to 
19 
5. Mr. Junaid Wali, Sub-Divisional Ex. PW-5/A dated 02.06.2024 | File — Vol. IV 


Police Officer, M.R. Gunj, Srinagar 


Affidavit from pages | to 8, 
and exhibits from pages 9 to 
18 


i Mr. Owaise Rashid, Sub- Ex. PW-6/A dated 24.06.2024 | File— Vol. IV 


Divisional Police Officer, Bijbehara, 


७७५४० ashi Affidavit from pages 1 to 16, 


and exhibits from pages 17 to 
66 


47. It needs a highlight that for the Tribunal’s proceedings at Srinagar, Union of India was directed to ensure that 
any interested party who desires to appear physically before the Tribunal on 20.06.2024, 21.06.2024 and 24.06.2024, 
should be duly assisted for the said purpose. For the said purpose, ASI Mohd. Niyaz, ARP: Q51324/XI-SEC was 
deputed for all 3 dates of hearing at Srinagar, in the High Court premises, for facilitating the appearance of any 
interested party who desired to appear before this Tribunal. However, none from the general public or from the 
MCJK-S appeared to join proceedings. 


48. It needs a highlight that after 24.06.2024 which was the last of the three hearings at Srinagar, no one 
appeared to attend or join the Tribunal proceedings from or on behalf of MCJK-S. 


49. Vide the order dt. 24.06.2024, further proceedings were directed to be held at High Court of Delhi, on 
03.07.2024 on which date Id. Counsel for the UOI informed the Court that another affidavit in evidence of an officer 
from the Ministry of Home Affiars, Govt. of India has also been filed with the Registrar of the Tribunal. The 
proceedings were thereafter adjourned further to 15.07.2024 for which date the said witness from the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Govt. Of India was directed to be present for recording his deposition. 


50. Statement of following witness was recorded on 15.07.2024 at Delhi High Court, New Delhi: 


S.No. | Name of witness Details of Affidavit along Affidavits kept in File no. 
with date 
7. Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gupta, Ex. PW-7/A dated 01.07.2024 | File— Vol. IV 


Director (CT) in Government 
of India, Ministry of Home 
Affaris, New Delhi Affidavit from pages | to 7, 
and exhibits from pages 8 to 
29 alongwith documents/ 
confidential material in a 
sealed cover 


51. Also, vide order dated 15.07.2024, ld. Counsel for Union of India submitted that no other witness is to be 
examined on behalf of the Union of India. Since the proceedings are not being contested on behalf of MCJK (Sumji 
faction), the recording of evidence stood concluded on 15.07.2024 and the matter was listed on 27.07.2024 for final 
arguments, and a direction was also given to file brief written submissions. 


VI. NON-APPEARANCE / NO REPLY ON BEHALF OF THE ASSOCIATION IN THESE 
PROCEEDINGS 


52. Despite service of notice upon MCJK-S, the concerned association has not entered appearance to contest the 
notification under Section 3(1) of the UAPA. Despite opportunities afforded, no reply has been filed on behalf of the 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 19 


concerned association, as contemplated under Section 4(2) of the Act. This Tribunal has also not received any 
intimation from any interested party seeking to depose before this Tribunal. 


53. Ample opportunity has been afforded by this Tribunal to the concerned association/ its office bearers to 
appear before this Tribunal and give their written version/ adduce evidence, in opposition to the factual version of the 
Central government as regards the activities of the concerned association. Apart from effecting service on the 
association and its office bearers in the manner aforesaid, this Tribunal even held public hearing/s in Srinagar to 
enable members of the concerned association and/ or member of the public, to participate in the proceedings of the 
Tribunal. However, the said opportunity was not availed of by the association or any of its office bearers. 


54. This Tribunal is conscious that despite non-appearance of the concerned organization, Tribunal is required to 
make an “objective determination” as mandated in the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind 
(supra). The credibility of the material/evidence placed on record by the Central Government is still required to be 
tested. The Supreme Court has cautioned that the procedure to be adopted must achieve this purpose and must not be 
reduced to mere acceptance of the “ipse dixit of the Central Government”. 


55. Thus, notwithstanding the non-appearance on behalf of the concerned association, this Tribunal is required to 
independently assess the credibility of the material / evidence placed on record by the Central Government, and on 
that basis, come to a conclusion as to whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful. 


VII. EVIDENCE ADDUCED BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL 
PW-1 


56. Mr. Kuldeep Raj (PW-1) tendered his affidavit as Ex. PW 1/A and deposed that he is posted as Dy. S.P., 
Headquarter, Ananatnag, Kashmir. He stated that he is the supervising officer of the case in respect of FIR No. 
173/2018 and in course of discharge of his duties as supervising officer, had gone through the records of the case FIR 
No. 173/2018 and was well conversant with the facts and circumstances of the case. He also deposed that he had 
been duly authorized by the competent authority to depose before this Tribunal and relied upon such authorisation 
dated 19.06.2024 as PW 1/A-1. 


37. PW-1 deposed that the Central Government, in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide Notification No. 8.0. 935(E) published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, on 28" February, 2024, has declared Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) 
(MCJK-S) (hereinafter referred to as “MCJK-S”) as an ‘unlawful association’. Witness stated that he had read the 
brief background note on MCJK-S prepared by the Central Government and based on the same and the cases 
registered against the said organization and its leaders, he could depose that MCJK-S and its leaders were involved in 
the secessionist activities. 


58. PW-1 further testified that it was borne out from the records, personal knowledge gained during service and 
the contents of the background note that Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir is a Pakistan backed secessionist 
organization, which was formed in the year 1985. Since its formation, Muslim Conference has been supporting 
terrorism and anti-India propaganda for fuelling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir. It started its campaign by 
resorting to radicalization of the youth towards religious fundamentalism and questioning the accession of Jammu 
and Kashmir with India. Muslim conference later got split into three factions; one led by Abdul Gani Bhat of 
Sopore, another by Ghulam Nabi Sumji of Bijebehera and third by Shabir Ahmad Dar of Sopore. The most 
prominent faces of MCJK-S are Ghulam Nabi Sumji s/o Haji Mohammad Ramzan (Founder and Chairman of 
MCJK-S), Ghulam Nabi Shaheen s/o Ghulam Mohidin Thokar (General Secretary of MCJK-S), Manzoor Ahmed 
Misgar alias Gazi (Chief Organizer of MCJK-S) and Adil Mushtaq Wani (representative of MCJK-S in 
Pakistan/POK). 


59. Witness further deposed that MCJK-S was established as an upper ground organization to provide 
background and logistic support in Jammu and Kashmir to terrorists operating in Kashmir and to popularize and 
strengthen the terrorist and secessionist networks. Witness stated that the prime objective of MCJK-S has been to 
separate Jammu and Kashmir from India. MCJK-S has always claimed Jammu and Kashmir to be a disputed territory 
and that India's control on it is not justified. MCJK-S is directly involved in anti-India propaganda besides fuelling 
and causing law-and-order incidents in Jammu and Kashmir. 


60. PW-1 deposed that MCJK-S has always supported portrayed a negative image of the counter insurgency 
operations in Jammu and Kashmir, glorified terrorist activities, mobilized public opinion against India, propagated 
false narrative and to incite youth towards violence and terrorism. MCJK-S under the patronage of Ghulam Nabi 
Sumji has left no stone unturned to spread hatred and disaffection against India, vilifying India State, in launching 
calculated attacks on the government of the day, provoking and inciting youth into violence, spawning protests 
disclaiming and disrupting the sovereignty and integrity of India and extending covert and overt support to anti- 
national organizations. 


FIR No. 173/2018, of P.S. Anantnag: 


61. PW-1 deposed that on 18.09.2018, P.S. Anantnag received information that on the said day a video was 
uploaded on the social media of separatist leaders namely (i) Gh. Nabi Sumji, (ii) Mohammad Rafiq Ganir, (iii) 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Mohd Yaseen Athahi, (iv) Mohammad Iqbal Mir, (v) Ashiq Hussain and (vi) Yasmeena Raja who were delivering 
speeches to the gathering of general public at the Anchidoora residence of deceased Rouf Ahmad Ganie. The above 
said persons in their speeches said that everyone should be ready to sacrifice to free Jammu and Kashmir from India 
and raised anti-India slogans and slogans in favour of Pakistan. Upon receipt of this information, FIR No. 173 of 
2018 was registered at P.S. Anantnag on 18.09.2018 under sections 149/153/143 of RPC and u/s 13 of UAPA. A true 
copy of FIR No. 173/2018 along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW-1 as Ex. PW 1/1. 


62. PW-1 further deposed that during investigation, statements of some material witnesses were recorded under 
section 161 Cr.P.C. who corroborated the contents of the written complaint. Statements of witnesses Sabzar Ahmad 
Bhat, Sartaj Ahmad Shiekh, and Yasir Ahmed Sofi recorded under section 161 Cr.PC in vernacular with their true 
English translations, have been relied upon as Ex. PW 1/2 to Ex. PW 1/4. Witness further deposed that the 
investigation faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the valley orchestrated by separatist leaders 
and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from across the border and terrorist organizations. This 
climate of fear deterred individuals from coming forward to provide statements, hindering the progress of the 
investigations. Any attempt to probe these separatist organizations and their leaders triggered widespread unrest and 
turmoil in the affected regions, causing further delays in concluding the investigation. It was only after the 
reorganization of the State that significant progress could be made in the investigation of the present case which is 
now at its fag end and chargesheet is also expected to be filed soon. 


63. PW-1 testified that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of service and the records of the 
criminal cases, it is manifest that MCJK-S and its leaders and members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and continuously advocating cession territory of Jammu and Kashmir from the 
Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly encouraging and advocating claims for secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 
Indian and have been inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of India; 


c) The acts of commission and omissions which are part of the present FIR are intended to disrupt the territorial 
integrity of India and have been aimed at inciting individuals and groups of local Muslim community to bring 
about cession of lawful constitutional authority of Government of India in the territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir; 


d) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
on religious lines and have been a firm preacher of Kashmir separatist movement. 


64. PW-1 further testified that sufficient material has been brought on record which manifests that MCJK-S and 
leaders and members of the said organization who also had support from the cross-border have been actively and 
continuously supporting the separatist organizations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to 
bring about a secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. Witness further testified that it is also 
established that the activities of MCJK-S are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting 
feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government which acts are prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
sovereignty of the Union of India. PW 1 further deposed that the ban imposed upon the said organization by the 
Central Government is appropriate and needs to be upheld in national interest. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance/ no-contest on the part of 
MCJK-S. 


PW-2 


65. Mr. Vikram Nag (PW-2) tendered his affidavit as Ex. PW 2/A and deposed that he is posted as Sub- 
Divisional Police Officer, Shaheedgunj, Kashmir and since April 2024 is the supervising officer of the case bearing 
FIR No. 54 of 2010. PW 2 deposed that he had been duly authorized by the competent authority to depose before this 
Tribunal and relied upon such authorization dated 19.06.2024 as Ex. PW 2/A-1. 


66. PW-2 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide Notification No. 8.0. 935(E) published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, on 28" February, 2024, has declared Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) 
(hereinafter referred to as “MCJK-S”) as an ‘unlawful association’. Witness stated that he had read the brief 
background note on MCJK-S prepared by the Central Government and on the basis of the cases registered against the 
said organization and its leaders, he could depose that MCJK-S and its leaders were involved in the secessionist 
activities. 


67. Witness testified that it is borne out from the records and background note that Muslim Conference Jammu 
and Kashmir, is a Pakistan backed secessionist organization, which was formed in year 1985. Since the formation, 
Muslim Conference has been supporting terrorism and anti-India propaganda for fuelling secessionism in Jammu and 
Kashmir. It started its campaign by resorting to radicalization of the youth towards religious fundamentalism and 
questioning the accession of Jammu and Kashmir with India. Muslim conference later got split into three factions; 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 21 


one led by Abdul Gani Bhat of Sopore, another by Ghulam Nabi Sumji of Bijebehera and third by Shabir Ahmad 
Dar of Sopore. 


68. PW-2 deposed that the most prominent faces of MCJK-S are Ghulam Nabi Sumji s/o Haji Mohammad 
Ramzan (founder and chairman of MCJK-S), Ghulam Nabi Shaheen s/o Ghulam Mohidin Thokar (General Secretary 
of MCJK-S), Manzoor Ahmed Misgar alias Gazi (Chief Organizer of MCJK-S) and Adil Mushtaq Wani 
(representative of MCJK-S in Pakistan/POK). Witness further stated that MCJK-S was established as an upper 
ground organization to provide background and logistic support in Jammu and Kashmir to terrorists operating in 
Kashmir and to popularize and strengthen the terrorist and secessionist networks. Witness stated that the prime 
objective of MCJK-S has been to separate Jammu and Kashmir from India as MCJK-S has always claimed Jammu 
and Kashmir to be a disputed territory and that India's control on it is not justified. Witness asserted that MCJK-S is 
directly involved in anti-India propaganda besides fuelling and causing law-and-order incidents in Jammu and 
Kashmir. 


69. PW-2 further deposed that MCJK-S has always supported portrayed a negative image of the counter 
insurgency operations in Jammu and Kashmir, glorified terrorist activities, mobilized public opinion against India, 
propagated false narrative and incited youth towards violence and terrorism. MCJK-S under the patronage of Ghulam 
Nabi Sumji has left no stone unturned to spread hatred and disaffection against India, vilifying India State, launching 
calculated attacks on the government of the day, spawning protests disclaiming and disrupting the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, and extending covert and overt support to anti-national organizations. 


FIR no. 54/2010 at P.S. Shergarhi, Srinagar: 


70. PW-2 further deposed that on 18.02.2010 Chairman of Hurriyat G Group Syed Ali Shah Geelani, after 
offering Friday prayers at Iqra Masjid Magarmal Bagh, Srinagar along with other associates of Hurriyat G marched 
in the shape of an unlawful assembly with stones in their hands and raised slogans against the unity and integrity of 
India and also exhorted people to boycot panchayat elections. Witness stated that leading to the abovesaid incident, 
FIR No. 54 of 2010 was registered at P.S. Shergarhi on 18.02.2010 u/s 153-B RPC & 13 ULA Act. A true copy of 
FIR No. 54/2010 in vernacular, alongwith its true English translation of the relevant portion has been relied upon by 
PW-2 as Ex. PW 2/1. Statements of Mukhtar Ahmad Hakim, and of Fayaz Ahmad Khan, recorded under section 
161 Cr.PC during investigation; of SGCT Manzoor Ahmad, of ASI AB. Hamid, of HC Fayaz Ahmad and of 
Constable Mohd. Abdullah, all of which recorded under section 164 Cr.PC in vernacular, alongwith their true 
English translations were relied upon by PW-2 as Ex. PW 2/2 to Ex. PW 2/7. 


71. PW-2 deposed that the current status of FIR No. 54 of 2010 is that of being still under investigation since 
the investigation faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the valley orchestrated by separatist 
leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from across the border and terrorist 
organizations. This climate of fear deterred individuals from coming forward to provide statements, hindering the 
progress of the investigations. Any attempt to probe these separatist organizations and their leaders triggered 
widespread unrest and turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in concluding the investigations. It was only 
after the reorganization of the State that significant progress could be made in the investigations, leading to the filing 
of chargesheets. 


72. PW-2 further deposed that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of service and the records 
of the criminal cases, it is manifest that MCJK-S and its leaders and members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and advocating cession of territory of Jammu and Kashmir from the Indian 
dominion; 
b) incessantly encouraging and advocating claims for secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 


Indian and have been inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of India; 


०) The acts of commission and omissions which are part of the present FIR are intended to disrupt the territorial 
integrity of India and have been aimed at inciting individuals and groups of local Muslim community to bring 
about cession of lawful constitutional authority of Government of India in the territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir; 


d) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
on religious lines and have been a firm preacher of Kashmir separatist movement. 


73. Witness further testified that sufficient material has been brought on record which manifests that MCJK-S 
and leaders and members of the said organization who also had support from the cross-border, have been actively 
and continuously supporting the separatist and banned organizations and have been openly advocating and inciting 
the people to bring about a secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. Witness stated that it is also 
established that the activities of MCJK-S are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting 
feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
sovereignty of the Union of India. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance/ no-contest on the part of 
MCJK-S. 


PW-3 


TA. Mr. Mohammad Ashrif (PW-3) who is Sub-Divisional Police Officer, Saddar, Srinagar, Kashmir tendered 
his affidavit as Ex. PW 3/A. Witness deposed that is the supervising officer of the cases bearing FIR Nos. 12/2006 
and 139/2010. Witness further deposed that he had been authorized by the competent authority to depose before this 
Tribunal and relied upon such authorization dated 19.06.2024 as Ex. PW 3/A-1. 


1D: PW-3 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide Notification No. 8.0. 935(E) published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, on 28" February, 2024, has declared Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) 
(hereinafter referred to as “MCJK-S”) as an ‘unlawful association’. Witness stated that he had read the brief 
background note on MCJK-S prepared by the Central Government and gone through the details of cases registered 
against the said organization and its leaders, and based on the same, he could testify that MCJK-S and its leaders 
were involved in the secessionist activities. 


76. PW-3 testified that it is further borne out from the records and the knowledge gathered during service that 
Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir, is a Pakistan backed secessionist organization, which was formed in year 
1985. Since the formation, Muslim Conference has been supporting terrorism and anti-India propaganda for fuelling 
secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir. It started its campaign by resorting to radicalization of the youth towards 
religious fundamentalism and questioning the accession of Jammu and Kashmir with India. Muslim conference later 
got split into three factions; one led by Abdul Gani Bhat of Sopore, another by Ghulam Nabi Sumji of Bijebehera 
and third by Shabir Ahmad Dar of Sopore. 


77. PW-3 further deposed that the most prominent faces of MCJK-S are Ghulam Nabi Sumji s/o Haji 
Mohammad Ramzan (founder and chairman of MCJK-S), Ghulam Nabi Shaheen s/o Ghulam Mohidin Thokar 
(General Secretary of MCJK-S), Manzoor Ahmed Misgar alias Gazi (Chief Organizer of MCJK-S) and Adil 
Mushtaq Wani (representative of MCJK-S in Pakistan/POK). 


78. PW-3 stated on oath that MCJK-S was established as an upper ground organization to provide background 
and logistic support in Jammu and Kashmir to terrorists operating in the region and to popularize and strengthen the 
terrorist and secessionist networks. Witness deposed that the prime objective of MCJK-S has been to separate Jammu 
and Kashmir from India as it has always claimed Jammu and Kashmir to be a disputed territory and that India's 
control on it is not justified. MCJK-S is directly involved in anti-India propaganda besides fuelling and causing law- 
and-order incidents in Jammu and Kashmir. Witness further deposed that MCJK-S has always supported portrayed a 
negative image of the counter insurgency operations in Jammu and Kashmir, glorified terrorist activities, mobilized 
public opinion against India, and propagated false narrative to incite youth towards violence and terrorism. MCJK-S 
under the patronage of Ghulam Nabi Sumji has left no stone unturned to spread hatred and disaffection against India, 
vilifying India State, launching calculated attacks on the government of the day, provoking and inciting youth into 
violence, spawning protests disclaiming and disrupting the sovereignty and integrity of India and in extending covert 
and overt support to anti-national organizations. 


FIR No. 12/2006: 


79. PW-3 further deposed that on 12.02.2006, Inspector S.S. Baloria along with ASI Ab Aziz, and Ct. Mohd. 
Aslam were performing regular duties at Hurriyat Office Kursoo Rajbagh when they observed a huge gathering at the 
spot to celebrate a welcome party organised by the Hurriyat Group of Geelani faction for Syed Ali Shah Geelani’s 
return from Haj Pilgrimage. The said gathering was led by Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Gh. Nabi Sumji, Mohammad 
Ashraf Sehrani, Masrat Alam Bhat, Firdous Ahmad Shah and Mohammad Akbar Bhat etc. and they raised slogans 
against the Republic of India, like “Hindustan Murdabad”, “Indian rulers leave Kashmir’, "Free Kashmir” and 
“Pakistan zindabad”’. Witness further deposed that on the basis of the said information, FIR No. 12/2006 was 
registered at P.S. Rajbagh u/s 10/13 of ULA(P) Act, a true copy of which alongwith its true English translation was 
relied upon as Ex. PW 3/1. Statements of witness S.S. Baloria, of ASI Abdul Azir, and of HC Shabir Ahmad, 
recorded under section 161 Cr.PC during investigation in vernacular, alongwith their true English translations were 
relied upon as Ex. PW 3/2 to Ex. PW 3/4. Witness stated that the investigation is still in progress. 


FIR No. 139/2010, P.S. Sadder Srinagar: 


80. PW-3 further deposed that on 09.07.2010 P.S. Sadder received information that acting chairman of Hurriyat 
“G” Ghulam Nabi Sumji has informed the people at Sanatnagar to strictly comply with the programme of Hurriyat 
given by Hurriyat Chairman G group. He instructed students, transporters, employees, businessmen to protest against 
the Govt. from morning prayer till evening prayers. He further instructed media personnel for videography of such 
protests. All such actions were done with the purpose to separate state of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 
India. He also instigated people to commit Tashudad and created a feeling of agitation and distress among the 
general masses. Witness stated that on receipt of this information, FIR No. 139 of 2010 was registered on 09.07.2010 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 23 


as P.S. Sadder, Srinagar u/s 13 UAPA, u/s 121-A RPC and u/s 13 ULA(P) Act. A true copy of the FIR No. 139/2010 
alongwith its true English translation was relied upon as Ex. PW 3/5. Statements of witness Inspector Nazir, of 
SGCT Nazir Ahmad, of SGCT Shareef-u-Din, of SGCT Mohammad Abdullah, recorded in vernacular under section 
164 Cr.PC, alongwith their true English translations were relied upon as Ex. PW 3/6 to Ex. PW3/9. Further, true 
copy of seizure memo of xerox copies of Press cuttings published by the acting chairman of Hurriyat Conference (G) 
GH Nabi Sumji alongwith their English transaltions, were relied upon as Ex. PW 3/10. 


81. PW-3 further deposed that the investigations faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the 
valley orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from across the 
border and terrorist organizations. This climate of fear deterred individuals from coming forward to provide 
statements, hindering the progress of the investigations. Any attempt to probe these separatist organizations and their 
leaders triggered widespread unrest and turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in concluding the 
investigations. It was only after the reorganization of the State that significant progress could be made in the 
investigations which are at their fag end and the chargesheets are also likely to be filed very soon. 


82. PW-3 further deposed that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of service and from the 

records of the criminal cases, it is manifest that MCJK-S and its leaders and members have been: 

a) incessantly encouraging and advocating cession of territory of Jammu and Kashmir from the Indian 
dominion; 

b) incessantly encouraging and advocating claims for secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 


Indian and have been inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of India; 


०) The acts of commission and omissions which are part of the present FIR’s are intended to disrupt the 
territorial integrity of India and have been aimed at inciting individuals and groups of local Muslim 
community to bring about cession of lawful constitutional authority of Government of India in the territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir; 


d) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
on religious lines and have been a firm preacher of Kashmir separatist movement. 


83. PW-3 concluded by further affirming that sufficient material has been brought on record which manifests 
that MCJK-S, its leaders and members who also have support from the cross-border have been actively and 
continuously supporting the separatist organizations, and have been openly inciting the people to bring about a 
secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. Witness further asserted that it is also established that the 
activities of MCJK-S are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity 
and hatred against the lawful government which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union 
of India. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance/ no-contest on the part of 
MCIJK-S. 


PW-4 


84. Ms. Ruksana Chowdhary (PW-4), currently posted as Deputy Superintendent of Police, CIK, Kashmir 
tendered her affidavit as Ex. PW 4/A and deposed that she is the Investigating Officer in respect of FIR No. 19/2010, 
and was well conversant with the facts and circumstances of the case. Witness further affirmed that he had been duly 
authorized by the competent authority to depose before this Tribunal and relied upon such authorization dated 
24.06.2024 as PW 4/A-1. 


85. PW 4 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide Notification No. 8.0. 935(E) published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, on 28" February, 2024, has declared Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) 
(hereinafter referred to as “MCJK-S”) as an ‘unlawful association’. Witness stated that she had read the brief 
background note on MCJK-S prepared by the Central Government and from the details of the cases registered against 
the said organization, and its leaders, she could state on oath that MCJK-S and its leaders were involved in the 
secessionist activities. 


86. PW 4 further deposed that it was borne out from the records of the cases, other materials available in police 
stations and on the basis of the knowledge gathered by her during the course of her service that Muslim Conference 
Jammu and Kashmir, is a Pakistan backed secessionist organization, which was formed in year 1985. Since the 
formation, Muslim Conference has been supporting terrorism and anti-India propaganda for fuelling secessionism in 
Jammu and Kashmir. It started its campaign by resorting to radicalization of the youth towards religious 
fundamentalism and questioning the accession of Jammu and Kashmir with India. Muslim conference later got split 
into three factions; one led by Abdul Gani Bhat of Sopore, another by Ghulam Nabi Sumji of Bijebehera and third 
by Shabir Ahmad Dar of Sopore. Witness affirmed that the most prominent faces of MCJK-S are Ghulam Nabi 
Sumji s/o Haji Mohammad Ramzan (founder and chairman of MCJK-S), Ghulam Nabi Shaheen s/o Ghulam 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Mohidin Thokar (General Secretary of MCJK-S), Manzoor Ahmed Misgar alias Gazi (Chief Organizer of MCJK-S) 
and Adil Mushtaq Wani (representative of MCJK-S in Pakistan/POK). 


87. PW 4 further deposed that MCJK-S was established as an upper ground organization to provide background 
and logistic support in Jammu and Kashmir to terrorists operating in Kashmir and to popularize and strengthen the 
terrorist and secessionist networks. Witness stated that the prime objective of MCJK-S has been to separate Jammu 
and Kashmir from India as MCJK-S has always claimed Jammu and Kashmir to be a disputed territory and asserted 
that India's control on it is not justified. MCJK-S is thus directly involved in anti-India propaganda besides fuelling 
and causing law-and-order incidents in Jammu and Kashmir. 


88. PW 4 further testified that MCJK-S has always portrayed a negative image of the counter insurgency 
operations in Jammu and Kashmir, glorified terrorist activities, mobilized public opinion against India, and 
propagated false narrative to incite youth towards violence and terrorism. MCJK-S under the patronage of Ghulam 
Nabi Sumji has left no stone unturned to spread hatred and disaffection against India, vilifying India State, launching 
calculated attacks on the government of the day, provoking and inciting youth into violence, spawning protests 
disclaiming and disrupting the sovereignty and integrity of India and extending covert and overt support to anti- 
national organizations. 


FIR No. 19/2010 


89. PW 4 further testified that the instant case has been registered on 05.07.2021 in PS CIK Srinagar after 
receiving reliable information that Gh. Nabi Sumji, a self-styled chairman of Hurriyat (G) Sah hatched criminal 
conspiracy with other associates and openly instigated people of the valley to support militancy in the valley and also 
provoked the youth of valley for pelting stones on security forces and indulge in violent protests till freedom of 
Kashmir from India. During the secret meetings conducted by the accused, people of valley were warned that if they 
don't follow the Hurriyat Calendar of Hartals in letter and spirit, they will face bad consequences and also warned 
Banks, Schools and other Government offices including transport authorities to shut down their activities so that the 
economic position of valley can be disturbed. Leading to this, FIR No. 19/2010 was thus registered under relevant 
sections of the law at PS Counter Intelligence Kashmir. A true copy of the FIR no. 19/2010 registered under sections 
109, 120-B, 121A, 123, 188, 153 of RPC, and u/s 13 Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 at P.S CIK, 
Srinagar, Jammu & Kashmir, in vernacular, alongwith its true English translation was relied upon as Ex. PW 4/1. 
Statements of witness SI Abdul Hameed recorded under section 161 Cr.PC alongwith its true English translation, of 
SGCT Hafizullah, recorded under section 161 Cr.PC with its true English translation, and of Arif Shafi Wani, 
Executive Editor Daily Greater Kashmir dated 13.06.2022 recorded under section 161 Cr.PC alongwith its true 
English translation were relied upon as Ex. PW4/2 to Ex. PW4/4. True copy of seizure memo dated 26.07.2010 
prepared during investigation of FIR no. 19/2010 alongwith its true English translation was relied upon as Ex. PW 
4/5. Witness further deposed that he also is relying upon the statement dated 10.05.2024 of Arif Shafi Wani, 
Executive Editor Daily Greater Kashmir which was recorded under section 161 Cr.PC but which he had 
inadvertently missed out in his affidavit, as Ex. PW 4/6. 


90. PW 4 further testified that the investigations faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the 
valley orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from across the 
border and terrorist organizations. This climate of fear deterred individuals from coming forward to provide 
statements, hindering the progress of the investigations. Any attempt to probe these separatist organizations and their 
leaders triggered widespread unrest and turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in concluding the 
investigations. It was only after the reorganization of the State that significant progress could be made in the 
investigation. 


91. PW-4 further deposed that from the knowledge acquired by her during the course of her service and the 

records of the criminal cases, it is manifest that MCJK-S and its leaders and members have been: 

a) incessantly encouraging and advocating cession of territory of Jammu and Kashmir from the Indian 
dominion; 

b) incessantly encouraging and advocating claims for secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 


Indian and have been inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of India; 


०) The acts of commission and omissions which are part of the present FIR are intended to disrupt the territorial 
integrity of India and have been aimed at inciting individuals and groups of local Muslim community to bring 
about cession of lawful constitutional authority of Government of India in the territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir; 


d) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
on religious lines and have been a firm preacher of Kashmir separatist movement. 


e) exploited the situation in the valley intensely and actively provoked, incited and lured the youth of Jammu 
and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in order to keep the anti-India pot boiling, 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 25 


announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars, leading to riots which resulted in the injuries and death of 
several civilians, police and Security Forces. 


92. PW-4 concluded by further affirming that sufficient material has been brought on record which manifests 
that MCJK-S, its leaders and members had support from across the border and have been actively and continuously 
supporting the separatist organizations and have also been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring about a 
secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. Witness asserted that it is also established from the 
records that the activities of MCJK-S are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting 
feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government in a manner which is prejudicial to the territorial 
integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance/ no-contest on the part of 
MCIJK-S. 


PW-5 


93. Mr. Junaid Wali (PW-5), currently posted as Sub-Divisional Police Officer, M.R.Gunj, Srinagar, Kashmir 
tendered his affidavit as Ex. PW 5/A and deposed that he is the supervising officer of the case bearing FIR No. 
70/2007 registered under Sections 13, 18 Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 at P.S Safakadal, Srinagar, and 
was well conversant with the facts and circumstances of the case. Witness further affirmed that he had been duly 
authorized by the Inspector General of Jammu and Kashmir Police to depose before this Tribunal and relied upon 
such authorization dated 19.06.2024 as PW 5/A-1. 


94. PW-5 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide Notification No. 8.0. 935(E) published in the Gazette of - India, 
Extraordinary, on 28" February, 2024, has declared Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) 
(hereinafter referred to as “MCJK-S”) as an ‘unlawful association’. Witness stated that he had read the brief 
background note on MCJK-S prepared by the Central Government and from the details of the cases registered against 
the said organization and its leaders, he could state on oath that MCJK-S and its leaders were involved in the 
secessionist activities. 


95. PW-5 further deposed that it is borne out from the records of the cases, other materials available in police 
stations and on the basis of the knowledge gathered by him during the course of his service that Muslim Conference 
Jammu and Kashmir, is a Pakistan backed secessionist organization, which was formed in year 1985. Since the 
formation, Muslim Conference has been supporting terrorism and anti-India propaganda for fuelling secessionism in 
Jammu and Kashmir. It started its campaign by resorting to radicalization of the youth towards religious 
fundamentalism and questioning the accession of Jammu and Kashmir with India. Muslim conference later got split 
into three factions; one led by Abdul Gani Bhat of Sopore, another by Ghulam Nabi Sumji of Bijebehera and third 
by Shabir Ahmad Dar of Sopore. Witness deposed that the most prominent faces of MCJK-S are Ghulam Nabi 
Sumji s/o Haji Mohammad Ramzan (founder and chairman ofMCJK-S), Ghulam Nabi Shaheen s/o Ghulam 
MohidinThokar (General Secretary of MCJK-S), Manzoor Ahmed Misgar alias Gazi (Chief Organizer of MCJK-S) 
and Adil Mushtaq Wani (representative of MCJK-S in Pakistan/POK). 


96. PW-5 further testified that MCJK-S was established as an upper ground organization to provide background 
and logistic support in Jammu and Kashmir to terrorists operating in Kashmir and to popularize and strengthen the 
terrorist and secessionist networks. Witness stated that the prime objective of MCJK-S has been to separate Jammu 
and Kashmir from India since MCJK-S has always claimed Jammu and Kashmir to be a disputed territory and 
asserted that India's control on it is not justified. MCJK-S is thus directly involved in anti-India propaganda besides 
fuelling and causing law-and-order incidents in Jammu and Kashmir. 


97. PW-5 deposed that MCJK-S has always portrayed a negative image of the counter insurgency operations in 
Jammu and Kashmir, glorified terrorist activities, mobilized public opinion against India, propagated false narrative 
and to incite youth towards violence and terrorism. MCJK-S under the patronage of Ghulam Nabi Sumji has left no 
stone unturned to spread hatred and disaffection against India, vilifying India State, launching calculated attacks on 
the government of the day, provoking and inciting youth into violence, spawning protests disclaiming and disrupting 
the sovereignty and integrity of India and extending covert and overt support to anti-national organizations. 


FIR No. 70/2007 


98. PW-5 further deposed that on 22.04.2007, a written docket was received at Police Station Safakadal through 
In-Charge Police Post Noorbagh (camp Idgah Srinagar) disclosing that on the said day, at about 15:45 hours when 
in-charge Police Post Noorbagh alongwith Police party was on patrolling at Jdgah Srinagar, they saw that activists of 
Hurriyat (G) namely Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Mohammad Ashraf Khan @ Sehraiye, and Ghulam Nabi Sumji were 
delivering an address to the rally stating that the accession to the India is temporary and the youth should oppose the 
forcible encroachment by India. The rally included 6) Masrat Alam Bhat (ii) Firdous Ahmad Shah (iii) Mukhtar 
Ahmad Sofi (iv) Mohammad Shafi Reshi (v) Mehraj-ud Din Sofi (vi) Mohmad Salim Zargar and (vii) Shakeel 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Ahmad Bhat @ Adja (8) Javaid Ahmad Bhat who also provoked the people in the rally and raised slogans such as 
"JIVEJIVE PAKISTAN" and "PAKISTAN SE RISHTA KYA LA-ILAHA ILALLA". This act of the preachers and 
organisers posed threat to the peace and tranquillity of India. Accordingly, based on the above incident, FIR No. 
70/2007 was registered on 22.04.2007 at P.S Safakadal, Srinagar under Sections 13 and 18 of UAPA. A true copy of 
the FIR No. 70/2007 along with its true translation was relied upon as Ex. PW 5/1. Statements of witness ASI 
Mohammad Kamal Bhat recorded in vernacular under section 164 Cr.PC alongwith its true English translation and of 
SGCT Siraj-ud-din recorded under section 164 Cr.PC in vernacular alongwith its true English translation were relied 
upon as Ex. PW 5/2 and Ex. PW 5/3 respectively. 


99. PW-5 further testified that the investigations faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the 
valley orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from across the 
border and terrorist organizations. This climate of fear deterred individuals from coming forward to provide 
statements, hindering the progress of the investigations. Any attempt to probe these separatist organizations and their 
leaders triggered widespread unrest and turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in concluding the 
investigations. It was only after the reorganization of the State that significant progress could be made in the 
investigation which is now at its fag end and chargesheet is likely to be filed soon. 


100. PW-5 deposed that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of service and the records of the 
criminal cases, it is manifest that MCJK-S and its leaders and members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and advocating cession of territory of Jammu and Kashmir from the Indian 
dominion; 
b) incessantly encouraging and advocating claims for secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 


Indian and have been inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of India; 


०) The acts of commission and omissions which are part of the present FIR are intended to disrupt the territorial 
integrity of India and have been aimed at inciting individuals and groups of local Muslim community to bring 
about cession of lawful constitutional authority of Government of India in the territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir; 


d) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
on religious lines and have been a firm preacher of Kashmir separatist movement. 


e) exploited the situation in the valley intensely and actively provoked, incited and lured the youth of Jammu 
and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in order to keep the anti-India pot boiling, 
announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars, leading to riots which resulted in the injuries and death of 
several civilians, police and Security Forces. 


101. PW-5 concluded by further affirming that sufficient material has been brought on record which manifests 
that MCJK-S, its leaders and members of the said organization had support from across the border and have been 
actively supporting the separatist organizations which have been openly inciting the people to bring about a secession 
of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. Witness asserted that it is also established that the activities of 
MCIJK-S are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred 
against the lawful government in a manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of 
the Union of India. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance/ no-contest on the part of 
MCJK-S. 


PW-6 


102. Mr. Owaise Rashid (PW-6) who is currently posted as Sub-Divisional Police Officer, Bijbehara, 
Anantnag, Kashmir tendered his affidavit as Ex. PW 6/A and deposed that he is the supervising officer of the cases 
bearing FIR nos. 249/2009, 255/2013, 224/2015 and 225/2015, and was well conversant with the facts and 
circumstances of these cases. Witness further affirmed that he had been duly authorized by the competent authority to 
depose before this Tribunal and relied upon such authorization dated 19.06.2024 as PW 6/A-1. 


103. PW-6 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide Notification No. 8.0. 935 (E) published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, on 28" February, 2024, has declared Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction) 
(hereinafter referred to as “MCJK-S”) as an ‘unlawful association’. Witness stated that he had read the brief 
background note on MCJK-S prepared by the Central Government and from the records of the cases registered 
against the said organization and its leaders, he could depose that MCJK-S and its leaders were involved in the 
secessionist activities. 


104. PW-6 further deposed that it is borne out from the records and background note that Muslim Conference 
Jammu and Kashmir, is a Pakistan backed secessionist organization, which was formed in year 1985. Since the 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 27 


formation, Muslim Conference has been supporting terrorism and anti-India propaganda for fuelling secessionism in 
Jammu and Kashmir. It started its campaign by resorting to radicalization of the youth towards religious 
fundamentalism and questioning the accession of Jammu and Kashmir with India. Muslim conference later got split 
into three factions; one led by Abdul Gani Bhat of Sopore, another by Ghulam Nabi Sumji of Bijebehera and third 
by Shabir Ahmad Dar of Sopore. Witness testified that the most prominent faces of MCJK-S are Ghulam Nabi 
Sumji s/o Haji Mohammad Ramzan (founder and chairman of MCJK-S), Ghulam Nabi Shaheen S/o Ghulam 
Mohidin Thokar (General Secretary of MCJK-S), Manzoor Ahmed Misgar alias Gazi (Chief Organizer of MCJK-S) 
and Adil Mushtaq Wani (representative of MCJK-S in Pakistan/POK). 


105. PW-6 deposed that MCJK-S was established as an upper ground organization to provide background and 
logistic support in Jammu and Kashmir to terrorists operating in Kashmir and to popularize and strengthen the 
terrorist and secessionist networks. Witness stated that the prime objective of MCJK-S has been to separate Jammu 
and Kashmir from India since MCJK-S has always claimed Jammu and Kashmir to be a disputed territory and 
asserted that India's control on it is not justified. MCJK-S is thus directly involved in anti-India propaganda besides 
fuelling and causing law-and-order incidents in Jammu and Kashmir. Witness further deposed that MCJK-S has 
always portrayed a negative image of the counter insurgency operations in Jammu and Kashmir, glorified terrorist 
activities, mobilized public opinion against India, and propagated false narrative to incite youth towards violence and 
terrorism. MCJK-S under the patronage of Ghulam Nabi Sumji has left no stone unturned to spread hatred and 
disaffection against India, vilifying India State, launching calculated attacks on the government of the day, provoking 
and inciting youth into violence, spawning protests disclaiming and disrupting the sovereignty and integrity of India 
and extending covert and overt support to anti-national organizations. 


FIR no. 249/2009 


106. PW-6 further testified that on 22.10.2009 at 15:30 hours, SG Constable Ashiq Ahmad, who was on his 
patrolling duties, approached the Police Station Bijbehara with a written docket from SHO P.S. Bijbehara, 
mentioning there-in that on the said day, while conducting patrolling, they had reached at Baba Mohalla near 
Shaheed Mazar. Upon reaching there, some persons, which include (i) Advocate Bashir Ahmad, (ii) Sheikh Rashid, 
(iii) Noor Mohammad Kalwal, (iv) Ghulam Nabi Sumji, (v) Qazi Yasir Ahmad Mirwaiz, (vi) Mohammad Hussain 
Zargar, and (vii) Aatif Hassan Shaksaz, Anantnag etc had assembled a gathering and were raising slogans against the 
integrity of India, and for ceceding Kashmir from the legal occupation of India. These persons were asked by the on- 
duty police party to disperse. However, the riotous gathering started pelting stones upon police. In order to control 
the mob, police at first instance used light cane charge. However, they did not disperse. Thereafter, the police fired 
some tear smoke shells and dispersed the mob. Pertinently, stone pelting by the riotous mob not only restrained the 
police party from performing their legitimate duties but also injured some police personnel. Subsequently, upon 
receipt of the aforesaid docket, FIR no. 249/2009 was registered at P.S. Bijbehara on 22.10.2009 against the accused 
u/s 147, 336, 332 of RPC and u/s 13 of UAPA. A true copy of the FIR no. 249/2009 was relied upon by PW-6 as 
Ex. PW 6/1. Witness further deposed that after collecting sufficient material substantiating the guilt of the accused 
persons, a Chargesheet was filed in the jurisdictional Court vide Challan No. 63/2023 dated 24.04.2023. A true copy 
of the Chargesheet in vernacular along with true its English translation was relied upon as Ex. PW 6/2. Statements 
of witness Shabir Ahmad Shah, SHO, PS Bijbehara recorded under section 161 Cr.PC alongwith its true English 
translation, of Constable Mohammad Ashrat recorded under section 161 alongwith its true English translation and of 
SGCT Aashiq Hussain recorded under section 161 Cr.PC alongwith its true English translation, were relied upon as 
Ex. PW 6/3 to Ex. PW 6/5. 


FIR No. 255/2013 


107. PW-6 deposed that on 03.11.2013 at 10:30 hours, Police Station Bijbehara received a reliable information to 
that effect that since few days, an active terrorist namely Mubarak Ahmad Wani 710 Bangdar along with other 
terrorists, who are in judicial custody in the jails of Jammu & Kashmir or outside i.e. Fayaz Ahmad Wani r/o Mali 
Nag Anantnag, Mohd Rafiq Ganie r/o Telwani Anantnag, Hafizullah Mir r/o Badoora Achabal, Peer Mohd Ashraf 
t/o Bata Gund Dooru, and Bashir Ahmad Wani r/o Kokernag were addressing the youth of the area to join the 
terrorist ranks. As a result of their address, one released terrorist namely Abdul Haq Malik r/o Arwani joined them, 
who is active in the jurisdiction of Police Station Bijbehara. Moreover, the terrorists are also encouraging the youth 
to gather donation from the people to buy arms and ammunition and harm the integrity of the nation so as to bring 
about cession of the state of Jammu & Kashmir from India. The witness stated that leading to the said information, 
FIR no. 255/2013 was registered on 03.11.2013 at PS Bijbehara u/s 13/16/18/20 & 40 of ULA (P) Act. A true copy 
of the said FIR in vernacular alongwith its true English translation was relied upon as Ex. PW 6/6. 


108. PW-6 further deposed that after collecting sufficient material substantiating the guilt of the accused persons, 
a Chargesheet was filed in the jurisdictional Court, the trial in which is still pending. A true copy of the Chargesheet 
in vernacular along with its true English translation was relied upon as Ex. PW 6/7. Statements of ASI Mohd. Amin 
recorded in vernacular under section 161 Cr.PC alongwith its true English translation and of Inspector Shabir 
Ahmad, recorded in vernacular under section 161 Cr.PC alongwith its true English translation, were relied upon as 
Ex. PW 6/8 and Ex. PW 6/9 respectively. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


FIR No. 224/2015: 


109. PW-6 testified that on 24.11.2015 at 09:00 hours, Incharge Police Station Bijbehara received a written 
docket from SHO P.S. Bijbehara through Constable Shabir Ahmad mentioning therein that during their patrolling 
duties near marriage hall Baba Mohalla, eight to ten thousand people had gathered there to attend the funeral prayers 
of killed terrorists namely Taveer Ahmad Bhat @ Abu Bakar and Adil Sheikh, who were eliminated in an encounter 
at Siligam Aishmugam on 23.11.2015. Separatists’ leaders namely Gh. Nabi Sumji, Hafizullah Mir, Zafar Akber 
Bhat, Yaqoob Mir, Manzoor Ahmad Misger @ Gazi, and Waseem Ahmad Wagay addressed the gathering and asked 
the people/youth to assist and help the militants to continue the struggle of separatism from India. The separatist 
leaders encouraged militancy to get freedom from India. Subsequently, upon the receipt of the docket, FIR no. 
224/2015 was registered at PS Bijbehra on 24.11.2015 u/s 153 of IPC. A true copy of the FIR no. 224/2015, in 
vernacular alongwith its true English translation was relied upon as Ex. PW 6/10. 


110. PW-6 further deposed that after collecting sufficient material substantiating the guilt of the accused persons, 
a Charge-sheet in FIR no. 224/2015 was filed in the jurisdictional Court vide Challan no. 112/2023 dated 21.06.2023. 
A true copy of the chargesheet, in vernacular alongwith its true English translation, was relied upon as Ex. PW 6/11. 
Statement of Inspector Nisar Ahmad, SHO, PS Bijbehara recorded under section 161 Cr.PC alongwith its true 
English translation, of Dy. SP Irshad Hussain Rather, SDPO, Bijbehara, recorded under section 161 Cr.PC alongwith 
its true English translation, and of Constable Shabir Ahmad recorded under section 161 Cr.PC alongwith their true 
English translations were relied upon as Ex. PW 6/12 to Ex. PW 6/14. 


FIR No. 225/2015 


111. PW-6 further testified that on 24.11.2015 at 10:40 hours, Constable Shahbaz Ali approached the Police 
Station Bijbehara with a written docket from SHO P.S. Bijbehara Camp Baba Mohalla mentioning therein that at 
Baba Mohalla, where people after performing the funeral prayers and last rites of killed militants namely Adil Sheikh 
and Tanveer Bhat, turned violent and started sloganeering against India and Jammu & Kashmir government. These 
rioters were lead by Ghulam Nabi Sumji, Hafizullah Mir, Yaqoob Mir, Zaffar Akbar Bhat, Manzoor Ahmad Gazi, 
Faheem Ahmad, Danish, Arif Redi Meet Walla, Ashiq Mir, Sajad Ahmad Badar, Khalid Hakeen Vaid, Wajid, Aqib, 
Irfan Vaid, and Farooq Nisar Sheikh and together they started pelting stones heavily upon the residential house of 
Chief Minister Shri Mufti Mohammad Sayed due to which damage was caused to the windows and an Ambassador 
Car bearing number JKO1K-9757 which had been provided to the brother of Chief Minister from security wing and 
was parked in the premises of his residential house, also sustained damages due to the stone pelting. The rioters, who 
were led by aforementioned persons hoisted a Pakistani flag upon an electric pole situated on rear side lane of Chief 
Minister’s residence. Violent rioters were continuously pelting stones due to which two PSO’s namely Constable 
Abdul Rashid and Constable Muzafar Ahmad got injured. In order to disperse the rioters, who were in large numbers 
and to save the lives and government/private properties, the police party engaged in tear/smoke grenade shelling in 
air. Subsequently, upon receipt of the aforesaid docket, FIR no. 225/2015 was registered at PS Bijbehra on 
24.11.2015 u/s 147, 149, 336, 427, 307, 332, 506 & 153 of RAC Act and section 13 of ULAP Act. A copy of the 
aforesaid FIR in vernacular alongwith its true English translation was relied upon as Ex. PW 6/15. 


112. PW-6 deposed that after collecting sufficient material substantiating the guilt of the accused persons, a 
Chargesheet in FIR no. 225/2015 was filed in the jurisdictional Court vide Challan no. 113/2023 dated 21.06.2023. 
A copy of the chargesheet in vernacular alongwith its English translation was relied upon as Ex. PW 6/16. 
Statements of Head Constable Mol Raj recorded in vernacular under section 161 Cr.PC alongwith its true English 
translation, and of Head Constable Mohammad Rashid recorded in vernacular under section 161 Cr.PC alongwith its 
true English translation were relied on as Ex. PW 6/17 and Ex. PW 6/18. 


113. PW-6 further testified that the above investigations faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation 
in the valley orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from 
across the border and terrorist organizations. This climate of fear deterred individuals from coming forward to 
provide statements, hindering the progress of the investigations. Any attempt to probe these separatist organizations 
and their leaders triggered widespread unrest and turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in concluding the 
investigations. It was only after the reorganization of the State that significant progress could be made in the 
investigations, leading to the filing of chargesheets. 


114. PW-6 deposed that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of service and from the records 
of the criminal cases, it is manifest that MCJK-S and its leaders and members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and advocating cession of territory of Jammu and Kashmir from the Indian 
dominion; 
b) incessantly encouraging and advocating claims for secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 


Indian and have been inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of India; 


c) The acts of commission and omissions which are part of the present FIR’s are intended to disrupt the 
territorial integrity of India and have been aimed at inciting individuals and groups of local Muslim 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 29 


community to bring about cession of lawful constitutional authority of Government of India in the 
territory of Jammu and Kashmir; 


d) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir on religious lines and have been a firm preacher of Kashmir separatist movement. 


e) exploited the situation in the valley intensely and actively provoked, incited and lured the youth of Jammu 
and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in order to keep the anti-India pot boiling, 
announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars, leading to riots which resulted in the injuries and 
death of several civilians, police and Security Forces. 


115. PW-6 concluded by further affirming that sufficient material has been brought on record which manifests 
that MCJK-S, its leaders and members had support from across the border and have been actively supporting the 
separatist organizations and inciting the people to bring about a secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 
India. Witness asserted that it is also established that the activities of MCJK-S are aimed at causing disaffection, 
disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government in a manner 
which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance/ no-contest on the part of 
MCJK-S. 


PW-7 


116. Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gupta (PW-7) Director (Counter Terrorism), MHA, GOI, tendered his affidavit as 
Ex. PW-7/A and deposed that he was well conversant with the facts and circumstances of the case as he had been 
dealing with all the relevant files/records concerning MCJK-S in his official capacity. Witness further stated that he 
had been duly authorized by the competent authority to depose before this Tribunal and relied upon copy of such 
authorization by way of an official noting as Ex. PW 7/A-1 dated 26.06.2024, the original of which was submitted 
during his deposition in a sealed cover along with other documents. 


117. PW-7 deposed that the notification no. S. 0. 935(E) dated 28" February, 2024, issued by the Central 
Government is based on the information and material received from the central intelligence agency and Criminal 
Investigation Department of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, with regard to the unlawful activities of the 
Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji Faction). Witness deposed that on the basis of information received 
from the intelligence and investigation agencies of the Central Government and the Union Territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir regarding unlawful activities of MCJK-S, a note was prepared for the consideration of the Cabinet 
Committee on Security. 


118. PW-7 deposed that thereafter, the Cabinet Committee on Security took the decision and approved the 
proposal contained in the above note, in its meeting held on 217 February, 2024. Accordingly, the declaration was 
made and published vide notification dated 28" February, 2024, bearing No. S.O. 935(E). A copy of the said 
notification published in the official gazette dated 28.02.2024 was relied upon by PW 5 as Ex. PW 7/1. Witness 
further deposed that in terms of sub-section (1) of Section 5 read with sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as UAPA) and vide notification dated 18 March, 2024, 
bearing no. 8.0. 1462 (E), this Tribunal was constituted. The background note submitted to this Tribunal in terms of 
Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities Prevention Rules 1968, vide letter dated 26 March, 2024 is based upon the 
material/ information as contained in the concerned file. A copy of the said background note was relied upon by PW 
7 as Ex. PW 7/2. 


119. PW-7 affirmed that various cases registered by the Jammu and Kashmir Police throw light on the unlawful 
and subversive activities of its chairman and members of MCJK-S. Further, officers concerned of the Union 
Territory of Jammu and Kashmir have filed their affidavits before this Tribunal in respect of cases registered in 
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir against the chairman and members of MCJK-S under various provisions of 
law including the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 and Ranbir Penal Code. PW-7 further deposed that 
various witnesses have already adduced evidences during the course of proceedings before this Tribunal in support of 
the declaration as contained in notification no. 5.0. 935 (E) dated 28" February, 2024. The evidences adduced 
clearly establish that MCJK-S is continuously indulging in unlawful activities which pose a serious threat to the 
internal security of the country. Witness stated that in addition to the above adduced evidences, various intelligence 
inputs show that MCJK-S is continuing its unlawful activities which are prejudicial to the security of the country and 
considering all these facts, circumstances and evidences adduced before this Tribunal, the MCJK-S has been banned 
under the UAPA, 1967 and the same may kindly be affirmed by this Tribunal. 


120. PW-7 deposed that as per the information received from various intelligence agencies, banning of the 
MCJK-S is necessary in the interest of national security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. Chairman and 
members of the MCJK-S have indulged in radicalizing and brainwashing the minds of youth through provocative 
speeches for separation of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


121. The original file (duly indexed) containing above mentioned central intelligence reports / inputs was 
submitted for the perusal of this Tribunal in a sealed cover and was relied upon by PW 7 as Ex. PW 7/3. Witness 
deposed that the Central Government is seeking privilege for the original file mentioned above as Ex. PW 7/3 and 
accordingly, relied on section 123 of Evidence Act read with Rule 3(2) and proviso to Rule 5 of Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Rules of 1968 since the Central Government considers it against the public interest to disclose the same 
to either the banned association or to any third-party inter-alia in terms of the provisions of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Rules, 1968. 


122. PW-7 further deposed that the documents for which claim of privilege is being sought, by their very nature, 
are confidential and sensitive in nature and, therefore, cannot be supplied as a public document as dissemination of 
the same to public at large may impede/impeach the ongoing investigations/prosecutions against the banned 
organization or its members and can also entail cross border nation security concerns. Therefore, the said documents 
can be verified by the Tribunal only. 


123. PW-7 further submitted that MCJK-S is promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the 
integrity and security of the country and is tacitly supporting terrorist activities and incitement of violence for 
seeking secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. He further stated that the cogent and irrefutable 
evidences which have emerged till now prove that MCJK-S is continuously encouraging veiled armed terrorist 
activities to bring about a secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union. 


124. PW-7 concluded his testimony by deposing that from the above it is evident that MCJK-S is indulging in 
anti-national activities posing a serious threat to the sovereignty and integrity of India. If the MCJK-S is not banned 
the activists and sympathizers of MCJK-S will pose a serious threat to the communal harmony, internal security & 
integrity of the country. It has been further submitted that through material available on record and inputs received 
from various agencies, the MCJK-S has been incessantly encouraging and continuously pursuing the agenda of 
securing secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India by inciting and orchestrating violence. Witness 
affirmed that in view of the submissions made herein above, the declaration made by the Central Government vide 
Notification No. S. 0. 935 (8) dated 28" February, 2024 may please be confirmed and upheld in public interest. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance/ no-contest on the part of 
MCJK-S. 


No other witness was examined on behalf of UOI. The evidence was thus concluded and the matter was posted to 
27.07.2024 for addressing final submissions. 


VIII. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE UOI 


125. On 27.07.2024 the Reference was taken up for hearing final submissions. Learned Additional Solicitor 
General for the Union of India addressed arguments first on the claim for privilege in respect of the documents 
submitted by PW-7 in a sealed cover and subsequently, also addressed the Tribunal regarding existence of sufficient 
grounds for declaring MCJK-S as an unlawful association. For claiming privilege for documents produced in a sealed 
cover, Id. Additional SG has referred to Section 123 of the Evidence Act read with Section 3(2) of the UAP Rules, 
1968, which are reproduced as under: 


Indian Evidence Act, 1872 


“123. Evidence as to affairs of State — No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from 
unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer 
at the head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks 


fit.” 
The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 


“3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence.- 


(1) In holding an inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 4 or disposing of any application under 
sub-section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section 8, the Tribunal or the District Judge, 
as the case may be, shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), follow, as far as 
practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). 


(2 


YS 


Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), where any 
books of account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal or the Court of 
the District Judge by the Central Government and such books of account or other documents 
are claimed by that Government to be of a confidential nature then, the Tribunal or the Court 
of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall not,- 


(a) Make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the proceedings 
before it; or 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 31 


(b) Allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books of 
account or other documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings 
before it.” 


126. Learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that the claim of privilege by the Union of India for the 
documents placed in a sealed cover has been made as the documents are of such a nature that the non-disclosure of 
which would be in the interest of the public. It was submitted that this concept of public interest is taken into account 
even in the criminal proceedings qua the accused, whereas in juxtaposition, the present matter stands at a much higher 
pedestal and involves the issue of sovereignty and integrity of the country. Learned Additional SG submitted that in 
the cases concerning national security, sovereignty and integrity, the Tribunal has to interpret and analyze the material 
differently as the decisions taken by the Central Government in such manner are based on highly sensitive information 
and inputs; and the effects of such decisions are not confined to the boundaries of the nation. 


127. To support her arguments, learned Additional SG has relied upon the judgment delivered in a case of 
preventive detention i.e. Raj Kumar Singh vs. State of Bihar (1986) 4 SCC 407 wherein the Supreme Court, inter 
alia, held as under: 


“The executive authority is not the sole judge of what is required for national security or public order. 
But the court cannot substitute its decision if the executive authority or the appropriate authority acts on 
proper materials and reasonably and rationally comes to that conclusion even though a conclusion with 
which the court might not be in agreement. It is not for the court to put itself in the position of the 
detaining authority and to satisfy itself that untested facts reveal a path of crime provided these facts are 
relevant. See in this connection the observations of O. Chinnappa Reddy, J. in Vijay Narain Singh case 
[(1984) 3 SCC 14: 1984 SCC (Cri) 361: AIR 1984 SC 1334: (1984) 3 SCR 435 ] at p. 440 and 441. 
(SCC p. 19, para 1) 346. Similarly, in the case of Union of India vs. Rajasthan High Court, (2017) 2 
SCC 599: 2016 SCC Online SC 1468.. It was not for the court in the exercise of its power of judicial 
review to suggest a policy which it considered fit. The formulation of suggestions by the High Court for 
framing a National Security Policy travelled far beyond legitimate domain of judicial review. 
Formulation of such a policy is based on information and inputs which are not available to the court. 
The court is not an expert in such matters. Judicial review is concerned with the legality of executive 
action and the court can interfere only where there is a breach of law or a violation of the Constitution. ” 


128. The learned Additional SG has also placed reliance upon the judgment delivered in Ex-Armymen's 
Protection Services (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (2014) 5 SCC 409, wherein it has been interalia held as under: 


“15. It is difficult to define in exact terms as to what is “national security”. However, the same 
would generally include socio-political stability, territorial integrity, economic solidarity and 
strength, ecological balance, cultural cohesiveness, external peace, etc. 


16. What is in the interest of national security is not a question of law. It is a matter of policy. It is 
not for the court to decide whether something is in the interest of the State or not. It should be left to 
the executive.” 


129. The learned Additional SG submitted that the UAPA and the Rules framed thereunder provide for a 
mechanism to claim privilege and withhold certain facts/documents so as to seek non-disclosure of the same. The 
learned Additional SG then placed reliance on the judgment delivered in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), wherein the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court has held as under: 


"19. ...the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Act itself permits the Central Government to 
withhold the disclosure of acts which it considers to be against the public interest to disclose. 
Similarly, Rule 3(2) and the proviso to Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 
also permit nondisclosure of confidential documents and information which the Government 
considers against the public interest to disclose... 


20... 


24, It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine in 
nature and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued 
confidentiality in public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such information, 
and, may be, also full particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. The scheme of 
the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder provide for 
maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in public interest. 


22....in such cases where the Tribunal is satisfied that non-disclosure of such information to the 
association or its office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non-disclosure to the 
association or its office-bearers, but in order to perform its task of adjudication as required by the 
Act, the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the 
information and satisfying itself that it can safely act on the same. In such a situation, the Tribunal 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


can devise a suitable procedure whereby it can itself examine and test the credibility of such 
material before it decides to accept the same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for 
declaring the association to be unlawful. The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence 
in the strict sense. 


23... 


24. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its source, in 
public interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the confidential 
information for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the conflicting evidence of 
the other side. This modified procedure satisfies the minimum requirements of natural justice and 
also retains the basic element of an adjudicatory process which involves objective determination of 
the factual basis of the action taken." 


130. The learned Additional SG also relied on the judgment delivered in People’s Union for Civil Liberties vs. 
Union of India, (2004) 2 SCC 476, where it was, inter alia, held as under: 


“69. The legislative policy behind the aforementioned provisions is no longer res integra. The State 
must have the prerogative of preventing evidence being given on matters that would be contrary to 
public interest. 


70. For determining a question when a claim of privilege is made, the Court is required to pose the 
following questions: 


(1) whether the document in respect of which privilege is claimed, is really a document 
(unpublished) relating to any affairs of State; and 


(2) whether disclosure of the contents of the document would be against public interest? 


71. When any claim of privilege is made by the State in respect of any document, the question 
whether the document belongs to the privileged class has first to be decided by the court. The court 
cannot hold an enquiry into the possible injury to public interest which may result from the 
disclosure of the document in question. The claim of immunity and privilege has to be based on 
public interest. 


72. The section does not say who is to decide the preliminary question viz. whether the document is 
one that relates to any affairs of State, or how it is to be decided, but the clue in respect thereof can 
be found in Section 162. Under Section 162 a person summoned to produce a document is bound to 
bring it to the court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its production or to its 
admissibility. The validity of any such objection shall be decided on by the courtl. It further says 
that: The court, if it deems fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of State, or take 
other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility 


73. In order to claim immunity from disclosure of unpublished State documents, the documents must 
relate to affairs of the State and disclosure thereof must be against interest of the State or public 
interest.” 


131. The learned Additional SG, thus, submitted that from a bare reading of the aforesaid judgment of the 
Supreme Court, it is clear that an enquiry contemplated under the UAPA gives a right to the government to claim 
privilege of sensitive documents in public interest/national interest which right has been duly upheld by the Supreme 
Court; and that in the present case, the documents for which claim of privilege has been raised by their very nature are 
confidential and sensitive in nature and, therefore, cannot be supplied as a public document. 


132. The learned Additional SG further submitted that the documents form part of the evidence collected by the 
intelligence agencies which pertains to secessionist and unlawful activities of the MCJK-S and those associated with it 
and the same can be verified by the Tribunal only. The learned Additional SG further submitted that the nature of 
material placed in the sealed cover by the Central Government is in the form of secret information collected from time 
to time by the investigating and intelligence agencies, communications between the intelligence agencies, information 
which may lead to further recoveries, discoveries of facts as also unearth conspiracies, the disclosure whereof would 
be clearly detrimental to the larger public interest and the security of the State. The learned Additional SG submitted 
that the material filed by the Central Government contains the note then put up to the Cabinet Committee on Security 
along with documents supporting the note and the grounds on which the notification was issued. Hence, the claim of 
privilege of the documents in sealed cover by the Central Government is in accordance with law and the said 
documents are not required to be disclosed in the public interest. 


133. Learned Additional SG further submitted that the sealed cover material as mentioned in the affidavit of the 
Union of India, is inherently and dehors being part of the evidence of the present proceeding, of confidential nature, 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 33 


disclosure of which would be contrary, not only to the public interest but also to national interest. In the same breath, 
the learned Additional SG submitted that the privilege of the said documents is claimed on the nature of documents 
which impinge upon national security. 


134. Learned Additional SG has also placed reliance in this regard on the following judgments of the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court: 


(a) Dr. S.P. Gupta Vs. Union of India (1981) Supp SCC 87 
(b) Iqbal Singh Marwah Vs. Meenakshi Marwah (2005) 4 SCC 370 


135. Learned Additional SG further submitted that with regard to the claim of privilege for non-disclosure of 
sealed documents, the Supreme Court in S.P. Gupta (supra), has held as under: 


“73. We have already pointed out that whenever an objection to the disclosure of a document under 
Section 123 is raised, two questions fall for the determination of the court, namely, whether the 
document relates to affairs of State and whether its disclosure would, in the particular case before 
the court, be injurious to public interest. The court in reaching its decision on these two questions 
has to balance two competing aspects of public interest, because the document being one relating to 
affairs of State, its disclosure would cause some injury to the interest of the State or the proper 
functioning of the public service and on the other hand if it is not disclosed, the non disclosure 
would thwart the administration of justice by keeping back from the court a material document. 
There are two aspects of public interest clashing with each other out of which the court has to 
decide which predominates. The approach to this problem is admirably set out in a passage from the 
judgment of Lord Reid in Conway v. Rimmer [(1968) AC 910, 952, 973, 979, 987, 993 : (1968) 1 All 
ER 874 (HL)]: 


“It is universally recognized that there are two kinds of public interest which may clash. 
There is the public interest that harm shall not be done to the nation or the public service by 
disclosure of certain documents, and there is the public interest that the administration of 
justice shall not be frustrated by the withholding of documents which must be produced if 
justice is to be done. There are many cases where the nature of the injury which would or 
might be done to the nation or the public service is of so grave a character that no other 
interest, public or private, can be allowed to prevail over it. With regard to such cases it 
would be proper to say, as Lord Simon did, that to order production of the document in 
question would put the interest of the State in jeopardy. But there are many other cases 
where the possible injury to the public service is much less and there one would think that it 
would be proper to balance the public interests involved.” 


136. Learned Additional SG, therefore, submitted that the rigors of S.P Gupta (supra) for claiming privilege have 
to be read in context of the provisions of UAPA and the Rules framed thereunder which provide that document, 
disclosure whereof may not be in the public interest, be not disclosed. She further submitted that the UAP Rules, as 
quoted above, starts with a non obstante clause and thus an inbuilt mechanism has been provided under the UAPA and 
the Rules framed thereunder. Accordingly, the Tribunal is mandated to grant privilege forbidding disclosure where the 
claim of the Government is that the disclosure of such documents could affect the larger public interest of the nation 
by jeopardizing the safety and sovereignty of the country and also that the public interest outweighs the interest of the 
association/members/office bearers. 


137. Learned Additional SG submitted that the claim of confidentiality has to satisfy the test of character of the 
document and if on an objective satisfaction, it is concluded that the document is of such a character that its disclosure 
will injure public interest, the contents thereof cannot be permitted to be disclosed to the other side. Thus, the 
foundation of immunity from non-disclosure stems from the character of the document. 


138. The learned Additional SG also submitted that the decision of the previous Tribunals constituted under 
Section 4 of the UAPA, in which the claim of privilege by the Central Government had been allowed holding that the 
same satisfied the requirement of Section 123 of the Evidence Act, are binding on this Tribunal in view of the 
provisions of Section 5(7) of the UAPA which provide that the proceedings before this Tribunal are judicial 
proceedings and, therefore, reliance has been placed on the Extraordinary Gazette Notification bearing no CG-DL-E- 
27032023-244721 published in PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) having No. 1382 dated Monday, March 27, 
2023/Chaitra 6, 1945 whereby, Tribunal comprising of Hon'ble Mr. Justice Dinesh Kumar Sharma, Judge, Delhi High 
Court in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-Section (3) of section 4 of the said Act, passed an order on the 21st 
March, 2023, confirming the declaration made by Central Government declaring the Popular Front of India (PFI) and 
its associates or affiliates or fronts including Rehab India Foundation (RIF), Campus Front of India (CFI), All India 
Imams Council (AIIC), National Confederation of Human Rights Organization (NCHRO), National Women‘s Front, 
Junior Front, Empower India Foundation and Rehab Foundation, Kerala as ‘unlawful associations’ vide notification 
of the Government of India, number S.O. 4559 (E), dated the 27 September, 2022, published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (ii) dated the 28 September, 2022. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


139. In view of the aforesaid position, the learned ASG submitted that the Central Government respectfully claims 
privilege for the documents contained in the sealed cover, as mentioned in the affidavit filed by the Central 
Government. 


140. Addressing, thereafter, on the existence of the sufficiency of grounds warranting declaration of MCJK-S as 
an unlawful association, Id. Additional SG submitted that the validity of the provisions of the Act ought to be judged 
in the backdrop of the history of the ‘Act’ necessitating their introduction. Learned Additional SG submitted that as 
per the Statement of Objects and Reasons, the Unlawful Activities (Preventive) Act, 1963 was enacted to make 
powers available for dealing with activities directed against the integrity and sovereignty of India which may take the 
manner and form either of “terrorism” or “other unlawful activity” that threatens the sovereignty of India. 


141. Learned Additional SG further submitted that the exception to the freedom of speech and expression, and to 
form associations and union, under Article 19(1) of the Constitution of India, was inserted in the form of “sovereignty 
and integrity of India” in Article 19(2) and 19(4), after the National Integration Council appointed a Committee on 
National Integration and Regionalization. The said Committee was to look into the aspect of putting reasonable 
restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. Learned ASG submitted that pursuant to the 
acceptance of recommendations of the Committee, the Constitutional Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 (‘1963 Act’ 
hereinafter) was enacted to impose reasonable restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. 
Further, in order to implement the provisions of the 1963 Act, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill was 
introduced in the Parliament. The main objective of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act is to make powers 
available for dealing with activities directed against the integrity and sovereignty of India. 


142. Learned Additional SG submitted that after Independence, Parliament has passed many laws to regulate 
national security and in order to protect sovereignty of India. The UAPA, 1967 is an Act to provide for the more 
effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and associations and for dealing with terrorist 
activities and other matters connected therewith. 


143. Learned Additional SG further submitted that to achieve the aforesaid purpose of tackling the menace of 
activities inimical to the sovereignty and integrity of India, the legislature in its wisdom decided to create two species 
of the offence i.e. 


i. Unlawful Activity & Unlawful Association [S-2(0) r/w Chapter 2 & 3 (Sections 3-14)]; and 
ii. Terrorist Act & Terrorist Organization [S-2(k), (I),(m) r/w Chapter 4-6 (Sections 15-40)]. 


144. Learned Additional SG further submitted that the growing threat of terrorism posed immediate harm to the 
lives of the Indian citizens and the security of the State which led to the enactments of special deterrent laws from 
time to time. Accordingly, as a consequence, the UAPA was amended to include a definition of the term ‘terrorism' 
and to give substantive powers to the Indian State to address the same. The amendments made therein were made also 
keeping in mind India's commitments under the Security Council Resolution dated 28 September, 2001, which 
enjoined to fight both terrorism as well as terror funding, which was to be treated as a genus of terrorism. 


145. In view of the aforesaid, learned Additional SG submitted that it is evident that the provisions of UAPA have 
been enacted by the Parliament which had the legislative competence to enact the same and that once it is clear that 
the Parliament had the legislative competence to enact the law, there is a presumption of constitutionality in favour of 
the statute. Learned Additional SG submitted that an organization can be banned solely based on the opinion of the 
Central Government and, therefore, the challenge to Chapter II of UAPA has already been repelled by the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court in para 84 -92 of Arup Bhuyan 7. State of Assam (2023) 8 SCC 745. In para 90 of this judgment, the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under: 


“90. Thus from the aforesaid it can be seen that before any organization is declared unlawful a 
detailed procedure is required to be followed including the wide publicity and even the right to a 
member of such association to represent before the Tribunal. As observed hereinabove the 
notification issued by the Central Government declaring a particular association unlawful, the same 
is subject to inquiry and approval by the Tribunal as per Section 4. Once that is done and despite 
that a person who is a member of such unlawful association continues to be a member of such 
unlawful association then he has to face the consequences and is subjected to the penal provisions 
as provided under Section 10 more particularly Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA, 1967.” 


146. Learned Additional SG submitted that from the aforesaid discussion of the Supreme Court, it is clear that an 
organization can be banned solely on the basis of the opinion of the Central Government and through the process duly 
established by the law enacted by the Parliament. 


147. The learned Additional SG also hihlighted that the statement of objects and reasons of the UAPA itself 
underlines the purpose of the enactment to provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of 
individuals and associations and for matters connected therewith. She submitted that the statute empowers the 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 35 


Parliament to impose by a due process of law reasonable restrictions in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of 
India on the right to form an association and incidentally a restriction on the freedom of speech and expression, to 
assemble peacefully and with arms. Learned Additional SG submitted that Section 48 of the UAPA itself provides that 
the provisions of the UAPA and the Rules made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or any instrument having effect by virtue of an enactment 
other than this Act, giving it a clear over-riding position. 


148. On the aspect of standard of proof required for the present proceedings, learned Additional SG for the Union 
of India submitted that the proceedings before this Tribunal are civil in nature and the standard of proof is the standard 
prescribed by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). The Reference has to be answered by objectively 
examining which version is more acceptable and credible. In this regard, learned Additional SG has referred to the 
observation made in para 30 of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). Learned Additional SG also argued that the procedure 
to be followed by the Tribunals can be read from the law enacted under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
Learned Additional SG then submitted that similarly the Tribunal established under the UAPA has been bestowed 
with certain powers and the procedure to be adopted by it under Section 5 read with Section 9 of the said Act. 


149. Learned Additional SG has submitted that as per the mandate of Section 4 of the UAPA, the jurisdiction of 
this Tribunal is to adjudicate whether or not there is sufficient cause available with the Central Government to ban the 
organization in question. Learned Additional SG has submitted that any procedural irregularities or defects in material 
adduced before this Tribunal are to be tested by the concerned trial court within the parameters of the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872 and other relevant laws. Learned Additional SG further submitted that the jurisdiction of this Tribunal is to 
satisfy itself whether these documents can be relied upon to ascertain ‘sufficiency of cause’ and whether the agencies 
responsible for the enforcement of law and order could or could not have ignored the same for recommending suitable 
action under the UAPA. 


150. Learned Additional SG further submitted that for the purpose of assessing the sufficiency of the cause, this 
Tribunal has to holistically look into the entire materials / incidents and if the material / incidents are relatable acts of 
commission of ‘unlawful activity’, ‘secession’ or ‘cession of a part of the territory of India’, on the anvil of 
preponderance of probability, then the ban is justified and is required to be confirmed. Learned Additional SG 
submitted that the Central Government has led sufficient and cogent material and evidence to demonstrate that there 
was sufficient material available with the Central Government to form an opinion that MCJK-S and its associates were 
indulging in unlawful activities. Learned Additional SG submitted that the law does not require that the cases which 
should form the basis of opinion formed by the Central Government should be proximate to the date of the decision or 
there should be ‘X’ number of cases to prove an association to be an unlawful association; and that even one case may 
be sufficient. Learned Additional SG has submitted that the delay in the investigation will have no bearing in the 
present proceedings as the degree of evidence required before this Tribunal and the adjudication thereon is to be based 
on the principles of preponderance of probabilities. 


151. Learned Additional SG has further submitted that the evidence adduced by the Central Government has not 
been refuted on any ground whatsoever, and as such, in view of non-rebuttal of the evidence adduced by the Central 
Government by any member / erstwhile member of MCJK-S opposing the ban, the Notification No. 8.0. 935 (E) 
published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, dated 28" February, 2024, declaring the Muslim Conference Jammu 
and Kashmir (Sumji faction) / MCJK-S as an ‘unlawful association’ under sub-Section (1) of Section 3 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 is liable to be confirmed. 


152. As regards the hostile environment prevailing in the territory of Jammu & Kashmir creating hurdles in 
conclusion of cases against the separatist and militants, the learned Additional SG submitted that as has been stated in 
the testimonies of various witnesses, the delay in the investigation and trial has occurred due to extremely hostile 
environment which prevailed in the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir. Learned Additional SG submitted that it is 
a matter of public knowledge that since last more than three decades, the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir has 
been adversely affected by the acts and deeds of the separatist groups and its leaders. 


153. Learned Additional SG submitted that from 1989 to 2016 the situation in the erstwhile State of Jammu and 
Kashmir remained volatile and disturbed due to the circumstances created by terrorist groups and separatist 
Groups/Political Parties who instigated and provoked the general public at large against the lawfully established 
governments with the help of foreign state and non-state actors having interests inimical to the interest of the country. 
Learned Additional SG has submitted that these facts have been referred to in the concurring opinion of Hon’ble 
Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul in para-31 and Epilogue recorded in para 113-135 in the judgment Re: Article 370 of the 
Constitution, reported in 2023 SCC Online SC 1647. 


154. Learned Additional SG submitted that the separatist leaders and their activists had created such terror in the 
minds of public that the general public, which even did not support their cause, feared to oppose them or to report to 
the police against various incidents and even feared to depose or give evidence against the said separatist leaders. 
Thus, leading to a non-cooperative atmosphere for the police investigating agencies in the cases registered against the 
said separatist organizations or its leaders. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


155. Learned Additional SG also submitted that the investigation was further slowed thereafter due to COVID 
which had brought all the routine activities to a standstill and a complete lockdown in the entire nation was imposed. 
Hence, the investigation in the cases registered against the MCJK-S in the State of Jammu & Kashmir could not be 
processed at the pace it should have been. 


156. Learned Additional SG submitted that despite several FIRs having been lodged against MCJK-S, its 
members / activists / sympathizers are still active and are indulging in unlawful activities as defined in the UAPA, 
posing a serious threat to the sovereignty and integrity of India, peace, communal harmony, internal security and 
maintenance of secular fabric of the Indian society. Learned Addl. SG has submitted that if the MCJK-S is not banned, 
the activists and sympathizers of MCJK-S will again pose a serious threat to the communal harmony, internal security 
and integrity of the country. 


157. Lastly, learned Additional SG has submitted that the notification No. 5.0. 935 (E) dated 28" February, 2024, 
issued by the Central Government declaring MCJK-S as an unlawful association is liable to be confirmed. 


X. ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION 


158. Ld. Additional SG submitted a 2 tier argument. The first limb of submissions were concerning the claim of 
privilege. The 20 limb consisted of submissions regarding the existence of sufficient grounds for declaring MCJK-S 
as an unlawful association. Since the claim for privilege has a very important bearing on the aspect of existence of 
sufficient grounds for declaring MCJK-S as an unlawful association, this Tribunal shall first return a finding on the 
claim for privilege. The relevant provision regarding claim of privilege in respect of the documents, disclosure 
whereof is injurious to public interest, is specifically envisaged in the UAP Rules, 1968. Rule 3 of the said UAP 
Rules, is in the following terms : 


“3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence —(1) In holding an enquiry under 
sub-section (3) of Section 4 or disposing of any application under sub-section (4) of Section 7 or 
sub-section (8) of Section 8, the Tribunal or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall, subject to 
the provisions of sub-rule (2), follow, as far as practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), 
where any books of account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal or the 
Court of the District Judge by the Central Government and such books of account or other 
documents are claimed by that Government to be a confidential nature then, the Tribunal or the 
Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall not, -- 


(a) make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the proceedings 
before it; or 
(b) allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books of 


account or other documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings 
before it.” 


159. It can be seen that the Rule 3 (2) starts with a non-obstante clause providing that notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, where any books of account or other documents are sought to be 
produced by the Central Government and these documents are claimed to be of a confidential nature, then the Tribunal 
shall not make such documents a part of the records of the proceedings before it or allow inspection of or grant a copy 
of the same to any person other than the parties to the proceedings before it. 


160. Rule 5 of the UAP Rules which provides for the documents which should accompany a reference to the 
Tribunal i.e. a copy of the notification and all facts on which grounds specified in the notification are based, further 
provides that nothing in the said Rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact to the Tribunal which 
it considers against public interest to disclose. The said rule is in the following terms: 


“5. Documents which should accompany a reference to the Tribunal. — Every reference made to 
the Tribunal under sub-section (1) of Section 4 shall be accompanied by — 


(i) a copy of the notification made under sub-section (1) of Section 3, and 
(ii) all the facts on which the grounds specified in the said notification are based: 


Provided that nothing in this rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact to 
the Tribunal which that Government considers against the public interest to disclose.” 


161. The aforementioned provisions and the requirement of maintaining confidentiality of certain documents 
specifically came to be considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), wherein it was 
held as under : 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


उ7 


“22. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine in 
nature and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued 
confidentiality in public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such information, 
and, may be, also full particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. The scheme of 
the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder provide for 
maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in public interest. However, the non-disclosure of 
sensitive information and evidence to the association and its office-bearers, whenever justified in 
public interest, does not necessarily imply its non-disclosure to the Tribunal as well. In such cases 
where the Tribunal is satisfied that non-disclosure of such information to the association or its 
office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non-disclosure to the association or its office- 
bearers, but in order to perform its task of adjudication as required by the Act, the Tribunal can 
look into the same for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and satisfying itself 
that it can safely act on the same. In such a situation, the Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure 
whereby it can itself examine and test the credibility of such material before it decides to accept the 
same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. 
The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a procedure 
would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in controversy 
after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without abdicating its function 
by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a course would satisfy the 
minimum requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, while 
protecting the rights of the association and its members, without jeopardising the public interest. 
This would also ensure that the process of adjudication is not denuded of its content and the 
decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by it on all points in controversy after 
adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion already formed by the Central Government. 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer the United States Supreme Court, 
in a case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum requirements to be followed, as under: (L Ed 


pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They include (a) 
written notice of the claimed violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of evidence 
against him; (c) opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and 
documentary evidence; (d) the right to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses 
(unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing confrontation); (e) 
a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a traditional parole board, members of 
which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement by the factfinders 
as to the evidence relied on and reasons for revoking parole. We emphasise there is no 
thought to equate this second stage of parole revocation to a criminal prosecution in any 
sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the process should be flexible enough to consider evidence 
including letters, affidavits, and other material that would not be admissible in an 
adversary criminal trial.” 


24. In Paul Ivan Birzon v. Edward S. King placing reliance on Morrissey, while dealing with a 
similar situation, when confidential information had to be acted on, it was indicated that the 
credibility issue could be resolved by the Board retaining confidentiality of the information but 
assessing the credibility itself, and a modified procedure was indicated as under: 


“ 


. the board was required to decide whether it would believe the informants or the 
parolee and his witnesses. The infirmity that we see in the hearing and determination by the 
parole board is that it resolved the credibility issue solely on the basis of the State report, 
without itself taking the statements from the informants. Thus the board had no way of 
knowing how reliable the informants were and had no real basis on which to resolve the 
credibility issue against the parolee.... 


We do not mean to intimate that the board should have taken testimony from the informants 
at the hearing and given the parolee the opportunity to cross-examine. What we do mean is 
that the board should have received the information directly from the informants (although 
not necessarily in the presence of the parolee), instead of relying solely on the State report. 
The board could then have reached its own conclusions about the relative reliability of the 
informants’ statements and those of the parolee and his witnesses. 


Similarly, the board could then have made its own decision about how realistic were the 
claims of potential danger to the informants or to State parole officers if their identity was 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


disclosed, instead of placing exclusive reliance on the State report. Thus, we hold that, in 
relying exclusively on the written synopsis in the State report, which was the only evidence 
of a parole violation, in the face of the parolee's denial and his presentation of the 
testimony of other witnesses, the revocation of Satz's parole was fundamentally unfair to 
him and was a denial of due process of law.” 


25. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its source, in 
public interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the confidential 
information for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the conflicting evidence of 
the other side. This modified procedure satisfies the minimum requirements of natural justice and 
also retains the basic element of an adjudicatory process which involves objective determination of 
the factual basis of the action taken. 


26. An authorised restriction saved by Article 19(4) on the freedom conferred by Article 19(1)(c) of 
the Constitution has to be reasonable. In this statute, provision is made for the notification to 
become effective on its confirmation by a Tribunal constituted by a sitting High Court Judge, on 
adjudication, after a show-cause notice to the association, that sufficient cause exists for declaring it 
to be unlawful. The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a show-cause notice, of 
existence of sufficient cause to justify the declaration must necessarily imply and import into the 
inquiry, the minimum requirement of natural justice to ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is its 
own opinion, formed on the entire available material, and not a mere imprimatur of the Tribunal 
affixed to the opinion of the Central Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a fair procedure to 
prevent the vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure in a given case, would 
depend on the materials constituting the factual foundation of the notification and the manner in 
which the Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to be determined by the Tribunal keeping in 
view the nature of its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of natural justice, the fact that the 
materials in such matters are not confined to legal evidence in the strict sense, and that the scrutiny 
is not a criminal trial. The Tribunal should form its opinion on all the points in controversy after 
assessing for itself the credibility of the material relating to it, even though it may not be disclosed to 
the association, if the public interest so requires. 


27. It follows that, ordinarily, the material on which the Tribunal can place reliance for deciding 
the existence of sufficient cause to support the declaration, must be of the kind which is capable of 
judicial scrutiny. In this context, the claim of privilege on the ground of public interest by the 
Central Government would be permissible and the Tribunal is empowered to devise a procedure by 
which it can satisfy itself of the credibility of the material without disclosing the same to the 
association, when public interest so requires. The requirements of natural justice can be suitably 
modified by the Tribunal to examine the material itself in the manner it considers appropriate, to 
assess its credibility without disclosing the same to the association. This modified procedure would 
satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice and judicial scrutiny. The decision would then be 


that of the Tribunal itself.” 


162. The High Court of Andhra Pradesh in Deendar Anjuman v. Government of India, 2001 SCC OnLine AP 
663 after applying the test laid down in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra) upheld the ban imposed and further held that 
the entire material available on record itself need not be published or made available to the aggrieved person but what 
is required is disclosure of reasons and the grounds. Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“19. The expression “for reasons to be stated in writing” did not necessarily mean that the entire 
material available on record itself is to be published or made available to the aggrieved person. What 
is required is disclosure of reasons. The grounds must be disclosed. The notification issued under sub- 
section (1) of Section 3 alone is required to be referred to the Tribunal “for the purpose of 
adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” The 
Tribunal after such reference is required to issue notice to the affected association to show cause, why 
the association should not be declared unlawful. The Tribunal is required to hold an enquiry in the 
manner specified in Section 9 and after calling for such further information as it may consider 
necessary from the Central Government or from the association and then decide whether or not there 
is sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. The Tribunal is required “to 
adjudicate whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” As held by 
the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind v. Union of India the Tribunal is required to weigh the 
material on which the notification under sub-section (1) of Sec. 3 is issued by the Central Government 
after taking into account the cause shown by the Association in reply to the notice issued to it and by 
taking into consideration such further information which it may call for, to decide the existence of 
sufficient cause for declaring the action to be unlawful. The Tribunal is required to objectively 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 39 


determine the points in controversy. The Supreme Court further held that subject to non-disclosure of 
information which the Central Government considers to be against the public interest to disclose, all 
information and evidence relied on by the Central Government to support the declaration made by it 
of an association to be unlawful, has to be disclosed to the association to enable it to show cause 
against the same. The Tribunal is entitled to ascertain the credibility of conflicting evidence relating to 
the points in controversy. It is observed by the Supreme Court: 


“To satisfy the minimum requirements of a proper adjudication, it is necessary that the 
Tribunal should have the means to ascertain the credibility of conflicting evidence relating 
to the points in controversy. Unless such a means is available to the Tribunal to determine 
the credibility of the material before it, it cannot choose between conflicting material and 
decide which one to prefer and accept. In such a situation, the only option to it would be to 
accept the opinion of the Central Government, without any means to test the credibility of 
the material on which it is based. The adjudication made would cease to be an objective 
determination and be meaningless, equating the process with mere acceptance of the ipse 
dixit of the Central Government. The requirement of adjudication by the Tribunal 
contemplated under the Act does not permit abdication of its function by the Tribunal to the 
Central Government providing merely its stamp of approval to the opinion of the Central 
Government. The procedure to be followed by the Tribunal must, therefore, be such which 
enables the Tribunal to itself assess the credibility of conflicting material on any point in 
controversy and evolve a process by which it can decide whether to accept the version of 
the Central Government or to reject it in the light of the other view asserted by the 
association. The difficulty in this sphere is likely to arise in relation to the evidence of 
material in respect of which the Central Government claims nondisclosure on the ground of 
public interest.” 


20. It is, therefore, evident that disclosure of all the facts and material available on record subject to 
the claim of any privilege in this regard by the Central Government is only after the reference of the 
notification issued under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal for the purpose of 
adjudication whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful. The 
material available on record may have to be revealed to the association or its members. In a case 
wherever any privilege is claimed, the Tribunal has to examine the material itself in the manner it 
considers appropriate, to assess its credibility without disclosing the same to the association. 
Therefore, there is no requirement to disclose the material itself and publish the same in the 
notification or provide to the association along with the notification issued in exercise of the power 
under proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 3 declaring the association to be unlawful with immediate 
effect. The requirement is disclosure of additional reasons and grounds and not the material. The 
notification issued in exercise of the power under proviso to sub-sec. (3) of Section 3 cannot be set 
aside on the ground that the material relied upon for stating the reasons is not communicated to the 
association concerned declaring it to be an unlawful association with immediate effect. Such 
notification would become vulnerable only when the reasons are not notified: The record should 
contain the reasons in writing and the same is required to be revealed and published in the 
notification or communicated to the association concerned. Such reasons are required to be distinct 
and different and cannot be the same for imposing ban under Section 3 of the Act. The reasons are 
required to be communicated but not the entire material. Disclosure of the material is only after 
reference of the notification issued under Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal.” 


163. The legal position that emerges thus can be succinctly put in the following terms: 


i. The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder 
contemplates maintenance of confidentiality whenever required in public interest; 


ii. The Tribunal can look into the confidential material without the same being disclosed to the 
Association or its office-bearers, for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and 
satisfying itself that the same is reliable; 


iii. The Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure for itself for examining and testing the credibility of 
such material 


The requirement of natural justice can be suitably modified by the Tribunal in the manner it considers appropriate for 
the purpose of assessing/examining the confidential material/documents, and arriving at a conclusion based on a 
perusal thereof. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


164. Further, the rigors prescribed by the Supreme Court in the case of $.P. Gupta (supra) have to be read in the 
context of the provisions of the UAPA and the Rules framed thereunder. In particular, it needs to be borne in mind 
that Rule 3(1) of the UAP Rules, 1968 expressly provides that in holding any inquiry under Sub-Section (3) of Section 
4 of the UAPA, the Tribunal shall follow “as far as practicable”, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian 
Evidence Act. Thus, the rigors that have been contemplated in the context of Section 123 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
cannot ipso-facto be made applicable to these proceedings. The legislative intent in making the provisions of the 
Evidence Act applicable only “as far as practicable” is evident from the nature of these proceedings. The proceedings 
before this Tribunal do not contemplate a full-fledged trial; rather the proceedings are in the nature of an “inquiry” as 
referred to in Section 4(3). 


165. Further, the proceedings are time-bound and as laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Jamaat-e- 
Islami Hind (supra), an appropriate procedure has to be devised/tailored by this Tribunal for the purpose of its 
inquiry. As such, any claim seeking privilege has to be assessed in terms of the in-built mechanism as provided under 
the UAPA and the Rules framed thereunder. The Tribunal is mandated to grant privilege from disclosure where it 
finds that the disclosure would be against/injurious to public interest. 


166. On perusal of the documents submitted by the Central Government in a sealed cover, it is found that the same 
contains intelligence reports, secret information collected from time to time by the investigating and intelligence 
agencies, notes/memos prepared by the investigating and intelligence agencies, information revealed on investigation 
including information as to the clandestine nature of the activities of the concerned association and its office-bearers 
and linkage of the association and its office-bearers with organizations and individuals outside of India. 


167. This Tribunal finds from the perusal of these documents that the disclosure of these documents would be 
detrimental to the larger public interest and security of the State. One of the documents which is contained in the 
sealed cover, is a note prepared for consideration of the Cabinet Committee on Security, which contains sensitive 
information about activities of the ‘Association’ and its inimical impact on national security. Clearly, the nature of 
these documents is such that it would be in public interest and in the interest of the security of the State to maintain 
confidentiality as regard thereto. 


168. Tribunal also notes that the claim for privilege has been expressly stated by the concerned witness from the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (PW-7) to be based on a specific approval/direction of the Union Home Secretary (Head of 
the Department). The said position is also borne out from the relevant official/noting files shared with this Tribunal. 


169. In the circumstances, this Tribunal allows the claim for privilege in respect of the documents submitted in a 
sealed cover by the concerned witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs. Consequently, the Tribunal has proceeded 
to peruse the said documents, as contemplated in the Judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind 
(supra) and to assess the credibility thereof and the implications flowing therefrom for the purpose of the present 
inquiry. 

170. On the basis of the material placed on record and the evidence adduced by the Central Government, this 
Tribunal finds sufficient cause for declaring the Muslim Conference Jammu and Kashmir (Sumji faction)/ MCJK-S as 
an unlawful association which conclusion is drawn for the following reasons. 


171. The notification dated 28" February, 2024 issued under Section 3(1) of the Act inter alia mentions that (i) the 
members of the MCJK-S have been at the fore-front of the secessionist activities in Jammu and Kashmir; (ii) the 
leaders or members of the MCJK-S have been involved in promoting unlawful activities, including supporting 
terrorist activities; (iii) MCJK-S and its members have scant respect towards the constitutional authority and 
constitutional set-up of the country; (iv) MCJK-S and its leaders or members, particularly, have been indulging in 
unlawful activities, which are prejudicial to the integrity, sovereignty, security and communal harmony of the country; 
(v) there are linkages between MCJK-S with banned terrorist organizations. 


172. The above grounds/justification cited in the notification issued under Section 3(1) of the Act are borne out 
from the extensive evidence adduced by the Central Government. The said evidence can be broadly categorized into 2 
categories: 


i. Evidence adduced by officers (senior police officers) from Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir; 
ii. Evidence in the form of documents/material submitted in a sealed cover before this Tribunal. 
Evidence adduced by officers from the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
173. As many as 6 senior police officers from the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir (PW1 — PW6) have 


deposed as regards the litany of incidents involving MCJK-S in the past 2 decades. The same clearly brings out that 
the concerned association and its chief protagonist has been relentlessly indulging in “unlawful activities”. 


174. The incidents in regard to which voluminous evidence has been adduced, inter alia involves: 
i. raising anti-India and pro-Pakistan slogans (evidence of PW-1 to PW-6), 


ili. encouraging boycott of elections and openly professing dis-allegiance towards the Constitution of 
India (evidence of PW-1 to PW-6), 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 41 


iii. inciting the people of Jammu and Kashmir to take resort to violence/pelting of stones on security 
forces (evidence of PW-1 to PW-6), 


iv. undermining the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India and professing affection towards 
Pakistan by making hate speeches (evidence of PW-1 to PW-6), 


v. instigating the general public intending to cause disaffection against India (evidence of PW-1 to 
PW-6). 


175. On a cumulative consideration of the various incidents/activities which are subject matters of the various 
FIRs with regard to which the aforesaid evidence has been led, it is evident that MCJK-S has been indulging in 
“unlawful activities” and has posed a grave threat to the law and order situation in Jammu and Kashmir. 


176. Although it is true that the investigation in most of the FIRs (with regard to which PW-1 to PW- 6 have 
deposed) has been protracted, learned Additional SG has sought to emphasise that the same was on account of hostile 
environment prevailing in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir over a long period of time. However, what is of 
relevance to this Tribunal is the clear pattern that is discernible as regards the nature of activities of the concerned 
association and its office bearers. The pattern of conduct is to incessantly encourage secession of the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir, questioning or seeking to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India, inciting the people of 
Jammu and Kashmir to take resort to violence/pelting of stones etc., and to disrupt peace in the region of Jammu and 
Kashmir. These activities continued unabated for a long period of time; it is only in the last few years (in the 
aftermath of the Jammu & Kashmir Re-organisation Act, 2019) that there has been a lull in the activities of the 
MCIJK-S, as evident from the reduced instances of violence/disruption of law and order. 


177. This Tribunal also takes note of the fact that each of the senior police officers from the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, who have deposed before this Tribunal, during the course of their examination, strenuously emphasized 
from their own personal knowledge which has been derived during the course of discharge of their official functions. 
From the evidence adduced, it is patent that MCJK-S and its leaders and members have been: 


i. incessantly encouraging and advocating claims for secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union 
of India and have been inciting the local population; 


ii. promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the integrity and security of the 
country; 


iii. tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir on religious lines and have sought to escalate the separatist movement. 


178. The compelling testimony of officers from various districts of Jammu and Kashmir cannot be disregarded. 
The aforesaid evidence remains unrebutted by the concerned association/ its office bearers. At every stage of these 
proceedings, a right was afforded to the concerned association/its members and any other interested party in the matter 
to appear before this Tribunal and cross-examine the concerned officers who have deposed before this Tribunal. 
However, the said opportunity has not been availed. 


Evidence in the form of documents/material submitted in a sealed cover before this Tribunal 


179. As noted hereinabove, the documents submitted by the concerned witness who has deposed on behalf of the 
Central Government, inter alia, includes reports of intelligence agencies, the note prepared for the Cabinet Committee 
on Security setting out the entire background of MCJK-S and its activities based on the information collated by the 
intelligence agencies and also bringing out linkage of MCJK-S with cross-border agencies/establishments, inputs 
received from Criminal Investigation Department, Jammu and Kashmir (Srinagar). 


180. A perusal of the said documents has brought out in vivid detail the terrorist and secessionist activities of 
MCJK-S in close coordination with inimical elements in Pakistan. The systematic attempts to promote secession of 
Jammu and Kashmir from the territory of India, to undermine the sovereignty of India, to incite the local populace and 
to promote violence have been brought out in the said material/documents. 


CONCLUSION 


181. From the elaborate material/evidence placed on record in these proceedings, this Tribunal finds that there is 
ample justification to declare MCJK-S as an unlawful association under the UAPA. Moreover, given the nature of 
activities of the association, the Central Government was justified in taking recourse to the proviso to Section 3 (3) of 
the UAPA. As noticed hereinabove, the activities of the concerned association have had a deleterious effect on 
maintenance of law and order in the region of Jammu and Kashmir over the last several decades. The modicum of 
stability that has come about after 2019 (as is evident from the reduced number of unconducive incidents) can not be 
allowed to be jeopardized on account of continuing activities of the concerned association. 


182. In the framework of the Indian Constitution and the UAPA, there is no space for an association like the 
MCJK-S which openly propagates secessionism, avowedly expresses dis-allegiance to the Constitution of India, and 
undermines the territorial integrity and sovereignty of India. 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


183. Thus, this Tribunal having followed the procedure laid down in the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, 1967 
and its Rules and having independently and objectively appreciated and evaluated the material and evidence on 
record, is of the firm and considered view that there is sufficient cause for declaring MCJK-S as an unlawful 
association under Section 3(1) of the UAPA, 1967 vide the notification dated 28" February, 2024. Thus, an order is 
passed under Section 4 (3) of the UAPA, 1967 confirming the declaration made in the notification bearing no. S.O. 
935 (E) published in the official gazette on 28 February, 2024 issued under Section 3 (1) of the Unlawful Activities 
Prevention Act, 1967. 


(JUSTICE NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA) 
UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL 
August 237, 2024” 
[F. No. 14017/53/2024-NI-MFO] 
ABHIJIT SINHA, Jt. Secy. 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. _ sasvestxumar 


