रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल. (एन) 04/0007/2003--05 REGD. NO. 0. L. (५) 04/0007/2003—05 


जीरत = sida 
Che Gazette of India 


OSH. -F7.We. -AT.-402024-257833 
CG-DL-W-402024-257833 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


साप्ताहिक 
WEEKLY 


a. 39] नई दिल्‍ली, सितम्बर 29-.-अक्तूबर 5, 2024, शनिवार/ आश्विन 7--आश्विन 3, 946 
No. 39] NEW DELHI, SEPTEMBER 29— OCTOBER 5, 2024, SATURDAY/ASVINA 7-- ASVINA 3, 946 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह पृथक संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके 
Separate Paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation 


भाग Il—@vs ३---उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 


भारत सरकार के मंत्रालयों (TAT मंत्रालय को छोड़कर) द्वारा जारी किए गए सांविधिक आदेश और अधिसूचनाएं 
Statutory Orders and Notifications Issued by the Ministries of the Government of India 
(Other than the Ministry of Defence) 


श्रम और रोजगार मंत्रालय 
(हिन्दी अनुभाग) 
नई दिल्‍ली, 20 सितम्बर, 2024 

का,आ. 4859.--केंद्र सरकार, राजभाषा (संघ के शासकीय प्रयोजनों के लिए प्रयोग) नियम, 7976 (यथा संशोधित, 
4987) के नियम 40 के उप-नियम (4) के अनुसरण में, श्रम और रोजगार मंत्रालय के प्रशासकीय नियंत्रणाधीन निम्नलिखित कार्यालयों 
को, जिनके 80 प्रतिशत से अधिक कर्मचारियों ने हिन्दी का कार्यसाधक ज्ञान प्राप्त कर लिया है, एतट्ठारा अधिसूचित करती है: 

4. कर्मचारी राज्य बीमा निगम, उप क्षेत्रीय कार्यालय, dar (कर्नाटक) 

2. कर्मचारी राज्य बीमा निगम अस्पताल, अंकलेश्वर (गुजरात) 

3. कर्मचारी राज्य बीमा निगम अस्पताल, वापी (गुजरात) 

4. कर्मचारी राज्य बीमा निगम अस्पताल, उद्योगमंडल (केरल) 

5. कर्मचारी राज्य बीमा निगम चिकित्सा महाविद्यालय सह अस्पताल, बिहटा (बिहार) 


[फा. सं. $-406/7/2022-27. aT AT] 
नागेश कुमार सिंह, उपमहानिदेशक 


657 GI/2024 (427]) 


4272 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
(Hindi Section) 
New Delhi, the 20th September, 2024 


5.0. 859.—In pursuance of Sub-Rule (4) of Rule |0 of the Official Language (Use for official purposes of 
the Union) Rules, 976 (as amended, 987) the Central Government hereby notifies the following offices under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Labour & Employment, more than 80% Staff whereof have acquired 
working knowledge of Hindi:- 


i. Employees’ State Insurance Corporation, Sub-Regional Office, Peenya (Karnataka) 
2. Employees’ State Insurance Corporation Hospital, Ankleshwar (Gujarat) 
3. Employees’ State Insurance Corporation Hospital, Vapi (Gujarat) 
4. Employees’ State Insurance Corporation Hospital, Udyogmandal (Kerala) 
5. Employees’ State Insurance Corporation Medical College and Hospital, Bihta (Bihar) 
[F. No. E-06//2022-RBN] 
NAGESH KUMAR SINGH, Dy. Director General 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 सितम्बर, 2024 
का.आ. 4860.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम t947 (:947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
पांड्यन ग्राम बैंक के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय चेन्नई के पंचाट (66/20I7) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[फा. सं. एल-42044 / 48 / 2046—-3Tg आर (बी-])] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 25th September, 2024 


S.O. 860.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.66/207) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Chennai 
as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Pandhan Gramin Bank and their 
workmen. 


[F. No. L-I20/8/206-IR(B-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 

ANNEXURE 

CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL —CUM- LABOUR COURT, CHENNAI 
PRESENT 
JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR 
PRESIDING OFFICER 
LD. No. 66/207 
Ref. No. L-I20/8/206 (IR(B-I) Dated 08.06.2-7 
BETWEEN 


Pandyan Grama Bank Workers Union 
Represented by the general secretary 
O/o Pandyan Grama Bank 
Soolakkaraimedu-6262203 
Tamilnadu 


déwsseess Workman 


[भाग I—avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4273 


AND 
The Chairman 
Pandyan Grama Bank 
Administrative Office, 
2-70-! Collectorate Complex, 
Virudhanagar 
Tamilnadu 


sie Cans Respondent 
AWARD 
On 08.06.207 appropriate authority referred the following dispute to this tribunal for adjudication. 


“Whether the action of the management of Pandyan Grama Bank, Virudhuagar for recovering the excess 
money paid to the workman, whose causes are espoused by the Pandyan Grama Bank workers Union as per 
list enclosed in Annexure- I are legal and justified? if not, to what relief, the workmen/union is entitled to? 


I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record. 
Case of the workman 
Facts as pleaded by the claimant in its statement of claim in brief are as under:- 


l. The Petitioner Association is representing the workers of the Respondent Bank. The Respondent Bank is a 
Regional Rural Bank established under the Regional Rural Banks Act, 975. Indian Overseas Bank is the sponsor 
Bank. The salary and allowances are being extended to staff members of Regional Rural Banks on par with their 
sponsor Bank. Whenever Salary revision is effected in Banking Industry, Government of India will also extend the 
same to RRBs as per directions of Supreme Court dated 3.0! 200] in civil Appeal No. 228 of 999. 


2. Government of India vide order No F.No. 8/l/20l5-RRB dated 3.7.20I5 revised the pay scales of RRB 
employees and officers consequent upon the revision of the wages in nationalized commercial banks in terms of l0" 
Bipartite settlement with effect from |..20l2. Respondent Bank implementation the wages revision in the month of 
August 205. 


3. Accordingly Officers (Group A), Office Assistants (Group B) and Office Attendants (Group C) working in 
Respondent Bank go corresponding wage revision and corresponding arrears from the date |.l].20l2. But the Office 
Assistants promoted from Office Attendants cadre in the years 20, 20l2 and 203 were not given corresponding 
increase in wage revision and arrears due to them. For many of them, the revised salary in the month of Aug, 20I5 as 
per l0th bipartite settlement was lower than the salary they got in the month of July, 20l5 as per 9th bipartite 
settlement. 


4. The petitioner Union discussed the issue with the respondent Bank and it was told by the respondent that there was 
wrong fixation of pay to the Office Assistants at the time of promotions from the Office Attendants in the years 20], 
202 and 20I3 and the excess payment of increments was rectified then. 


5. Respondent Bank reduced the increments and denied the arrears thereupon without any prior notice to the 
concerned Office Assistants. 


6. Hence the petitioner herein looking at the plight of these workmen, who are members of the petitioner association, 
demanded prior notice from the respondent for the reduction of increments, non recovery of excess payment till the 
issue of proper notice and corresponding arrears due to them from |.l!.202. Since the respondent refused to concede 
the demands. The petitioner raised an industrial dispute before the conciliation officer. 


6. Before the conciliation officer Respondent Bank accepted its wrong fixation of pay and reduction of increments for 
the Office Assistants promoted from the Office Attendant cadre in the years 20l] and 20I2. It was added by the 
Respondents that the Office Assistants promoted from Office Attendants in the year 20I3 were rightly fixed pay 
scales and got arrears. 


7. Consequently Respondent Bank intimated the reduction of increments and rectification of pay to the concerned 
Office Assistants vides its letter date 4.3.20I6. 


8. But Respondent Bank was rigid in its stand to recover the amount of payments have mistakenly been made by the 
employer. And thereby, the Respondent refused to pay the arrears as per l0th bipartite settlement to the Office 
Assistants for their corresponding salary they were already paid from |..202. 


Next argument advanced by learned counsel for appellant is that the respondent may be directed to restore pay of the 
8] workmen in this dispute as it was prior to re-fixation and also pay the amount recovered from them along with the 
arrears due to them with interest @ 6% per annum. 


4274 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


In support of his argument learned counsel for appellant place reliance on the judgment rendered by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in the case of (a) (State of Punjab Vs. Rafiq Masih) (205) 4 SCC 334. (b) in the case of Thomas 
Daniel Vs. State of Kerala & others in civil No. 7I5/200 dated 2" May, 2022.(c) And the Hon’ble Madras High 
Court in the case of A. Jayaraman Vs. The Chairman Tamil Nadu Grama Bank, and others dated |2.0.2022 
passed in writ petition No. (MD) No. 2473/2022. 


Accordingly it is prayed by learned counsel for appellant present that relief as claimed by claimant may kindly be 
granted, case may be allowed. 


Case of respondent 


Learned counsel for the respondent on the basis of the facts as stated in the counter affidavit reproduced herein 
below:- 


l. This respondent Bank is a Regional Rural Bank formed under Regional Rural Bank Act 976 enacted by the 
Parliament and sponsored by the Indian Overseas Bank having is Head office at Collectorate Complex, 
Virudhunagar 


2 It is submitted that in exercise of power conferred under second proviso of Section 7(2) of the Regional Rural 
Bank Act 976, the Central Government is empowered to revise the salary and allowance of Regional Rural 
bank employees on par with employees of the Nationalized Banks, consequent upon any revision of pay 
structure of employees in terms of Bipartite settlement. 


3. It is submitted that Xth Bipartite settlement was implemented during the month of August 20I5 in the 
respondent Bank as per the directions of the Government of India on par with Nationalized Bank. Consequent to 
the implementation of the settlement, the pay revision was made and arrears were paid to the eligible persons 
and the recovery was also made from whom the fixation was made with higher component of pay during their 
promotion 


4. It is submitted that consequent to the implementation of Xth Bipartite settlement, the pay revision was made and 
arrear was paid to eligible staff members of the Bank and the recovery was also claimed from whom the 
fixation was made with higher component of pay during their promotion In respect of the staff members who 
got promotion from office attendant (MP) (MP) during the year 20I, 20l2 and 20]3, the fitment was made on 
the basis of fitment prevailing in the Bank for clerical cadre during the Unfortunately the Bank had received one 
new fitment formula from Association vide their letter no CIR/HR&IFU76/5I5/20ll received by Indian 
Overseas Bank, our Sponsor Bank on 09.07 later on communicated to us. On receipt of that circular, we came in 
www the fitment was wrongly made to the promoted Office Attendant (MB) OAS) and hence we have done the 
correct fitment while on Bipartite settlement and eligible arrears were calculated and paid to 4] staff members 
who were entitled to receive after partially adjusting the of 8l promoted Office Assistant (MP) due from their 
respective date of and wherever excess payment was arisen, it was claimed from those staff members who were 
fitted with wrong fitment. 


5 It is submitted that Office Attendant (MP) who were promoted to Office Assistant (MP) those who were entitled 
to receive the arrear after fixing the correct scale of pay were given arrears. For the rest of the promoted Office 
Attendant (MP), the recovery of excess payment has been claimed whoever fitted with wrong fitment during 
their promotion. 


6 It is submitted that in so far as the contention of the petitioner in paragraph 5, there was a wrong fixation due to 
promotion which was noticed only after receipt of the said circular from Indian Banks Association. So the 
increment was reduced for arriving the correct component of pay and thereby the arrear was paid only for the 
eligible staff member after partially but not fully adjusting the excess payment. The petitioner was well aware of 
the same. 


7 It is submitted that in so far the contention of petitioner in paragraph 6, the wrong fixation of pay was adjusted 
to arrive at correct fitment thereby the recovery was claimed after adjustment and correction. The revised 
fitment was also communicated to all individual members vide respondent communication dated 04.03.206 
and working sheet also containing the quantum of amount excessively paid to them was also supplied to them 
along with the said communication. But the full recovery process was not yet made from the members 
concerned. 


8. Inso far as the contention of the petitioner in paragraph 7 and 8 it is submitted all the promoted 8! OAA were 
fixed with wrong fitment and it was rectified and the correct fitment was made according to the circular 
received from Indian Banks Association. 


In support of his argument placed reliance on the judgment given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Sayed 
Abdul Qadir and others Vs. State of Bihar (2009) 3 Supreme Court cases 475, relevant paragraph quoted herein 
below:- 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4275 


59. This Court, in a catena of decisions, has granted relief against recovery of excess payment of 
emoluments/allowances if (a) the excess amount was not paid on account of any misrepresentation or fraud 
on the part of the employee, and (b) if such excess payment was made by the employer by applying a wrong 
principle for calculating the pay/allowance or on the basis of a particular interpretation of rule/order, which 
is subsequently found to be erroneous. 


56. The relief against recovery is granted by courts not because of any right in the employees, but in equity, 
exercising judicial discretion to relieve the employees from the hardship that will be caused if recovery is 
ordered. But, if in a given case, it is proved that the employee had knowledge that the payment received was 
in excess of what was due or wrongly paid, or in cases where the error is detected or corrected within a 
short time of wrong payment, the matter being in the realm of judicial discretion, courts may, on the facts 
and circumstances of any particular case, order for recovery of the amount paid in excess. See Sahib Ram v. 
State of Haryana, Shyam Babu Verma v. Union of India, Union of India v. M. Bhaskar’, V. Gangaram v. 
Director, Col. B.J. Akkara (Retd.) v. Govt. of Indias, Purshottam Lal Das v. State of Bihar, Punjab National 
Bank v. Manjeet Singh and Bihar SEB v. Bljay Bhadur. 


Accordingly learned counsel for respondent submits that claimant is not entitled for any relief and the present claim 
petition/ID case filed by him, liable to be dismissed. 


Finding & conclusion 


I have heard learned counsel for the parties and going through the record. 


As per undisputed fact of the present case the member of the claimant union/workmen while discharging their duties 
in the respondent bank, on the basis of the following facts:- 


(a) | Government of India vide order No F.No 8/l/20I5 3.07.20I5 revised the pay scales of RRB employees and 
officers consequent upon the revision of the wages in nationalized banks in terms of l0th Bipartite settlement 
with effect from 0..20!2. Respondent Bank implemented the wage revision in the month of August 205. 


(b) Accordingly Officers (Group A), Office Assistants (Group B) and Office Attendants (Group C) working in 
Respondent Bank got corresponding wage revision and corresponding arrears from the date 0..202. 


(c) The 8l workmen in the present dispute were promoted as Office Assistant (Multi-purpose) along with 45 other 
Office Attendants (Multi-purpose) in 20ll. Subsequently, in 20l2 and 20l3, subsequent batches of Office 
Attendants were promoted in successive years. At the time of promotion, my pay was fixed under the 9th 
Bipartite Settlement dated 27..2009. 


(d) Thereafter, the l0th Bipartite Settlement was entered on 23.02.20I5. The benefits of the l0th Bipartite 
Settlement was to be implemented for all cadres of employees with retrospective effect from 0..20l2. But 
the Office Assistants promoted from Office Attendants cadre in the years 20ll, 20l2 and 20l3 were not given 
corresponding increase in wage revision and arrears due to them. For many of them, the revised salary in the 
month of August 20I5 as per 0th bipartite settlement was lower than the salary they got in the month of July, 
205 as per 9th bipartite settlement. 


By the respondent/the members of claimant unions have been granted/paid certain amount (whose name finds place in 
Annexure No. |) towards their wages /salary. 


Moreover the said payment made by the respondent without, any demand made on behalf of the members of the 
claimant unions and there is no misrepresentation or any action on the part of the members claimant union on the 
basis of which the said amount paid to them, which is sought to be recovered by the respondent, as excess amount 
wrongly paid to them. 


Thus question to be considered, whether in view of the above said factual background the said amount can be 
recovered from the members of the claimant unions (whose name finds place in Annexure No. |) or not?. 


Answer to the said question finds place in the judgment passed by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Thomas 
Daniel (supra) wherein the Hon’ble Supreme after placing reliance on the judgment passed by the Hon’ble Apex 
Court in the case of Rafi Mahsi (supra) held as under:- 


This Court in a catena of Thomas Deuses Of May, 20 decisions has consistently held that if the excess 
amount was not paid on account of any misrepresentation of fraud of the employee or employer by 
applying a wrong principle interpretation of for calculating the pay/allowances or on the basis of a 
particular interpretation rule/order which is subsequently found to be erroneous, such excess payment of 
emoluments or allowances are not recoverable. This relief against the recovery is provide relief to the 
employees from the hardship that will be cause if the recovery is ordered. This court has further held that if 
in a given case, it is proved that an employee had knowledge that the payment received was in excess of 
what was due or wrongly paid, or in cases where error is detected or corrected within a short time of 


4276 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


wrong payment, the matter being in the realm of judicial discretion, the courts may on the facts and 
circumstances amount paid in excess of any particular case order for recovery of amount paid in excess. 


The excess payment made was the result of wrong interpretation of the Rule that was applicable to them, 
for which the appellants cannot be held responsible. Rather, the whole confusion was because of inaction, 
negligence and carelessness of the officials concerned of the Government of Bihar. Learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellant teachers submitted that majority of the lary beneficiaries have either 
retired or are on the verge of it. Keeping in view the peculiar facts and keep o circumstances of the case at 
hand and to avoid any hardship to the appellant teachers, we are of the view that no recovery of the 
amount that has been paid in excess to the appellant teachers should be made." (/3) In State of Punjab and 
Others v. Rafiq Masih (White Washer) and Others4 wherein this court examined the validity of an order 
passed by the State to recover the monetary gains wrongly extended to the beneficiary employees in excess 
of their entitlements without any fault or misrepresentation at the behest of the recipient. This Court 
considered situations of hardship caused to an employee, if recovery is directed to reimburse the employer 
and 4 (2075) 4 SCC 334 disallowed the same, exempting the beneficiary employees from such recovery. It 
was held thus: 


"8. As between two parties, if a determination is rendered in favour of the party. which is the weaker of the 
two, without any serious detriment to the other (which is truly a welfare State), the issue resolved would be 
in consonance with the concept of justice, which is assured to the citizens of India, even in the Preamble of 
the Constitution of India. The right to recover being pursued by the employer will have to be compared, 
with the effect of the recovery on the employee concerned. If the effect of the recovery from the employee 
concerned would be, more unfair, more wrongful, more improper, and more unwarranted, than the 
corresponding right of the employer to recover the amount, then it would be iniquitous and arbitrary, to 
effect the recovery. In such a situation, the employee's right would outbalance, and therefore eclipse, the 
right of the employer to recover. 


46, It is not possible to postulate all situations of hardship which would govern employees on the issue of 
recovery, where payments have mistakenly been made by the employer, in excess of their entitlement. Be 
that as it may, based on the decisions referred to hereinabove, we may, as a ready reference, summaries 
the following few situations, wherein recoveries by the employers, would be impermissible in law: 


(i) Recovery from the employees belonging to Class III and Class IV service (or Group Cand Group D 
service). 


(ii) Recovery from the retired employees, or the employees who are due to retire within one year, of the 
order of recovery. 


(iii) Recovery from the employees, when the excess payment has been made for a period in excess of five 
years, before the order of recovery is issued 


(iv) Recovery in cases where an employee has wrongfully been required to discharge duties of a higher 
post, and has been paid accordingly, even though he should have rightfully been required to work against 
an inferior post. 


(v) In any other case, where the court arrives at the conclusion, that recovery if made from the employee, 
would be iniquitous or harsh or arbitrary to such an extent, as would far outweigh the equitable balance of 
the employer's right to recover." (74) Coming to the facts of the present case, it is not contended before us 
that on account of the misrepresentation or fraud played by the appellant, the excess amounts have been 
paid. The appellant has retired on 3/.03. /999, In fact, the case of the respondents is that excess payment 
was made due to a mistake in interpreting Kerala Service Rules which was subsequently pointed out by the 
Accountant General. 


The Hon’ble Madras High Court in the case A. Jayaraman (supra) after taking into consideration the judgment passed 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case Rafiq Masih (supra) held as under , relevant paragraph |2 quoted as under:- 


“2. It is not possible to postulate all situations of hardship, which would govern employees on the issue of 
recovery, where payments have mistakenly been made by the employer, in excess of their entitlement. Be 
that as it may, based on the decisions referred to herein above, we may, as a ready reference, summarise 
the following few situates wherein recoveries by the employers, would be impressible in law: 


(i) Recovery from employees belongs to Class-III and class-IV service (or Group ‘C’ and Group ‘D’ 
service). 


(ii) Recovery from retired employees, or employees who are due to retire within one year of the order of 
recovery. 


(iii) Recovery from employees, when the excess payment has been made for a period in excess of five 
years, before the order of recovery is issued. 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4277 


(iv) Recovery in cases where in employee has wrongfully been required to discharge duties of a higher 
post, and has been paid accordingly, even though he should have rightfully been required to work 
against an interior post. 


(v) In any other case, where the Court arrives at the conclusion, that recovery if made from the 
employee, would be iniquitous or harsh or arbitrary to such an extent, as would far outweigh the 
equitable balance of the employers’ s right to recover.” 


Moreover I have carefully gone through the judgment cited on behalf of the respondents passed by the Hon’ble Apex 
Court in the case of Sayed Abdul Qadir, the respondent cannot derive any benefit from the said judgment as the 
same is not applicable to the facts of the circumstances of the present case. 


Accordingly in view of the said above legal position of law on the point in issue, impugned action on the part of the 
respondent/Pandyan Grama bank to recover amount already paid to the members of the claimant/union without any 
fault on their part/misrepresentation is an action which is contrary to law, liable to be set aside. 


Next point to be decided/adjudicated in the present case on the basis of the argument raised by learned counsel for 
appellant that whether an order can passed thereby directing the respondent to inform about the details on the current 
fixation of pay or the arrears of salary that they are entitled to or not?. 


After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record, admitted position which emerged out 
that the said relief cannot be granted to the claimant as the same is not within the scope of reference dated 08.06.207, 
because Labour Court gets its jurisdiction from the reference and it not like the Civil Court that any one Court, which 
entertains every suit. The Labour Court cannot go beyond the terms of reference nor it can travel beyond the 
pleadings and arrogate the power to raise issues which the parties to the reference are precluded to raise. 


Further the terms of reference determine the scope of the power and jurisdiction of the Labour Court, from case to 
case, whether certain points of dispute have been referred to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication it may, while 
dealing with the said points, deal with matters incidental thereto. However, such power cannot be exercised by the 
Court/Tribunal so as to enlarge materially the scope of reference itself for the reason that the Court/Tribunal derives 
its jurisdiction from the order of reference passed by the appropriate Government (vide Hocheif Gammon Vs. 
Industrial Tribunal, Bhubaneshwar, Orissa & 0, AIR 964 SC 746) Pottery Mazdoor Panchayat Vs The 
Perfect Pottery Co. Ltd. and Anr, AIR 970 50 356 and Mahendra L Jain & Ors. Vs. Indore Development 
Authority & Ors., AIR 2005 SC 252) 


ORDER 


For the foregoing reasons the present claim petition/ID case filed by claimant is partly allowed and the 
respondent/Pandyan Grama Bank is restrained from recovering amount/wages already been paid to the members of 
the claimant union (whose name finds place as per list is enclosed as Annexure No. |.) 


So far as the relief claimed by the claimant that the respondent be directed to inform about the details on the current 
fixation of pay or the arrears of salary that they are entitled to, cannot be granted as the same is beyond the scope of 
reference. 


Justice ANIL KUMAR, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्ली, 25 सितम्बर, 2024 
का.आ. 4864.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम t947 (0947 का 44 ) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
असम ग्रामीण विकास बैंक के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय गुवाहाटी के Gare ((2,/2049) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[फा. सं. एल-42044 / 34 / 2049--आई आर (बी-])] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 25th September, 2024 


S.O. 86.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.l2/20l9) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Guwahati_as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Assam Gramin_Vikash 
Bank and their workmen. 


[F. No. L-20/34/209- IR(B.D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 


4278 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 


BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT, 
GUWAHATI, ASSAM. 


PRESENT: = Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 
Presiding Officer, 
CGIT-cum-Labour Court, Guwahati. 


REFERENCE CASE NO. [2 of 209. 
PARTIES: The General Secretary, Assam Gramin Vikash Bank Employee Association, Guwahati. 


30828 22460 5 Workmen/Union. 
-vIs- 
Assam Gramin Vikash Bank, Guwahati, eee OP/Management. 
REPRESENTATIVES: 
For the Workmen/Union_: Mr. R. Nagendranaik, Advocate 
Mr. H. Nagabhushan Rao, Advocate. 
For the Management. : Mr. S. Dutta, Advocate. 
INDUSTRY : Assam Gramin Vikash Bank 
STATE : Guwahati, Assam. 
Date of Award न 8-09-2024 


AWARD 


Mr. Sameran Medhi, General Secretary of Assam Gramin Vikash Bank Employee Association, Guwahati has 
appeared for the aggrieved workmen. On repeated call at .30 a.m. none appeared for the Management of Assam 
Gramin Vikash Bank, Guwahati. Case is fixed up today for cross examination of workman witness. 


Mr. Sameran Medhi, General Secretary of Assam Gramin Vikash Bank Employee Association, Guwahati 
submitted an application before the Tribunal today in the form of Memo, stating therein that the Management of the 
Bank had denied benefit of additional increment to the workers of the Bank which was payable to the members of the 
Union as per settlement dated 29-0-993, as available to the employees of commercial Banks. It is further stated that 
during pendency of the proceeding before this Tribunal, the Management of Bank has paid the said benefit to all the 
eligible members as such the issue involved in this Industrial Dispute has become infructuous and prayed for 
permitting the Union to withdraw the present reference. Copy of the application has not been served upon the 
Management of the Bank. 


Considered the submission made by Mr. Medhi representative the aggrieved workman. Perused the order of the 
reference and the schedule. 


The Govt. of India through the Ministry of Labour and Employment issued order No. L-20/34/209-IR (B- 
I) dated 30-0-209 and in exercise of the powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section () of sub-section (2A) 
of section 0 of the Industrial Dispute Act,l947 has been pleased to refer the scheduled Industrial Dispute to this 
CGIT-Cum-Labour Court, Guwahati for adjudication. 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the management of Assam Gramin Vikash Bank, Guwahati in denying grant of 
advance increment (Fixed Personal Pay) and computer increment with consequential benefits to Shri Adul 
Mifid and 603 other workmen (list attached) is legal and justified? If not, to what relief the workmen are 
entitled?” 


The Case was registered on !5-!l-209, Workmen submitted Written Statement on 2-02-2020. Management 
filed their Written Statement on 3-l0-2020. The Case was thereafter fixed up for evidence on |9-03-202! onwards. 
At this stage the Union representative by way of filing his application stated that the claim of the aggrieved workmen 
has been fulfilled and he wants to withdraw the claim against the Assam Gramin Vikash Bank, Guwahati. In view of 
such submission, I am hold that formal adjudication of the Case is no more essential. The prayer for withdrawing the 
Industrial Dispute is allowed. The reference Case is accordingly disposed of. Let a no dispute Award be drawn up in 
the light of above observation. 


Copies of the Award be communicated to the Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India, New 
Delhi for information and notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4279 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. (862.—aiteitia विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार ई.सी.एल.के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, आसनसोल के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 27/2048) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 28/09/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[फा. सं. Vea-220I2/38/207-ang am. (सी.एम-])] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 26th September, 2024 


S.O. 862.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Reference.I.D. No. 27/208) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management 
of E.C.L. and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 28/08/2024. 


[F. No. L-2202/38/20l7 — IR (CM-ID)] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM- LABOUR COURT, 
ASANSOL. 


PRESENT: = Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 
Presiding Officer, 
C.G.LT-cum-L.C., Asansol. 


REFERENCE CASE NO. 27 OF 20i8 
PARTIES: — Shib Pujan Gowala 
Vs. 
Management of Bankola Colliery of ECL 
REPRESENTATIVES: 


For the Union/Workman: Mr. Rakesh Kumar, President, Koyala Mazdoor Congress. 
For the Management of ECL: Mr. P. K. Das, Adv. 


INDUSTRY: Coal. 
STATE: West Bengal. 
Dated: 29.07.2024 
AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section (l) and Sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Government of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2202/38/207-IR(CM-ID) dated 29.0.20l8 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer, that is the Management of Bankola Colliery under Bankola Area of Eastern Coalfields Limited and their 
workman for adjudication by this Tribunal. 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the management of Eastern Coal Fields Ltd. (E.C.L) by not providing 
employment to the dependent of Shri Shibpujan Gwala, Ex-employee of Bankola Colliery, Bankola Area, 
who was retired on the medical ground, is justified? If not, what relief his dependent is entitled to? ” 


l. On receiving Order No. L-2202/38/20I7-IR(CM-ID) dated 29.0.20l8 from the Government of India, 
Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, a Reference case No. 27 of 208 was registered on 


4280 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


9..208 and an order was passed for issuing notice to the parties through registered post, directing them to appear 
and submit their written statements along with relevant documents in support of their claims and a list of witnesses. 


2 Shib Pujan Gowala filed his written statement on 9.2.2022 through, Mr. Rakesh Kumar, President, Koyala 
Mazdoor Congress. The case disclosed in the written statement is that Shib Pujan Gowala was a permanent employee, 
posted as an Underground Loader having UM No. 602598 at Bankola Colliery under 


Bankola Area of Eastern Coalfields Limited (hereinafter referred to as ECL). Due to his illness, he was unable to 
perform his duty and applied for voluntary retirement on medical ground according to the provisions of Clause 9.4.3 
of National Coal Wage Agreement — IV (hereinafter referred to as NCWA-IV). He was asked to appear before 
Medical Board of the employer company constituted for this purpose. On 26.02.994 after examining Shib Pujan 
Gowala, the Medical Boad declared him medically unfit for job. Management of ECL in the letter Ref. No. 
BK:PD:I5(/I)/58 Yrs/79 dated .03.994 terminated the service of Shib Pujan Gowala on medical ground along 
with other workmen. On his termination due to physical debility, one dependent member of his family is entitled to 
get employment. The management directed the workman to submit necessary document for processing the 
employment of his son. Relevant documents, consisting of Attestation Form, Relationship Certificate, No Objection 
by other dependent family members, Indemnity Bond were submitted before the management. A screening was 
conducted at the Colliery level and the dependent son was referred for medical examination by the Initial Medical 
Examination Board (hereinafter referred to as IME Board) at the Area level, which found him fit for duty. 


3. After lapse of time the Headquarters of ECL issued a direction not to process the employment proposal of the 
dependent on the ground that some complain had been received against the Medical Board, which held the medical 
examination of the employee and the management decided to cancel the result of the Medical Board, which was 
however not communicated to Shib Pujan Gowala. Some of the worker namely, Kishori Mohan Chakraborty and 
others filed a case before the Hon’ble High Court, Calcutta and after hearing the matter, the Hon’ble High Court 
passed an order, directing the management to provide employment to the dependent of the medically unfit employee 
and the management provided employment to some of the dependent of the medically unfit persons. On 
9.09.994 the Director (Personnel), Coal India Limited issued a direction to offer employment to dependent of all 
those who were found medically unfit. It is contended that since Shib Pujan Gowala was declared medically unfit, 
under the provision of Clause 9.4.3 of NCWA-IV his dependent should be provided with employment. According to 
the union the ex-workman and his son are not having any income to maintain their livelihood, as such the son of Shib 
Pujan Gowala should be provided with employment and adequate compensation should be provided to the employee 
due to inordinate delay in considering prayer and all other consequential benefits. 


4. The management of ECL contested the Industrial Dispute by filing their written statement on 9.2.2022. The 
points on which the claim for employment was denied by the management inter-alia are that the provisions of Clause 
9.4.3 of NCWA-IV for employment of the dependent of the disabled employee have been grossly misused by some 
unscrupulous officials of ECL, unions and employees for the purpose of ensuring employment from generation to 
generation in the public sector undertaking, which is a violation of the basic fabric of the Article 6 of the 
Constitution of India. The result of medical examination held at Bankola Area was manipulated with vested interest 
and the management of ECL was not inclined to accept the findings of the Medical Board. It was also found on 
enquiry that the concerned workman was not suffering from any incurable disease, resulting in permanent incapacity 
of the workman. The concerned workman is aware about such manipulation and he did not raise any dispute within a 
span of two decades after such findings and stoppage of employment to his dependent son. It is contended that the 
demand raised by the union for employment of the dependent of Shib Pujan Gowala on the ground of partial debility 
and it was never accepted as full and final. The management of ECL had issued direction for holding fresh medical 
examination of the person who had appeared before the Medical Board on earlier occasion and Shib Pujan Gowala 
finally not declared as medically unfit. Consequently, the question of providing employment to his dependent son 
does not arise. It is urged on behalf of the management that the claim raised by the union is absurd and the dependent 
of Shib Pujan Gowala is not entitled to get any employment. 


5. In order to establish his case in this Industrial Dispute Shib Pujan Gowala submitted his affidavit-in-chief. He 
examined himself as Workman Witness — | and faced cross-examination. In his affidavit-in-chief the main case 
projected by him is that on 26.02.994 he was declared medically unfit for duty. Thereafter management terminated 
his service on medical ground under the provision of Clause 9.4.3 of NCWA-IV by issuing letter bearing Ref. No. 
BK:PD:5()/58 Yrs/79 dated .03.994. On the basis of the direction passed by the management on .03.994, 
employees declared medically unfit were asked to submit application for employment of their dependent as per 
Clause 9.4.3 of NCWA-IV. Shib Pujan Gowala submitted an application for employment of Prakash Gwala (Yadav), 
his son. Documents called for by the management were also submitted. After screening at the colliery level his son 
was sent for medical examination by the IME Board and he was found fit for duty. In course of his evidence the 
workman produced the following documents : 


(i) Copy of the Identity Card of Shib Pujan Gowala is produced as Exhibit W-. 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 428] 


(ii) Copy of the Office Order .03.994 by which he was terminated from service for being medically 
unfit for duty and asked to submit application for employment of his dependent son is produced as 
Exhibit W-2. 


6. In course of cross-examination Shib Pujan Gowala admitted that the competent authority did not accept that the 
recommendation of the Medical Board. He further stated that the name of his son Prakash Gwala (Yadav) is 
recorded in his Service Record as a dependent and his said son was thirty years old at the time he appeared before the 
Medical Board. The witness further deposed that at present his son is forty years old and denied that he is not entitled 
to the benefit of employment on the ground of his voluntary retirement on medical ground. 


7. Management examined Dibyendu Ghosh, Manager (Personnel), Bankola Colliery as Management Witness - |. 
He filed his affidavit-in-chief in support of the stand taken by the management. It is admitted that Shib Pujan Gowala 
was a permanent employee of ECL. He was declared medically unfit for duty by the Medical Board on 3.03.994 
and he was terminated from service on the ground of medical unfitness. Later on, due to detection of some 
malpractice the findings of the Medical Board was not approved by the higher authority and the workmen were 
requested to appear for a fresh medical examination which was held on 2.0.995, but the workman never appeared 
before the said Medical Board. It is further stated that compassionate appointment under NCWA-IV is provided to the 
eligible dependent of the workman found permanently incapacitated due to disease or on his death and a certificate of 
such disablement or debility had to be issued by the coal company. Unscrupulous officials and unions have gravely 
misused the benevolent clause for employment in public sector, violating the principles of Article 6 of the 
Constitution of India. The witness stated in his affidavit-in-chief that during enquiry it was found that the concerned 
workman was not suffering from any incurable disease resulting in permanent incapacity to work and the union and 
the workman fully aware about such manipulation, did not raise any Industrial Dispute for more than two decades. 
The management denied employment to the dependent of Shib Pujan Gowala on the ground of his medical debility. 
The witness produced the following documents in course of evidence : 


(i) Copy of the Office Order .03.!994 by which Shib Pujan Gowala was terminated from service and 
his work was stopped from 3.03.994 has been produced as Exhibit M-I. 


(ii) Copy of the order dated 02/03.03.994 relating to termination of service of Shib Pujan Gowala on 
medical ground, as Exhibit M-2. 


(ii) Copy of the letter dated 29.04.994 issued by the Director (Personnel) addressed to the General Manager 
of Bankola Area, as Exhibit M-3. 


8. In cross-examination the witness admitted that by order dated 02/03.03.994 (Exhibit M-2), the competent 
authority of Bankola Area has approved termination of service of the enlisted persons including Shib Pujan Gowala 
on medical ground. Management witness admitted that they have no record from which it can be made out that Shib 
Pujan Gowala had made any representation before the company for employment of his dependent on the ground that 
he had been declared medically unfit. The witness further stated that the chairman of the Medical Board was 
competent to declare somebody as medically unfit but he was unable to state that on whose recommendation Shib 
Pujan Gowala and other persons were declared medically unfit. It transpires from the evidence of MW-|] that the 
General Manager of Bankola Area had requested to inform the Director (Personnel) if service of the employees, 
declared unfit by the said Medical Board had been terminated and whether the cases for employment of their 
dependent have been processed. The witness failed to produce any document or copy of the letter to show that Shib 
Pujan Gowala was asked to appear before any fresh Medical Board thereafter. It also appears that no letter was issued 
to Shib Pujan Gowala asking him to join his service on the ground that the decision of Medical Board declaring him 
unfit was incorrect and improper. The management witness stated that no Initial Medical Examination of any 
dependent was held for providing employment. 


9. The sole question formulated for adjudication is whether it is justified and proper in providing employment to 
the dependent of Shib Pujan Gowala on his retirement on medical ground. If not, what relief the dependent is entitled 
to? 


0.. Mr. Rakesh Kumar, Union representative for the aggrieved workman, in his argument submitted that the 
Medical Board examined Shib Pujan Gowala on 26.02.994 and declared him unfit for duty according to the 
provisions of Clause 9.4.3 (ii) of NCWA-IV. At the relevant time the workman was fifty-six years of age and had four 
years left in service for his superannuation. By letter dated .03.994 (Exhibit W-2) Shib Pujan Gowala, whose 
name appeared against serial no. 6 of the Office Order, was declared medically unfit for duty on debility ground and 
was stopped from duty w.e.f. 3.03.994. Relying upon Exhibit M-2, a letter dated 02/03.03.]994 issued by the 
Personnel Manager (Incharge), Bankola Area it is argued that the service of Shib Pujan Gowala was terminated and 
the same was approved by the competent authority. It is argued that though the management has taken a plea that 
there was manipulation in the findings of the Medical Board, the same was not accepted by the company, no letter 
was issued to the terminated workman, informing him about the decision of management, any subsequent medical 
examination or asking him to resume office by setting aside or recalling the order of termination approved by the 
competent authority. Mr. Rakesh Kumar argued that some of the employees who were declared medically unfit and 


4262 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


no employment was provided to their dependents had preferred Writ Petition bearing No. 23 of 996 before the 
Hon’ble High Court at Calcutta, wherein the Hon’ble High Court observed that : 


१४ the adverse vigilance report does not stand in the way in giving suitable employment to the 
petitioners dependent, as the petitioners were declared medically unfit. In the event the petitioner’s 
dependants are found eligible their cases shall be considered for employment in the suitable post. 
Therefore I direct that the respondents and / or each of them to take steps with regard to employment of the 
respective petitioners’ defendant in terms of 9.4.3 of the said Agreement. .........” 


It is further argued on behalf of the workman that the findings of the Medical Board by which Shib Pujan 
Gowala was declared medically unfit for duty has not been set aside by subsequent order. Therefore, according to the 
provisions of Clause 9.4.3 (ii) of NCWA-IV, which was applicable to the workman until coming into force of 
NCWA-V, signed by the Joint Bipartite Committee for the Coal Industry on 9.0.996, entitles Prakash Gwala 
(Yadav), the dependent son to be considered for employment. 


ll. Mr. P. K. Das, learned advocate for the management of ECL argued that the Medical Board, which was 
functioning in connivence of the union and workman, declared several workmen medically unfit for duty, despite the 
fact that they were not suffering for debilitating disease. The Office Order dated .03.994 by which Shib Pujan 
Gowala was declared medically unfit for duty was stopped from duty w.e.f. 3.03.994, as they had proceeded on 
leave and no order of termination was issued to Shib Pujan Gowala. The management by confidential enquiry found 
that good number of persons were declared medically unfit by the Medical Board on 26.02.994 and wanted to know 
if the service of such persons were already terminated and employment of the dependents were processed. The 
General Manager of Bankola Area was also requested to ensure that no employment of the dependent was processed 
or forwarded till the same was approved by the Director (Personnel) (Exhibit M-3). In respect of the direction passed 
by the Hon’ble High Court at Calcutta in the Writ Petition to give suitable employment to the dependent of the 
employee found medically unfit, it is argued that the present petitioner did not approach the Hon’ble High Court and 
the management of the company had no responsibility to consider his case for employment of his dependent 
according to the provisions of NCWA-IV. It is vehemently argued by Mr. P. K. Das that after long lapse of twenty 
years Shib Pujan Gowala had approached the Industrial Tribunal, raising a dispute, which is not bona fide and his 
prayer for employment to his dependent is not sustainable. 


2. Ihave considered the argument advanced by both the parties and the evidence on record. The admitted case is 
that Shib Pujan Gowala was a permanent employee of Bankola Colliery, who applied for voluntary retirement on 
medical ground. His prayer had been considered and the Disability Medical Board of the company setup for the 
purpose, held medical examination on 26.02.994 and found Shib Pujan Gowala medically unfit for duty according to 
Clause 9.4.3 (ii) of NCWA-IV. The Office Order dated .03.994 (Exhibit W-2) was issued by the Agent of Bankola 
Colliery on the basis of letter No. BA/PD/A-II(28)/632 dated 02/03.03.994 of Personnel Manager (Incharge) of 
Bankola Area. On the basis of such order the duty of concerned workman was stopped from 3.03.994. It transpires 
from the pleadings of both the parties and the evidence of the workman as well as management that till date the 
provisions of Clause 9.4.3 (ii) of NCWA-IV has not been complied by the management of the company and 
dependent of the concerned employee was not provided with employment. 


3. Learned advocate for the management of ECL contended that the Chairman of the Medical Board is competent 
to certify that the employee is medically unfit on the ground of debility but in the instant case no such certificate has 
been issued. In my considered view it goes without saying that the management of the company having issued office 
order dated .03.994 on the basis of approval of the competent authority for termination of service of the enlisted 
employees is presumed to have taken into the consideration the relevant report of the Medical Board, authorized to 
certify such medical debility or disablement. The management of the company has produced a copy of letter dated 
02.03.994 issued by Personnel Manager (Incharge) of Bankola Area, informing the Agent of Bankola Colliery 
regarding termination of service of several employees of the company on medical ground. The said letter dated 
02/03.03.994 (Exhibit M-2) precedes the letter bearing No. ECL/HQ/D(P)/02/l935 dated 29.04.994 issued by the 
Director (Personnel) addressed to the General Manager of Bankola Area, wanting to know if the service of the 
employees declared unfit by the Medical Board have been terminated. It was also directed that that no employment 
should be processed till the same was approved by the Director (Personnel). At this juncture it may be safely be 
deduced that the termination process had already been made by issuing the Office Order dated I!.03.994, which in 
clear terms referred to letter Ref. No. BA/PD/A-I](28)/632 dated 02/03.03.994 of Personnel Manager (Incharge) of 
Bankola Area, disclosing approval of termination of employees. There is no case of the management that any order 
was issued by the management for setting aside or revoking its office order dated .03.994, based on the Medical 
Board’s findings or asking them to resume their duty from any particular date. The management led no evidence to 
prove that Shib Pujan Gowala was asked to appear before any Medical Board constituted on 2.0.995 for re- 
assessment of his medical condition and extent of his debility. Due to non-fulfilment of such responsibility the 
management is duty bound under the provisions of Clause 9.4.3 (ii) of NCWA-IV to consider the claim for 
employment of the dependent son of Shib Pujan Gowala. In the instant case Shib Pujan Gowala has not produced any 
document to show that any application was made by him before the management to provide employment to his 
dependent son, Prakash Gwala (Yadav). The stand taken by the management is not justified. Therefore, the 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4283 


management of ECL is directed to process the prayer for employment of the dependent son of Shib Pujan Gowala 
within a period of one month from the date of communication of the Award in accordance with the provisions of 
NCWA-IV, providing full opportunity to the party to place all materials and communicate their decision to Shib Pujan 
Gowala within a fortnight thereafter. In default the management of the company shall be liable to compensate Shib 
Pujan Gowala by paying him a sum equivalent to his wages and all consequential benefits which would have fallen 
due in favour of the employee from 3.03.994 till the date of his superannuation, had he not been terminated from 
his service by the office order dated .03.994. The compensation amount shall be paid within a period of one (l) 
month from the date of default in providing the employment to the dependent. Any delay in paying such 
compensation will be accompanied by an interest of nine percent (9%) per annum on the sum till repayment. The 
Industrial Dispute is accordingly allowed in favour of the workman on contest. 


Hence, 
ORDERED 


that the Industrial Dispute is allowed in favour of Shib Pujan Gowala on contest. The management of Bankola 
Colliery of ECL is directed to process the employment proposal of the dependent son of Shib Pujan Gowala under the 
provision of Clause 9.4.3 (ii) of NCWA-IV and communicate the decision to Shib Pujan Gowala within a fortnight. In 
default of providing employment to the dependent son (Prakash Gwala (Yadav)) of the employee the management 
shall compensate Shib Pujan Gowala by paying him a sum equivalent to his wages and all consequential benefits from 
3.03.994 till the date of his superannuation, as if Shib Pujan Gowala was not terminated from his service on the 
ground of his debility. The compensation amount shall be paid within a month from the default of providing the 
employment to the dependent. Any delay in paying such compensation shall accrue an interest of nine percent (9%) 
per annum on the sum till payment is made. Let an Award be drawn up in light of my above findings. Let copies of 
the Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour, Government of India, New Delhi for information and 
Notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4863.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार ई.सी.एल.के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, आसनसोल के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 36/2048) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 28/09/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[फा. सं. एल-22042/50/2048-आई.आर. (सी.एम-)] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 26th September, 2024 


5.0. 863.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Reference.I.D.No. 36/208) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management 
of E.C.L. and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 28/08/2024 


[F. No. L-2202/50/208-IR (CM-ID)] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM- LABOUR COURT, 
ASANSOL. 
PRESENT: Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 
Presiding Officer, 


C.G.I.T-cum-L.C., Asansol. 
REFERENCE CASE NO. 36 OF 208 
PARTIES: Abhijit Bouri 
Vs. 


4284 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Management of B.M.P. Group of ECL 


REPRESENTATIVES: 

For the Union/Workman: Mr. Rakesh Kumar, President, Koyala Mazdoor Congress. 
For the Management of ECL: Mr. P. K. Das, Advocate. 

INDUSTRY: Coal. 

STATE: West Bengal. 

Dated: 2.08.2024 


AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section (l) and Sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Government of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2202/50/208-IR(CM-II) dated 3..20l8 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer, that is the Management of B.M.P. Group under Sodepur Area of Eastern Coalfields Limited and their 
workman for adjudication by this Tribunal. 


SCHEDULE 


“ Whether the action of the Management of Patmohna Colliery under Sodepur Area of M/s. ECL in 
dismissing Shri Avijit Bouri, U.G.Loader w.e.f. /2/76. /2.96 is justified or not? If not, to what relief the 
workman concerned is entitled to and from which date? ” 


l. On receiving Order No. L-2202/50/208-IR(CM-ID) dated 3.!.20l8 from the Government of India, 
Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, a Reference case No. 36 of 20i8 was registered 
03.2.208 and an order was passed for issuing notice to the parties through registered post, directing them to appear 
and submit their written statements along with relevant documents in support of their claims and a list of witnesses. 


2. The aggrieved workman filed his written statement on 28.0.2022 and the management of the employer 
company contested the Industrial Dispute by filing their written statement on 02.0.2023. In gist, the fact of the case 
of the workman represented by Koyala Mazdoor Congress is that, Abhijit Bouri, an Underground Loader, bearing 
UM No. 84898 was a permanent employee of the company, posted at Patmohana Colliery under Sodepur Area of 
Eastern Coalfields Limited (hereinafter referred to as ECL). The workman was absent from duty from 04.02.998 to 
5.0.998, for a period of eight months and ten days due to illness. The management of the employer company 
issued a Charge Sheet against the workman for his unauthorized absence to which Abhijit Bouri submitted his reply, 
requesting the company to permit him to join his duty. 


3. Without issuing any Notice of enquiry, the employer company initiated a domestic enquiry against him, of 
which he had no knowledge. The workman was not provided with any opportunity to represent his case or to take the 
assistance of any co-worker. The Enquiry Proceeding was concluded ex-parte and the order of dismissal was issued 
against him bearing Ref. No. BMP/C-6/l2-A/l009 dated 2/6.2.998. 


4. _ The grievance of the workman is that he had to reside at Satgram Bograchetti, which is far away from his place 
of duty at Patmohna Colliery. No Notice of enquiry was sent to his home address, as a result workman could not 
attend the enquiry. No 2™ Show Cause Notice was issued to the workman to provide him an opportunity to defend his 
case. In the Charge Sheet there is no charge of habitual absence but the management had taken into consideration 
such charge in the course of enquiry without any notice to the workman. The workman submitted mercy petitions for 
his reinstatement but the management did not consider the same. In the light of Memorandum of Settlement reached 
before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Asansol on 22.05.2007, it had been agreed between the 
management and the functioning unions of ECL that mercy petitions of the dismissed employees would be considered 
if the period of absence was up to nine months and at the relevant time, the workman was within forty-five years of 
age. 


5. Further case of the workman is that in similar situation, in the case of Damu Dakua of Khas Kajora Colliery of 
ECL and Bagia Nayak of Chora Colliery of ECL, the Hon’ble High Court at Calcutta, directed the management to 
follow the order of the Coal India Limited, regarding issuance of 274 Show Cause Notice. According to the workman 
the enquiry proceeding resulting in his dismissal is illegal and unjust as the Enquiry Officer had filled up printed form 
in the guise of an enquiry. The punishment of dismissal imposed against the workman is disproportionate to the 
charge and the workman prayed for setting aside the order of dismissal, reinstatement in service and full back wages 
with all other consequential benefits. 


6. The management of BMP Group of ECL in their written statement urged that Abhijit Bouri, an Underground 
Loader at Patmohna Colliery had remained absent from his duty from 04.02.998 without any authorization and a 
Charge Sheet dated 5.0.998 was issued under Section 7(i)(n) of Model Standing Order. The workman failed to 
submit any reply to the Charge Sheet, giving rise to a domestic enquiry. An Enquiry Officer was duly appointed who 
held enquiry but the workman did not participate. The charge against the workman was established and on the basis of 


[भाग —avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4285 


Enquiry Report and past conduct of the workman an order of dismissal from service was issued bearing Ref. No. 
BMP/C-6/2-A/l009 dated 2/6.2.998. It is asserted by the management that the punishment is proportionate to 
the charge as the workman never informed the management about his absence from duty due to his alleged illness. It 
is further stated that if the Tribunal find that the enquiry was unfair, in that event the management may be given an 
opportunity to establish the charge by adducing independent proof and evidence. 


7. In order to substantiate his case Abhijit Bouri filed an affidavit-in-chief, reiterating his case in the written 
statement. He admitted having received the Charge Sheet and in paragraph — 4 of his affidavit-in-chief he stated 
that he replied to the Charge Sheet and requested the management to allow him to join his duty. He could not attend 
duty due to his illness and averred that he did not receive any Notice of enquiry for which he could not participate in 
the enquiry proceeding and the management without issuing any 2"! Show Cause Notice illegally dismissed him from 
service. It is asserted that he is not a habitual absentee and no Charge Sheet for habitual absence was issued against 
him. In the affidavit-in-chief the workman stated that his residence was far away from Patmohana Colliery for which 
he requested the management for his transfer but his request was not considered as a result he faced problem in 
attending his duty. The workman also stated that he filed mercy petition on 4.02.20l2 and 02.03.202 but the 
management did not consider the same in accordance with the terms of Memorandum of Settlement dated 22.05.2007. 
Abhijit Bouri in course of his examination as Workman Witness — | produced a copy of the Charge Sheet dated 
5.0.998, which has been marked as Exhibit W-l, a copy of the letter of dismissal dated 2/6.2.998, as Exhibit 
W-2, and copies of the Mercy Petitions dated 4.02.20l2 and 02.03.202 as Exhibit W-3 and W-4 respectively. 


8. In his cross-examination the workman witness stated that though he faced difficulty in travelling from Bogra 
Village to Patmohana Colliery for attending duty he did not apply before the employer company for providing him 
with quarters at Patmohana. He also failed to produce any application seeking transfer to some other place. The 
workman denied that he intentionally absented from duty from 04.02.998 to 5.0.998. In course of cross- 
examination the witness admitted that he did not inform the employer company the reason for his absence from duty. 


9. Mr. Rahul Panwar, Assistant Manager (P/HR) of BMP Group filed an affidavit-in-chief and was examined as 
Management Witness — |. In his affidavit-in-chief the witness stated that the workman did not submit any reply to the 
Charge Sheet for which a domestic enquiry was held. The charge of misconduct was established during the enquiry 
proceeding, which took place ex-parte. It transpires from the contents of his affidavit-in-chief that the Disciplinary 
Authority passed an order of dismissal after considering the enquiry proceeding and past conduct of the workman. It 
is urged that the dismissal of the workman is proper and justified. The management witness has produced the 
following documents : 


(i) A copy of the Charge Sheet dated 5.0.998 has been produced as Exhibit M-. 
(ii) A copy of the Notice of enquiry dated 8..998, as Exhibit M-2. 
(ili) A copy of the Enquiry proceeding, in five pages, as Exhibit M-3. 


(iv) A copy of the letter dated 07/08.2.998 issued by the Chief General Manager of Sodepur Area to the 
Agent of BMP Group regarding dismissal of Abhijit Bouri, as Exhibit M-4. 


(v) A copy of the letter of dismissal of Abhijit Bouri dated 2/6.2.998, as Exhibit M-S. 


The witness stated that he had no document relating to appointment of the Enquiry Officer, nor does he know 
the name of the Enquiry Officer, who issued the Notice of enquiry. 


0. In his cross-examination the management admitted that he was unable to produce any record relating to 
previous punishment of Abhijit Bouri in course of his service. He also admitted that the Enquiry Proceeding was 
prepared in the printed Form and that there is no record to show that the Notice of enquiry was served upon the 
workman before initiating the enquiry proceeding. The management witness denied that the enquiry initiated against 
the workman was illegal or that the punishment of dismissal was disproportionate to the charge. The witness further 
admitted that no 27 Show Cause Notice was issued to the workman and the direction of the Coal India Limited as 
well as the mandate of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India were not complied. 


ll. The crux of the issue which emerges for consideration is whether the dismissal of Abhijit Bouri from service 
w.e.f. 6.2.998 is justified. If not, to what relief the workman is entitled to. 


2. Mr. Rakesh Kumar, on behalf of the dismissed workman draw my attention to the evidence of MW-| that the 
enquiry was held without ensuring the service of Notice to the workman and that the management failed to produce 
any letter of appointment of the Enquiry Officer and was unable to identify who the Enquiry Officer was. It is argued 
that the workman had no opportunity to meet the charges levelled against him and the entire enquiry proceeding is a 
gross violation of the principles of natural justice. It is argued that the Enquiry Report has been submitted in a filled 
up pro forma without recording of statements of the management witness in first person. The union representative 
vehemently argued that there was serious miscarriage of justice by not issuing the 2"' Show Cause Notice to the 
workman even after conclusion of an ex-parte enquiry proceeding, especially when the Disciplinary Authority and 
Enquiry Officer were not the same person. Mr. Kumar placed reliance upon the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme 


4286 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Court of India in the case of Union of India and Others vs Mohd. Ramzan Khan [AIR (99) SC 47]], which laid 
down as follows: 


“ When the Inquiry Officer is not the Disciplinary Authority, the delinquent employee has a right to receive 
a copy of the inquiry officer’s report before the Disciplinary Authority arrives at its conclusion with regard 
to the charges levelled against him. A denial of the inquiry officer’s report before the Disciplinary 
Authority takes its decision on the charges, is denial of opportunity to the employee to prove his innocence 
and is a breach of principles of natural justice. ? 


3. It is further argued by the union representative that the principle laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
India was adopted by the Coal India Limited on issuing Circular bearing No. CIL C-5A(vi)/50774/28 dated 
2.05.994 and directed its subsidiaries that a 2" Show Cause Notice is to be issued to the workman after enquiry 
proceeding in order to give opportunity to meet the findings of the Enquiry Officer. Mr. Rakesh Kumar referred to the 
Mercy Petitions filed by the workman, which have been marked as Exhibit W-3 and W-4. It is urged that the 
management did not consider the mercy petition though the period of his absence was only eight months and ten days, 
which is less than nine months and at the relevant time his age was less than forty-five years. It is submitted that the 
management of ECL and all functioning unions have executed a Memorandum of Settlement before the Regional 
Labour Commissioner (Central), Asansol, agreeing to take into consideration such cases of absence. 


4. In reply, Mr. P. K. Das, learned advocate for the management of ECL argued that the workman has been 
dismissed for his unauthorized absence from duty for over eight months, without any intimation to the employer 
company. It is submitted that though the workman denied having received any Charge Sheet and Notice of enquiry, in 
his affidavit-in-chief as well as his evidence the workman claimed to have replied to the Charge Sheet which goes to 
establishment that he has received the Charge Sheet but did not participate in the enquiry proceeding. 


5. Learned advocate for ECL however, fairly admitted that the management is not in a position to prove that the 
Notice of enquiry was served upon the workman before the enquiry proceeding commenced and did not dispute that 
no 2™ Show Cause Notice was served upon the workman before his dismissal. The management did not respond to 
the contention that the mercy petitions of the workman were not considered by the management in compliance with 
the terms of the Memorandum of Settlement dated 22.05.2007. It is submitted that the management may be 
granted an opportunity to review their decision in consequence of the enquiry proceeding. 


6. Ihave considered the rival arguments in the light of the materials on record. Admittedly Abhijit Bouri remained 
absent from his duty for over eight months without any authorization and has grossly misused his privilege of 
working under the management of ECL. There are no qualms that a Charge Sheet for unauthorized absent was issued 
to the workman and he has received the same. The workman has failed to produce any reply to the Charge Sheet. 
Therefore, no material is forthcoming to support the claim of the workman that due to his illness he was unable to 
attend his duty. The facts and circumstances of the case clearly indicate that the situation was rife to initiate a 
domestic enquiry against the workman for his misconduct and violation of standing order. The pre-condition of 
starting an enquiry proceeding is that the competent authority has to appoint an Enquiry Officer and the Enquiry 
Officer is duty bund to ensure service of Notice of enquiry upon the charged employee. The management witness in 
his cross-examination stated that there was no record to show that the Notice of enquiry was served upon the 
workman before initiating the enquiry proceeding. On a perusal of the enquiry proceeding (Exhibit M-3), it appears 
that the enquiry proceeding was recorded in a printed Form by filing up the blanks which also contain a statement that 
charge was read over and explained in Bengali and Hindi. In fact, the workman did not appear and there is no reason 
to read out the charge. There is no whisper in the Enquiry Proceeding that the Notice of enquiry was served upon the 
workman. I find that Mr. Kanailal Pan, Mr. Mangalmoy Sarkar and Mr. Goutam Banerjee were examined as 
Management Representatives but their statements have not been recorded in the first person. On the other hand, the 
statements are in the form of reporting by the Enquiry Officer himself. 


7. It is an admitted fact that no 2"’ Show Cause Notice was issued to the workman before reaching a conclusion 
that his misconduct was grave enough to attract the punishment of dismissal. In this context it is worthwhile to rely 
upon the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Union of India and Others vs Mohd. 
Ramzan Khan (Supra.). The principle laid down was also to be followed by the Coal India Limited, which issued a 
Circular bearing No. CIL C-5A(vi)/50774/28 dated 2.05.994, directing all its subsidiaries to issue 2"' Show Cause 
Notice to the employees before taking the final decision of dismissal. In the instant case the workman did not get the 
opportunity to submit his reply before the Disciplinary Authority, which again amounts to violation of natural justice. 
The letter of dismissal bearing Ref. No. BMP/C-6/2-A/l009 dated 2/6.2.998 was issued by the Agent of BMP 
Group. I find that the Dy. CME / Agent is not the Appointing Authority of the charged employee, as such without any 
specific concurrence of the General Manager of the Area, the Agent had no jurisdiction to dismiss the workman from 
his service. In such view of the matter, I hold that the Agent has exceeded his jurisdiction by passing the order of 
dismissal of the workman bearing Ref. No. BMP/C-6/l2-A/l009 dated 2/6.2.998, not being the Disciplinary 
Authority or Appointing Authority. The procedure followed by the Enquiry Officer holding the enquiry proceeding is 
‘ex facie’ illegal and violative of natural justice. The order of dismissal also appears to be disproportionate to the 
charge, without any proof of habitual unauthorized absence of the workman. 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4287 


8. The evidence on record clearly indicates that two mercy petitions dated 4.02.20l2 and 02.03.20l2 were 
submitted by the dismissed workman, praying for allowing him to join his duty in terms of the Memorandum of 
Settlement signed by the management and union representatives on 22.05.2007. Though these petitions are submitted 
long after thirteen years from the date of dismissal, the management ought to have disposed the same after 
considering the facts and circumstances involved in accordance with the terms of the Memorandum of Settlement. 


9. In view of my above discussion I find and held that though the workman had remained absent for a long time 
and his mercy petitions were filed long after thirteen years from the date of his dismissal, the management ought to 
have considered the same. The enquiry proceeding is manifestly illegal and there has been no prior service of Notice 
upon the workman intimating him the date and place of holding such enquiry. Consequently, there has been violation 
of principles of natural justice by not providing opportunity to the workman to represent his case. Non-issuance of 27 
Show Cause Notice and passing of order of dismissal by the Agent, who is neither the Disciplinary Authority nor the 
Appointing Authority, I hold that the order of dismissal is illegal and is not sustainable under the law. The impugned 
order of dismissal is therefore set aside. The management shall provide an opportunity of hearing to the workman 
within one (l) month of communication of the Award and after considering the representation of the workman, if any, 
to be submitted within fifteen (5) days, shall pass a fresh order on the subject matter and communicate the same to 
the workman. In view of such facts and circumstances discussed above no order for payment of back wages is passed. 


Hence, 
ORDERED 


that the Industrial Dispute is allowed on contest. The impugned order of dismissal of Abhijit Bouri, bearing Ref. 
No. BMP/C-6/2-A/l009 dated 2/6.2.998, passed by the Agent of BMP Group is set aside. The management 
shall provide an opportunity of hearing to the workman within one (() month of communication of the Award and 
after considering the representation of the workman, if any, to be submitted within fifteen (5) days, shall pass a fresh 
order on the subject matter and communicate the same to the workman. Let an award be drawn up in light of my 
above findings. Let copies of the Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour, Government of India, New 
Delhi for information and Notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4864.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार ई.सी.एल.के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, आसनसोल के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 09/2044) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 28/09/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[फा. सं. एल-2202/43/2044-आई.आर. (सी.एम-])] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 26th September, 2024 


5.0. 864.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Reference.I.D.No. 09/204) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management 
of E.C.L. and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 28/08/2024. 


[F. No. L-2202/43/204 — IR (CM-ID)] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM- LABOUR COURT, 
ASANSOL. 


PRESENT: = Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 
Presiding Officer, 
C.G.LT-cum-L.C., Asansol. 


REFERENCE CASE NO. 09 OF 20I4 
PARTIES: Ajit Kora 


4288 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Vs. 
Management of Gourandi Begunia Colliery of ECL 


REPRESENTATIVES: 

For the Union/Workman: Mr. Rakesh Kumar, President, Koyala Mazdoor Congress. 
For the Management of ECL: Mr. P. K. Das, Advocate. 

INDUSTRY: Coal 

STATE: West Bengal. 

Dated: 07.08.2024 


AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Government of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2202/43/204-IR(CM-II) dated 30.06.20l4 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer, that is the Management of Gourandi Begunia Colliery under Salanpur Area of Eastern Coalfields Limited 
and their workman for adjudication by this Tribunal. 


SCHEDULE 


“ Whether the action of the Management of Gourandi Begunia Colliery of M/s. Eastern Coalfields Ltd. 
in imposing a punishment of dismissal on Shri Ajit Kora, U.G. Loader w.e.f. 05.06.2007, vide order No. C- 
6/36/P-852 dated 22.05.2007/05.06.2007 is just and legal? If not, to what relief the workman is entitled 
to?” 


On receiving Order No. L-2202/43/204-IR(CM-ID) dated 30.06.20l4 from the Government of India 
Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, a Reference case No. 09 of 204 was registered on 
5.07.204 and an order was passed for issuing notice to the parties through registered post, directing them to appear 
and submit their written statements along with relevant documents in support of their claims and a list of witnesses. 


2. Mr. P. K. Das, learned advocate for the management of Eastern Coalfields Limited is present. Ajit Kora, the 
dismissed workman is represented by Mr. Rakesh Kumar, union representative. The case is fixed up today for 
evidence of the workman witness for the thirtyfifth time. Workman has not appeared before this Tribunal even on a 
single date. 


3. The Management as well as union have filed written statements and the case was fixed up for evidence of 
workman witness since 09.02.20l6. Workman never appeared before this Tribunal for any redressal. The concerned 
union representing the workman has failed to establish any communication with the workman. Considering all 
aspects, I am of the view that the workman is not inclined to proceed further with this case and the same is disposed 
of in the form of a No Dispute Award. The Industrial Dispute is accordingly dismissed and a No Dispute Award be 
drawn up. 


Hence, 
ORDERED 


that a No Dispute Award be drawn up in the above Reference case. Let copies of the Award in duplicate be sent to the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India, New Delhi for information and Notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 सितम्बर, 2024 
का.आ. (865.—siteitie विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार ई.सी.एल.के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्‍्यायालय,आसनसोल के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 43/2024) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 28/09/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[फा. सं. Vel-2202/3/202-39g.3m. (सी.एम-)] 
मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 26th September, 2024 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4289 


S.O. 865.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ([4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Reference.I.D.No. 3/202l) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management 
of E.C.L. and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 28/08/2024. 


[F. No. L-2202/3/202 — IR (CM-ID)] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT, ASANSOL. 


PRESENT: = Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 
Presiding Officer, 
C.G.L.T-cum-L.C., Asansol. 


REFERENCE CASE NO. 3 OF 202! 
PARTIES: — Sunil Kora 


Vs. 

Management of Monoharbahal Colliery of ECL and Another. 
REPRESENTATIVES: 
For the Union/Workman: Mr. Rakesh Kumar, President, Koyala Mazdoor Congress. 
For the Management of ECL: Mrs. Swapna Basu, Advocate. 
INDUSTRY: Coal. 
STATE: West Bengal. 
Dated: 3.07.2024 


AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section (l) and Sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Government of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2202/3/202-IR(CM-ID) dated 6.08.202] has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer, that is the Management of Monoharbahal Colliery under Salanpur Area of Eastern Coalfields Limited and 
their workman for adjudication by this Tribunal. 


SCHEDULE 


“ Whether the action of the Management of M/s Eastern Coalfields Ltd. in relation to its Manoharbahal 
Colliery under Salanpur Area in dismissing the service of Shri Sunil Kora, UG Loader, U.M. No. //9/69 
vide their letter dated 29-03-2008 is just and legal? If not, to what relief the concerned workman is entitled 
to?” 


On receiving Order No. L-2202/3/202I-IR(CM-ID) dated 6.08.202] from the Government of India 
Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, a Reference case No. 3 of 202 was registered on 
6.08.202 and an order was passed for issuing notice to the parties through registered post, directing them to appear 
and submit their written statements along with relevant documents in support of their claims and a list of their 
witnesses. 


2. Mr. Rakesh Kumar, Union representative on behalf of the aggrieved workman filed a written statement on 
09..202. In brief, the facts leading to this Industrial Dispute as disclosed in the written statement is that Sunil Kora 
was posted as an Underground Loader bearing UM No. 0l69 and was a permanent employee at Monoharbahal 
Colliery under Salanpur Area of Eastern Coalfields Limited (hereinafter referred to as ECL). His date of birth is 
30.2.969 and was appointed under ECL on 7.0!.995. Due to illness Sunil Kora could not attend his duty. A 
Charge Sheet was issued to him on 3.2.2006 for his unauthorized absence from 27.0.2004. Sunil Kora replied to 
the Charge Sheet, informing that due to his illness he was unable to attend duty and was under medical treatment 
during this period. In support of the same he submitted his treatment papers. Instead of allowing him to join his duty 
the management issued Notice for domestic enquiry on 4.02.2008, fixing 9.02.2008 for enquiry. The Enquiry 
Officer held ex-parte enquiry proceeding without ensuring service of Notice upon the workman. Report of enquiry 
was submitted without providing any opportunity to the workman to participate. No 27 Show Cause Notice was 
served upon the workman and in violation to the mandate of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Md. 
Ramzan Khan as well as Circular of the Director (P&IR) of Coal India Limited, an order of dismissal was issued 
against the workman without any opportunity of submitting his representation against the findings of the Enquiry 
Officer. It is contended that the Hon’ble High Court in a catena of decisions made it incumbent upon the management 


4290 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


to issue 274 Show Cause Notice before awarding a punishment of dismissal. The union in support of such contention 
relied upon the decision of the Hon’ble High Court at Calcutta in the case of Bagia Nayak Vs. Coal India Limited 
and Others [W.P. No. 227 of 995]. It is further contended on behalf of the workman that the punishment of 
dismissal of Sunil Kora is disproportionate to the nature of misconduct alleged and lighter punishment should have 
been awarded. The union relied upon the Memorandum of Settlement dated 22.05.2007 signed by the representative 
of management of ECL and all functioning unions at ECL, wherein it had been agreed that a Mercy Appeal of the 
dismissed employee would be considered, if the workman is below forty-five years of age and the period of his 
absence from duty is below nine months, but in the instant case the mercy petition of the workman has not been 
considered. Sunil Kora is without any employment to maintain himself and family. It has been urged that the order of 
dismissal passed against the workman without service of Charge Sheet, Notice of enquiry and 2" Show Cause Notice 
is bad in law, punishment is disproportionate to the charge and the order is liable to be set aside with direction for 
reinstatement of the workman and payment of back wages and other consequential reliefs. 


3. The management of Monoharbahal Colliery contested the Industrial Dispute by filing their written statement on 
20.2.2022, wherein it is admitted that Sunil Kora was posted as Underground Loader at Monoharbahal Colliery 
bearing UM No. |069 and his date of birth is 30.2.969. According to the management of ECL, Sunil Kora was a 
habitual absentee and neglected his duty. His attendance was consecutively recorded as poor and it went down to only 
forty-eight days in a particular year. The specific charge against Sunil Kora is his unauthorized absence from service 
w.e.f. 27.0!.2004 which resulted in issuance of Charge Sheet bearing letter No. MB/06/268 dated 3.2.2006. 
Workman was asked to submit his explanation for his unauthorized absence from work within a week but he 
submitted his reply only on 3l.!2.2007 which was not found satisfactory. Management issued Notice of enquiry 
bearing Ref. No. BMC/Agent/08/l064 dated 3/4.02.2008, directing Sunil Kora to appear before the Enquiry Officer 
on |9.02.2008. Reasonable opportunity of hearing was given to Sunil Kora but he did not participate in the Enquiry 
Proceeding. Enquiry was held on 9.02.2008, 07.03.2008 and 9.03.2008 after issuance of Notice to Sunil Kora but 
the workman did not participate nor did he make any communication with the Enquiry Officer. Finally, an ex-parte 
Enquiry Proceeding was held and the charge mentioned in the Charge Sheet was established against the workman. On 
the basis of the Enquiry Report, the Chief General Manager of Salanpur Area issued a letter dated 29.03.2008, 
dismissing Sunil Kora from service of the company with immediate effect. According to the management the 
workman not only absented in unauthorized manner but he wilfully remained absent which adversely affected the 
work of the company. Management accordingly prayed for dismissing the Industrial Dispute. 


4. In support of his case Sunil Kora examined himself as Workman Witness — | and filed an affidavit-in-chief. In 
course of his evidence, he produced the following documents: 


(i) Copy of his Identity Card has been produced as Exhibit ४४७-।. 

(ii) Copy of the Appointment Letter dated 6.0.995, as Exhibit W-2. 
(ii) Copy of the Letter of dismissal dated 29.03.2008, as Exhibit W-3. 
(iv) Copy of the Mercy application dated 20.0.2020, as Exhibit W-4. 


The main contention in the affidavit-in-chief is that he did not receive any Charge Sheet. No Notice of enquiry 
was served upon him. the Enquiry Officer conducted the enquiry ex-parte without ensuring service of Notice and the 
management without issuing 274 Show Cause Notice, in violation of natural justice imposed an extreme punishment 
against him, which is illegal and he should be allowed to join duty with back wages. 


5. In course of cross-examination the workman admitted his signature on the reply to the Charge Sheet dated 
3.2.2006. His signature has been marked as Exhibit M-| and the reply submitted by him against the Charge Sheet, 
has been marked as Exhibit M-l/l. The workman denied the suggestion that he remained absent from duty 
intentionally till Charge Sheet was issued. 


6. After closure of evidence of workman witness on 22.02.2023 opportunity was extended to the management of 
ECL to adduce evidence and also produce their documents. Mrs. Swapna Basu, learned advocate produced Mr. 
Devendra Kumar, Assistant Manager (Personnel), as Management Witness -| but no affidavit-in-chief was filed. Mr. 
Devendra Kumar was examined-in-chief on oath. 


He produced the following documents : 
(i) Signature of Sunil Kora on reply to the Charge Sheet is marked as Exhibit -] 
(ii) Copy of the Chargesheet dated 3.2.2006 has been produced as Exhibit M-/2. 
(ili) Copy of the reply against the Charge Sheet submitted by Sunil Kora, as Exhibit M-2 and Exhibit M-I/I. 


(iv) Copy of the Notice of enquiry dated 3/4.02.2008 issued to Sunil Kora fixing date for enquiry, as 
Exhibit M-3. 


(v) Copy of the Notice of enquiry dated |.03.2008, as Exhibit M-4. 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 429] 


(vi) Copy of the Notice of enquiry dated 0.03.2008, as Exhibit ४-5. 

(vii) Copy of the Notice of Enquiry Proceeding in two pages, as Exhibit M-6. 

(vili) Copy of the findings of the Enquiry Officer dated 24.03.2008, as Exhibit M-7. 
(ix) Copy of the letter of dismissal dated 29.03.2008, as Exhibit M-8. 


7. The witness was unable to give any clear answers and the case was adjourned to 7.0.2023 for further cross- 
examination of the management witness. In his cross-examination the witness stated that he was not able to produce 
any document to show that Notice of enquiry was served upon the dismissed workman. No evidence has been 
adduced by the management witness regarding service of Notice of enquiry upon the workman. Management witness 
also admitted that no 2"! Show Cause Notice was served upon Sunil Kora and that Sunil Kora had submitted a mercy 
petition. The matter was referred to the Headquarters of ECL but no reply was given to the concerned person. The 
witness denied that the workman was dismissed from service by keeping him in the dark about the Departmental 
Proceeding. 


8. | The moot question which arises for consideration in this case is whether the dismissal of Sunil Kora from 
service on 29.03.2008 is just and legal and whether the concerned workman is entitled to any relief. 


9. | Mr. Rakesh Kumar, Union representative assailing the order of dismissal argued that the management of ECL 
has initiated the Departmental Proceeding against the workman without service of copy of Charge Sheet, Notice of 
enquiry and 27 Show Cause Notice accompanied with Enquiry Proceeding. It is vehemently argued that the entire 
proceeding against the workman is a manifestation of gross violation of natural justice in as much as no opportunity 
was given to Sunil Kora to participate in the Enquiry Proceeding or to raise his defence. It is argued on behalf of the 
dismissed workman that in his reply dated 3.2.2007 (Exhibit M-2), the workman informed that he was unable to 
attend his duty from 27.0.2004 due to his illness and he was under medical treatment at Kelejora BPHC but 
management initiated the Enquiry Proceeding in absence of the workman and without ensuring service of the Notice 
of enquiry upon him. Mr. Rakesh Kumar placed reliance upon a decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the 
case of Union of India and Others vs Mohd. Ramzan Khan [AIR (99) SC 47]], which laid down as follows : 


“ When the Inquiry Officer is not the Disciplinary Authority, the delinquent employee has a right to receive 
a copy of the inquiry officer’s report before the Disciplinary Authority arrives at its conclusion with regard 
to the charges levelled against him. A denial of the inquiry officer’s report before the Disciplinary 
Authority takes its decision on the charges, is denial of opportunity to the employee to prove his innocence 
and is a breach of principles of natural justice.” 


It is argued that the principle of law laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India was resolved to be enforced by 
the Coal India Limited by way of issuing a Circular bearing No. (वा, C-5A(vi)/50774/28 dated 2.05.994, wherein it 
has been clearly laid down that the charged employee had to be supplied with Enquiry Proceeding and Enquiry Report 
and a 27 Show Cause Notice had to be issued to him before taking any final decision of removing him from service. 
It is submitted that in the instant case the management of ECL violated the terms of their own Circular and the 
principle laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. It is argued that due to such violation of natural justice 
and non-compliance of the mandatory provisions of law, the order of dismissal, which is improper and illegal, needs 
to be set aside and the workman should be reinstated in the service with full back wages. 


0. Refuting the contention of the union representative, Mrs. Swapna Basu, learned advocate for the management 
argued that the union has taken a conflicting stand regarding service of Charge Sheet upon the workman. On one hand 
it is stated that he did not receive Charge Sheet but Sunil Kora in his cross-examination admitted his signature on 
reply to the Charge Sheet as Exhibit M-l. Learned advocate for the management referred Exhibit to M-3, M-4 and M- 
5 which are notice of the enquiry, issued in the name of Sunil Kora and argued that three Notice of enquiry were 
issued to the workman on 4.02.2008, 0.03.2008 and .03.2008 and thereby every effort was made to inform the 
absentee workman to attend the Enquiry Proceeding but he did not participate in the same, being aware of the fact that 
a Charge Sheet was issued against him for his habitual absence during the preceding three years and his unauthorized 
absence for more than ten days. Learned advocate argued that the management after giving every opportunity to the 
workman issued an order of dismissal against him for his unauthorized absence, which is a gross misconduct. It is 
submitted that he is not entitled to any relief and the Industrial Dispute is liable to be dismissed. 


ll. Ihave considered the rival arguments advanced on behalf of the union and management and also examined the 
materials on record and evidence adduced by both the parties. The workman initially was in a denial mode and 
claimed that copy of Charge Sheet and Notice of enquiry were not served upon him, thereby he did not have any 
opportunity to participate in the Enquiry Proceeding. In his affidavit-in-chief Sunil Kora in paragraph-6 stated that he 
did not receive the Charge Sheet issued by the management. However, he admitted that he submitted a reply against 
the Charge Sheet, which has been marked as Exhibit M-l/l. The Charge Sheet produced by the management has been 
marked as Exhibit M-/2, which bears an imputation that Sunil Kora absented from duty from 27.0.2004 without any 
leave or authorization and his absence amounted to misconduct under the provision of Clause 26.29 of Certified 


4292 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Standing Order. There is no reference to any charge under Clause 26.23 of Certified Standing Order, which relates to 
‘habitual absence’. The Charge Sheet also disclosed that his service would be terminated from the date of his 
unauthorized absence unless a satisfactory explanation was submitted within a week. The management of ECL has 
not been able to produce document to prove that Charge Sheet was served upon the workman within time. However, a 
delayed reply to the Charge Sheet by the workman dated 3!.2.2007 amply proves that the workman was informed 
about the charge levelled against him for his unauthorized absence. It may be gathered from the reply dated 
3.2.2007 that the workman was actually absent from duty for more than four years. The ground for absence is 
disclosed in his reply that he was suffering from serious disease and he was under medical treatment at Kelejora 
BPHC. It can well be assumed that a person suffering from serious ailment for four years, which allegedly prevented 
him from attending his work would have proceed to a higher centre for advance medical treatment. The workman did 
not disclose the nature of ailment and was far short of producing medical documents in support of his ailment. Even at 
this stage of the Industrial Dispute, when opportunity was given to the workman, he could not produce a single 
document relating to his medical treatment. The misconduct of the workman is abjectly disapproving. 


2. Be that as it may, a misconduct however serious and grave it may be, the ultimate decision has to be arrived by 
following the principle established by law. It would now be appropriate to consider the mode and manner in which the 
management of ECL has delt with the charged employee before dismissing him from service. The management in 
course of their evidence has produced a copy reminder of the Charge Sheet but the same bears the date of Charge 
Sheet as 3.2.2006. No evidence has been adduced by the management to prove the mode in which the Notice of 
enquiry dated 3/4.02.2008, 0.03.2008 and .03.2008 were transmitted to the workman and whether any of such 
notice was served upon the addressee. Exhibit M-6 reveals that the Enquiry Proceeding was taken up on 9.02.2008, 
07.03.2008 and 9.03.2008. In order dated 07.03.2008 the Enquiry Officer has stated that reply of the Charge Sheet 
dated 02.0.2008 along with some treatment papers were submitted by the chargesheeted workman. No copy of reply 
to the Charge Sheet dated 02.0.2008 has been produced by the management before this Tribunal. On none of the 
dates fixed for enquiry the Enquiry Officer recorded his satisfaction about service of Notice of enquiry upon the 
workman. While recording the statement of the Management Representative on 9.03.2008 the name of the 
management representative has neither been recorded nor has he recorded the statement of M.R. in first person. In the 
Enquiry Report dated 24.03.2008, produced as Exhibit M-7, the Enquiry Officer did not consider the contents of the 
treatment papers admittedly been submitted by the workman along with the reply to the Charge Sheet. After 
concluding the Enquiry Proceeding admittedly no 27 Show Cause Notice nor any copy of Enquiry Report was served 
upon the workman, seeking his explanation or representation. No formal charge was framed by the Enquiry Officer 
and in his report, there is no whisper as to the provision of the Clause under which the workman was found guilty. 
The Enquiry Proceeding appears to be an outcome of paperwork by the management. I further find that even in the 
letter of dismissal the Chief General Manager of Salanpur Area has not referred to the relevant Clause of the Certified 
Standing Order under which the accused workman was found guilty. 


In the instant case Mr. B. N. Pandey, Enquiry Officer and the Competent authority are different persons. As such non- 
issuance of 2"' Show Cause Notice to the workman amounted to the violation of the principles of natural justice as 
well as the mandate of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Union of India and Others vs Mohd. 
Ramzan Khan [AIR (499) SC 47], which laid down that when the Inquiry Officer is not the Disciplinary 
Authority, the delinquent employee has a right to receive a copy of the inquiry officer’s report before the Disciplinary 
Authority arrives at its conclusion with regard to the charges levelled against him, which has been duly adopted by the 
Coal India Limited in their Circular bearing No. CIL C-5A(vi)/50774/28 dated 2.05.994. 


3. The conduct of the workman who has remained absent for more than four years from his place of duty in 
unauthorized manner certainly deserves no sympathy and he has grossly abused his right contingent to service. 
Despite such fact I am unable to waive the legal necessities which were required to be fulfilled by the management 
before arriving at a decision of terminating the workman from his service. The procedure adopted by the management 
is itself violative of the principle of natural justice and hence the same is unacceptable and the order of dismissal 
dated 29.03.2008 is set aside. Sunil Kora, the dismissed workman is entitled to be reinstated in service more for the 
laches on the part of the management of ECL. The workman not having rendered any service to the company for 
several years and without any evidence on his part that he was not gainfully employed at any other place for his 
livelihood, I am not inclined to grant him the relief of any back wages during his period of absence. The period of 
absence from 27.0.2004 till the date of his joining shall be treated as dies non and he shall be entitled to the 
continuity of service. The Industrial Dispute is accordingly decided in favour of the workman. 


Hence, 
ORDERED 


that the Industrial Dispute is decided in favour of the workman on contest. The order of dismissal of Sunil Kora 
from service bearing Ref. No. C-6/36/P-2937 dated 29.03.2008 issued by the Chief General Manager of Salanpur 
Area of ECL is not sustainable under the law and is set aside. the management of ECL is directed to reinstate Sunil 
Kora within one (l) month from the date of communication of this Award. The workman shall not be entitled to any 
back wages. The period of absence from 27.0!.2004 till the date of his joining shall be treated as dies non and he shall 


[भाग [—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4293 


be entitled to continuity of service. Let an award be drawn up in light of my above findings. Let copies of the Award 
in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour, Government of India, New Delhi for information and Notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. (866.—sieifie = विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार ई.सी.एल.के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, आसनसोल के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 42/2020) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 28/09/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[फा. सं. एल-2202/99/209-आई.आर. (सी.एम-ा)] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 26th September, 2024 


5.0. 866.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Reference.I.D.No. 2/2020) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management 
of E.C.L and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 28/08/2024 


[F. No. L-2202/99/209 — IR (CM-ID)] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM- LABOUR COURT, ASANSOL. 


PRESENT: = Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 
Presiding Officer, 
C.G.LT-cum-L.C., Asansol. 


REFERENCE CASE NO. [2 OF 2020 
PARTIES: Nand Kishor Rajak 
(dependent son of Late Brahmadeo Rajak) 


Vs. 
Management of Jambad Colliery of ECL 
REPRESENTATIVES: 
For the Union/Workman: Mr. Rakesh Kumar, President, Koyala Mazdoor Congress. 
For the Management of ECL: Mr. P. K. Das, Advocate. 
INDUSTRY: Coal. 
STATE: West Bengal. 
Dated: 24.07.2024 


AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section (l) and Sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Government of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2202/99/209-IR(CM-II) dated 06.02.2020 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer, that is the Management of Jambad Colliery under Kajora Area of Eastern Coalfields Limited and their 
workman for adjudication by this Tribunal. 


4294 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


SCHEDULE 


“ Whether the demand of Koyala Mazdoor Congress (HMS), Asansol for providing employment on 
compassionate ground to Shri Nand Kishore Rajak S/o Late Bramhdev Rajak, Ex-Pump Khalasi of Jambad 
Colliery under Kajora Area who expired on 76.7./999, by M/s. Eastern Coalfields Ltd. is justified? If so, 
what relief Shri Nand Kishore Rajak S/o Late Bramhdev Rajak is entitled to and to what extent? ” 


l. On receiving Order No. L-2202/99/209-IR(CM-II) dated 06.02.2020 from the Government of India, 
Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, a Reference case No. 2 of 2020 was registered on 
24.02.2020 and an order was passed for issuing notice to the parties through registered post, directing them to appear 
and submit their written statements along with relevant documents in support of their claims and a list of witnesses. 


2. Management of Eastern Coalfields Limited (hereinafter referred to as ECL) contesting the Industrial Dispute, 
filed their written statement on 2.09.2022. 


Nand Kishor Rajak, son of the deceased employee filed his written statement on 24.0.2023 through Mr. Rakesh 
Kumar, President, Koyala Mazdoor Congress. The dispute in this case is that Brahmadeo Rajak was a permanent 
employee of Jambad Colliery who died on 6.07.999 in harness. Nand Kishor Rajak, the dependent son was not 
provided with employment as a dependent. Whether such act on part of the management is justified and the relief to 
which the dependent is entitled to. The fact of the case disclosed in the written statement of the union is that 
Brahmadeo Rajak, Ex-Pump Operator, having UM No. 536566 was posted at Jambad Colliery under Kajora Area of 
ECL and he died on 6.07.999, while in the service of the company. According to the Clause 9.5.0 of National Coal 
Wage Agreement (hereinafter referred to as NCWA) applicable to the Coal Industry, one dependent of the deceased 
employee is entitled to get employment. Asha Devi, wife of the deceased employee applied for providing employment 
to her and submitted relevant document before the management of Jambad Colliery. She was asked to appear before 
the Screening Committee of the Colliery for her employment and the employment proposal was forwarded to the 
Area Office. Asha Devi was called before the Screening Committee on 08.07.2003. After her screening she was 
referred before the Initial Medical Examination Board (hereinafter referred to as the IME Board). The proposal of 
employment of Asha Devi was forwarded to the Head Quarters of ECL. The management of ECL discouraged 
employment of female dependent and the proposal for her employment was kept pending for several years. The 
management of ECL persuaded Asha Devi to accept monetary compensation in lieu of employment but she did not 
accept the same and instead she requested the management for employment of Nand Kishor Rajak, the dependent son. 
An Industrial Dispute was raised before the Assistant Labour Commissioner (Central), Raniganj over the claim for 
employment by the dependent son. During the conciliation proceeding management agreed to process the 
employment proposal of the dependent son and a Memorandum of Settlement was signed. In accordance with 
such settlement Nand Kishor Rajak submitted his documents in support of his claim. He appeared before the 
Screening Committee at the Colliery level. The management verified his relationship with Brahmadeo Rajak through 
Police authority at his native place and after receiving the report, the committee recommended his employment. 
Screening was done at Area level and he was examined by the IME Board, where he was found medically fit for 
employment. The Area General Manager recommended the proposal of employment to the ECL Head Quarters. 
Several quarries made by the Personnel Manager (EMPL), ECL Head Quarters, which were all complied by Nand 
Kishor Rajak. After ten years the management of ECL regretted the proposal for employment of the son on the 
ground that his claim for employment was made after a delay. 


3. It is the case of the union that initially the dependent wife of the deceased employee submitted the claim for 
employment after the death of her husband but the matter was kept pending. Thereafter, the dependent son applied for 
employment and his subsequent application was in continuation of the earlier claim of his mother and the company 
cannot regret the claim for employment on the ground that it was a delayed claim. Union asserted that the 
management by not taking any decision delayed the matter for which the dependents of workman cannot suffer. The 
contention of Nand Kishor Rajak is that he has no source of income for his livelihood and he is badly in need of the 
employment. The union asserted that the provision for employment to the dependent is based upon the decision of the 
Coal India Limited, which was adopted by the Joint Bipartite Committee for the Coal Industry in NCWA and the 
same cannot be treated as compassionate appointment for the dependent. It is asserted that the management is under 
an obligation, be directed to provide employment to the dependent son and pay monetary compensation to the wife of 
Brahmadeo Rajak from the date of death of the employee up to the date of providing employment to the dependent 
son. In support of the claim for employment the union relied upon a decision of the Hon’ble High Court at Calcutta in 
the case of Jagadish Bouri @ Madhu Bouri Vs. Union of India and Others [MAT 49 of 2024 with IA No. CAN 
l of 2024, CAN 2 of 2024], wherein the Hon’ble Division Bench had granted the prayer for employment of the 
dependent son even after claim for employment was kept pending for several years. 


4. The Agent of Jambad Colliery, representing the management of ECL, in their written statement, refuted the 
claim for employment of the dependent son. It is their specific case that Nand Kishor Rajak submitted the application 
for compassionate appointment on 07..20ll. The matter was examined and the proposal for employment was 
processed. The Screening committee and the IME Board held necessary screening and medical examination at the 
Area level. The genuineness of relationship of the claimant with the deceased employee was also established but the 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4295 


competent authority did not provide employment to the dependent son on the ground that the case is liable to be 
rejected as per the decision of the Hon’ble High Court at Calcutta in the case of Nemai Kumar Vs. CIL and Others the 
claim of the dependent was rejected on the ground of delay. 


5. According to the management more than eleven years have passed since the death of the employee and the 
dependent son has submitted his application for employment after inordinate delay. It is further contended that the 
compassionate employment is not a vested right and it is provided to the family of the deceased employee to tide over 
the financial crisis due to sudden death of sole bread earner. In the present case the application for employment was 
field after a very long time and the claim for employment would fail for such delay. In support of their contention 
management of ECL relied upon a decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Eastern Coalfields 
Limited Vs. Anil Badyakar and Others [AIR 2009 SC 2534]. The management accordingly prayed for dismissal of 
the Industrial Dispute. 


6. On behalf of the union, Nand Kishor Rajak filed his affidavit-in-chief reiterating the facts of the case and 
examined himself as Workman Witness - |. In course of his examination-in-chief, the witness produced a letter dated 
27.08.208 by which the management regretted the proposal for employment of Nand Kishor Rajak, which has been 
marked as Exhibit W-l2. The witness submitted an application before the management on 20.!2.208 for 
reconsidering the proposal for employment. The workman witness produced the following documents in support of 
his case: 


(i) Copy of the Death Certificate of Brahmadeo Rajak is produced as Exhibit W-]. 
(ii) Copy of the Identity card of Brahmadeo Rajak, as Exhibit W-2. 
(ili) Copy of the Service Record Excerpt of Brahmadeo Rajak is produced as Exhibit W-3. 


(iv) Copy of the letter dated 07.07.2003 issued by the Personnel Manager, Jambad Colliery addressed to Asha 
Devi, as Exhibit W-4. 


(v) Copy of the letter dated 20.08.2003 issued by the Personnel Manager, Jambad Colliery for pre- 
employment medical examination of Asha Devi, as Exhibit W-5 


(vi) Copy of the letter dated 2.02.2007 regarding payment of family pension, as Exhibit W-6. 
(vii) Copy of the application dated 20.0!.200 filed by Nand Kishor Rajak, claiming employment, as Exhibit 
W-7. 
(vili) Copy of the letter of Nand Kishor Rajak dated 07..20I, filing documents, as Exhibit W-8. 


(ix) Copy of the employment proposal of Nand Kishor Rajak issued by the management of the Colliery and 
forwarded to the Area Office, as Exhibit W-9. 


(x) Copy of the Memorandum of Settlement dated 3.06.204, as Exhibit W-0. 


(xi) Copy of the Report dated 24.02.206 of three men committee for genuinity of relationship between Nand 
Kishor Rajak and the deceased employee, as Exhibit W-. 


(xii) Copy of the letter dated 27.08.20l8 issued by the Senior Manager (Personnel) Empl/ED, regretting 
employment proposal of Nand Kishor Rajak, as Exhibit W-2. 


(xili) Copy of the letter dated 8..20l8 issued by Agent Jambad Collery to Nand Kishor Rajak, rejecting 
claim for employment as Exhibit ४-3. 


(xiv) Copy of the application of Nand Kishor Rajak dated 20.2.208 for review of the decision for providing 
employment, as Exhibit W-4. 


(xv) Copy of the No Objection Certificate from the other legal heirs of Brahmadeo Rajak, as Exhibit W-5. 
(xvi) Copy of the Aadhaar Card of Nand Kishor Rajak, as Exhibit W-6. 
(xvii) Copy of the Voter Identity Card of Nand Kishor Rajak, as Exhibit W-7. 


7. In course of cross-examination the workman witness deposed that his date of birth is 0.0I.984 and he studied 
up to Class — IV. At the time of his father’s death his grandfather was alive and his grandfather did not agree to the 
employment of his mother, as he wanted his other son to get the employment in place of Brahmadeo Rajak. Witness 
admitted that his mother did not agree to accept monetary compensation and she wanted her son to get employment. 
The witness also admitted that he submitted his first application before ECL in the year 2009 after they regretted the 
employment proposal of his mother. Copy of such application could not be produced by the witness. 


8. Mr. Ramjee Tripathi, Assistant Manager (Personnel), Jambad Colliery, filed his affidavit-in-chief on behalf 
of the management and was examined as Management Witness — |. It is averred in the affidavit-in-chief that 
Brahmadeo Rajak, workman of Jambad Colliery died an unnatural death on l6.07.999 while in service. He also 


4296 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


stated that as per NCWA one of the eligible dependents of the family of the deceased workman is entitled to get 
compassionate employment for sustaining the family. Nand Kishor Rajak submitted his application for employment 
on 07..20l and after examining the matter the proposal for employment was processed. The Colliery Screening 
Committee held screening test on 29.0!.203 and the Initial Medical Examination (hereinafter referred to as IME) 
was done on 03.04.205. Subsequently, a screening was done at Area level on 29.04.205. The relationship of the 
claimant with the deceased employee was also considered on 3.03.20l6. The management then declined to provide 
employment on the ground that more than eleven years have passed after the death of the employee and the proposal 
was regretted. The witness produced following documents in support of the management’s case : 


(i) Copy of the Death Certificate of Brahmadeo Rajak has been produced as Exhibit M-I. 

(ii) Copy of the Service Record Excerpt of Brahmadeo Rajak, as Exhibit M-2. 
(ili) Copy of the application of Nand Kishor Rajak dated 07..20I, claiming employment, as Exhibit M-3. 
(iv) Copy of the letter dated .0.203 for screening of Nand Kishor Rajak, as Exhibit M-4. 


(v) Copy of the Notice dated 02.04.205 for appearance of Nand Kishor Rajak before the IME Board, as 
Exhibit M-5. 


(vi) Copy of the letter dated 27.08.208 issued by the Senior Manager (Personnel) Empl/ED, regretting the 
employment proposal of Nand Kishor Rajak, as Exhibit M-6. 


(vii) Copy of the report of pre-employment medical examination of Nand Kishor Rajak, as Exhibit M-7. 
(vili) Copy of the Internal Circular of ECL dated 4.05.205, as Exhibit M-8. 


9. In cross-examination the material statement made by the management witness is that the application for 
employment was submitted in the year 20!, whereas his father died in the year 999. Regarding Exhibit M-6, where 
a reference is made to the case of Nemai Kumar Vs. CIL and Others, the witness responded that the Senior Manager 
(Personnel) EMPL/ED has not mentioned the citation and number of the case on the basis of which the employment 
proposal of Nand Kishor Rajak was regretted. The witness produced a copy of Internal Circular of ECL dated 
4.05.205, whereby a dependent is required to submit an application, claiming employment within five years from 
the date of death of the workman. 


0.. Mr. Rakesh Kumar, Union representative, arguing the case for Nand Kishor Rajak submitted that on the 
premature death of Brahmadeo Rajak, the employee, his wife Asha Devi claimed for employment as dependent 
according to the provisions of Clause 9.5.0 of NCWA. After Screening and IME the proposal for her employment was 
forwarded to the Headquarters of ECL but no action was taken. The management tried to dissuade her from her claim 
for employment and persisted her to remain content with monetary compensation. Due to such treatment by the 
management of the employer company, Asha Devi was in dark regarding the fate of her employment. Nand Kishor 
Rajak, the dependent son was a minor at the time of his father’s death in the year 999. On attaining majority, when 
his mother’s prayer for employment was pending final consideration, the son submitted an application claiming 
employment as a dependent. The management delayed in processing the prayer for employment by several years and 
ultimately on 27.08.20l8 (Exhibit M-6) a regret letter was sent to Nand Kishor Rajak, rejecting his claim for 
employment on the ground of delay. The union presentative vehemently argued that the management of the 
company has violated the agreed terms of NCWA by not providing employment and causing suffering to the family 
of the dependent. It is argued that if there was any delay, it is due to acts and omission of the management of the 
company and not due to the family member of the deceased employee. Mr. Kumar argued that Asha Devi is entitled 
to a monetary compensation from the date of death of her husband on 6.07.999 till the date of employment, 
provided to the dependent son. In support of his claim, a reliance is placed upon a decision of the Hon’ble High Court 
at Calcutta in the case of Jagadish Bouri @ Madhu Bouri Vs. Union of India and Others [MAT 49 of 2024 with 
IA No. CAN ] of 2024, CAN 2 of 2024]. 


ll. Contrary to the argument advanced by the union representative, Mr. P. K. Das, learned advocate for the 
management of ECL argued that the Tribunal has to adjudicate the scheduled dispute, which relates to the claim for 
employment of Nand Kishor Rajak and not the claim for employment of Asha Devi. Referring to the evidence on 
record Mr. Das submitted that it is undisputed that Brahmadeo Rajak, the father of Nand Kishor Rajak, died an 
unnatural death while in service of the company. Referring to the Internal Circular of ECL dated 4.05.20I5 it is 
submitted that a claim for employment has to be made within five years from the date of death of the employee, but in 
the instant case the application, claiming employment was submitted by Nand Kishor Rajak for the first time on 
20.0.200 (Exhibit W-7), which is eleven years after the death of his father. Learned advocate submitted that such 
inordinate delay has destroyed the claim for employment of the dependent son and the company accordingly regretted 
the prayer for employment on the ground of delay, which is an established principle of law and upheld by the court of 
law in many cases. 


[भाग [—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4297 


2. The point for consideration at this juxtapose is whether the demand for providing employment to Nand Kishor 
Rajak on compassionate ground on the death of his father on 6.07.999 is justified and whether he is entitled to 
any relief. 


l3. Having considered the argument advanced by the learned advocate of ECL and the union representative and 
evidence on record, it would appear from the cross-examination of Nand Kishor Rajak that his date of birth is 
0.0.984 and he was a minor at the time of his father’s death. There is no case of the workman that any application 
was filed by Asha Devi before the company for maintaining the name of Nand Kishor Rajak in the live roster for 
employment on his attaining majority. The contrary case of the union is that the wife applied for her own employment 
in place of her husband. Nand Kishor Rajak for the first time submitted an application before the management, 
claiming employment after ten and a half years from the date of death of his father. It goes without saying that Nand 
Kishor Rajak has far exceeded the time, permissible for submitting the application for employment. The management 
cannot be expected to speculate and presume that a son will seek employment after a such long time nor the employer 
would be expected to provide employment after any duration of time. 


4. It is however absolutely inappropriate on the part of the management to remain silent regarding employment of 
the wife of deceased employee, having no disqualification at the time she submitted her application. The conduct of 
the officials of the management in prolonging the proceedings for employment without any promptitude does not 
inspire confidence in my mind in the matter of compliance of the terms of NCWA. The Hon’ble Division Bench of 
the Hon’ble High Court at Calcutta in the case of Jagadish Bouri @ Madhu Bouri Vs. Union of India and Others 
[MAT 49 of 2024 with IA No. CAN | of 2024, CAN 2 of 2024], while examining such trend of management has 
appropriately observed as follows : 


“ ....... It appears that the procedure adopted by ECL, is unusually lengthy and opaque and necessary 
assistance is not being provided to the illiterate, impoverished, financially weak dependants of the 
deceased employee. We are of the view that the welfare measures sought to be achieved by the NCWA has 
been followed more in breach than in observance. .......” 


In the instant case Nand Kishor Rajak is victim of circumstances who has followed suit in claim for employment after 
his mother. In the meantime, laches developed on his part due to delay and the management has taken full advantage 
of the situation which could have been otherwise treated in a ‘welfare society’. In the present case I do not find merit 
in the claim of the union for providing employment to the dependent son for the inordinate delay in raising the claim 
for employment. 


l5. Inthe instant case invoking the jurisdiction under Section !lA of Industrial Disputes Act, |947, the appropriate 
relief according to me which can be provided to the family of the dependent is monetary compensation to Asha Devi 
from the date of death of her husband on 6.07.999 till she attains sixty years of age. The management of the 
company is directed to disburse the monetary compensation to Asha Devi on account to her husband’s untimely death 
within a period of two months from the date of communication of Award. In default, the management shall be liable 
to pay an interest of nine percent (9%) per annum on the accumulated sum of the monetary compensation from the 
time specified. The Industrial Dispute is accordingly disposed of in part, in favour of the union. 


Hence, 
ORDERED 


that the Industrial Dispute is allowed in part. The claim for employment of Nand Kishor Rajak as a dependent 
under ECL is disallowed. The management is directed to pay the monetary compensation to Asha Devi, wife of 
the deceased employee for not providing employment to the dependent family member w.e.f. 6.07.999 till she 
attained sixty years of age. The monetary compensation to be paid within two (2) months from the date of 
communication of the Award. In default, the management shall be liable to pay an interest of nine percent (9%) per 
annum on the accumulated sum of the monetary compensation till payment. An award be drawn up in light of my 
above findings. Let copies of the Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour, Government of India, New 
Delhi for information and Notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 867.— aie = विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
बी. बी. एम. बी. के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 


4298 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह - श्रम न्यायालय नंबर Il चंडीगढ़ के care (संदर्भ संख्या 246/2005) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 29/08/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[फा. सं. Va—2302/20/2004-arg. आर. (H.C4-ID] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 26th September, 2024 


5.0. 867.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No.246/2005) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court NO 2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of BBMB and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 29/08/2024 


[F. No. L-2302/20/2004— IR (CM-ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh. 
Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 


ID No. 246 /2005 

Registered on:- 09.08.2005 

Daulat Ram S/o Mani Ram C/o Shri Hem Prabh S/o Sh. Bali Ram, R/o Village Bhayarta, P.O. Chanahan, Teh. & 
Distt. Mandi (HP). 


teeeeeeeeeee Workman 
Versus 
l. | Bhakra Beas management Board, Madhya Marg, Sector 9-B, Chandigarh through its Chairman. 
2. The Chief Engineer, BSL Project Sundernagar Township, Distt. Mandi, (HP). 
.... Respondents/Managements 
AWARD 
Passed on:- 5.07.2024 


Central Government vide Notification No.L-2302/20/2004-IR(CM-ID, dated 07.07.2005, under clause (d) of 
sub-section (l) of Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947(hereinafter called the Act), has referred the 
following Industrial dispute for adjudication to this Tribunal: - 


“Whether the demand of Shri Daulat Ram for reinstatement in the services of BBMB, Sunder Nagar is legal 
and justified? If so, to what relief the concerned workman is entitled and from which date? 


l. The brief facts, related to the case are that the construction of Beas Sutluj Link Project{hereinafter called as 
BSL(P)} started in the year 962 under Beas Control Board, which was constituted on 0.02.96l with its 
headquarter at Sundernagar and this project was under the control of Centre Government, who had been constructing, 
maintaining, operating and administrating it through various Boards in different phases. After passing of Pb. Re- 
Organisation Act, l966(hereinafter called “Re-Organisation Act”) Beas Control Board was replaced by Beas 
Construction Board (hereinafter called “BCB”). The workman was employed by BCB on 0.0.97l. The workman 
who was employed in Beas Project(Unit-l) become the employee of Bhakra Beas Management Board(hereinafter 
called as BBMB) in pursuance of proviso (l) of Section 80(3) and Section 80(5) of Re-organisation Act and the 
workman become the employee of the Centre Government under the management of B.B.M.B. from 5.05.976. The 
workman has completed 240 days in every calendar year and was not interrupted till his retrenchment. The employer 
made a bulk retrenchment of project employees in the year 4977 and 978 and also in stages thereafter till !984. The 
workman was also retrenched by the employer on 29..!978 on account of reduction in strength due to part 
completion of the BSL(P) and re-employment certificate was issued by the office of re-settlement B.S.L/B.B.M.B. 
Sundernagar for the re-employment of the retrenched workmen of B.S.L.(P)(BBMB) in accordance with provision of 
the Act. After the retrenchment of the workman, thousands of other persons were appointed secretly by employer, 
violating Section 25-G and Section 25-H of the I.D. Act, 947. The employer is also doing unfair labour practices as 
defined in Section 2(R)A of the ID Act. Management has also violated the provisions of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4299 


Dispute(Central) Rule, !957(hereinafter called “The Industrial Rules”). By filling vacant posts, the employer declared 
some posts as surplus and retrenched the employees working on those posts. 


2. It is also maintained that the present workman and other workmen have filed a Civil Writ Petition 
२0०.403/[996, titled as Sant Ram and 87 others Vs. BBMB in the Hon’ble High Court of Shimla for their re- 
employment and in the said writ petition management filed reply dated 6.04.996 by way of affidavit and admitted 
that retrenched workmen are employee of BBMB. The workmen have then withdrew the writ petition and filed civil 
suits for declaring them as a retrenched workmen of BBMB before the Sub-Judge, [7 Class, Sunder Nagar, Distt. 
Mandi(HP), on 2.0.!997 and later on those suits were decided on 05.07.2002 and all plaints were returned to the 
workmen to be filed before the competent authority on the basis of which the present proceedings were initiated after 
referring of the dispute of workman from the Ministry of Labour on 07.07.2005. Thereafter, management filed writ 
petition before the Hon’ble Punjab & Haryana High Court against the order of Ministry on 07.07.2005 and the same 
was dismissed on 07.05.2007 and Special Leave Petition filed bearing nos.!6939-!7007 of 2007 in Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India by the management was also dismissed on 08.07.204. It is therefore, prayed that the claim petition of 
the workman may kindly be allowed and workman be continued in the service of the management and be regularized 
and further be given all the consequential benefits. 


3. Management filed written statement, alleging therein that workman is Ex-work charged employee of Beas 
Construction Board, which was constituted under Section 80(.) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was 
retrenched after completion of the work of BCB in the year 978. The workman was paid terminal benefits i.e. 
retrenchment compensation, gratuity, ex-gratia amount on account of his retrenchment from BCB as per provisions of 
ID Act. It is further maintained that BCB and present management are two distinct and separate entities. It is also 
maintained that construction of Beas Project was undertaken by the Punjab Govt. Irrigation Department prior to the 
re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab on 0I.0!.966. After re-organisation the work of BSL(P) was taken 
over by the Central Govt. on behalf of partner states of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The Central Govt. constituted 
BCB under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act and further stipulated that any component of Beas Project in 
relation to which the construction has been completed be transferred by the Central Govt. to Bhakra Management 
Board(hereinafter called as BMB) constituted under Section 79(l) of the Re-organisation Act. It is further stated 
under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act that BMB would be re-named as BBMB when any component of Beas 
Project was transferred under Section 80(6) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was employed by the BCB. 
Thus, the workman never remained the employee of management. However, it is stated that !093 work-charged and 
2 contingent paid employees of Beas Project were sent on job order basis to Ranjit Sagar Dam, Punjab. They were 
taken over by the management under the benevolent policy of the Central Govt. as Central Govt. had given directions 
to BBMB to absorb these employees. The remaining work-charged employees were not entitled for the said benefit. 
Even work-charged employees of the BCB had filed a petition in the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, titled as 
Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., /979 SCC 440, in which their claim for absorbing them in 
BBMB is not granted instead their retrenchment from BCB was upheld. Remaining averments have been denied and 
it is stated that the claim of the workman is hopelessly time barred and the workman has no legal enforceable right to 
claim employment in BBMB. It is prayed that claim be dismiss. 


4. A replication was also filed by workman contravening the facts taken in written statement as reiterating the 
facts as stated in claim petition. 


5. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 


6. The workman has examined himself as WWI and filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WWI/A and has been 
cross-examined by the learned law officer of management. He also placed on Discharge Certificate (Ex.AWI/A), 
Identity card (७5.0७ ]/७) and (Ex.AWI/C) and also school leaving certificate (Ex.AW/D). 


7. Moreover, no evidence has been given by the management in this case. Vide order dated 03.03.202] the then 
Presiding Officer, A.K. Singh fixed the case for filing written arguments and the case remained pending for 
arguments. Even no evidence has been led by the management in this case. 


8. While arguing the case, learned Law Officer for the management contended that initially Beas Control Board 
was constituted in the year 960. BCB was constituted in the year 966 and all the projects were transferred from 
Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB 
was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. 
Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be 
re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the 
BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project have been so transferred. All the projects under 
BCB were completed in the year !984 and BCB ceased to exist in !984. Present workman was employed as work 
charged employee on 0.0.97l and was retrenched on 29..978. All similar work charged employees including 
the present workman was engaged by the BCB which ceased to exist in the year 984 therefore, the workmen cannot 
be termed as the employees of the BBMB because there does not exist BCB which was his parent department. 


Moreover, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case titled as Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., 


4300 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


2929 SCC 440 has held that work charged employees were bound by the settlement dated June 28, 977 effected by 
the management and also by the award 2-C of the year 97l before Sh. H.R. Sodhi, Presiding Officer, CGIT- 
Chandigarh between workman and employees of the Beas Construction Board, Sunder Nagar and published in the 
gazette on 5.06.974 of the Govt. of India. 


9. So far as the claim of the workman regarding re-employment after retrenchment on 29..978 is concerned, 
workman was not entitled for re-instatement as in a case under reference no.2-C of 97] decided by Sh. H.R. Sodhi, 
the then Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh, it was held that management in order to establish an industrial peace 
and to secure the work charge employees after completing the work can engage after completion of project at any 
time within 6 months for the maintenance of staff for project of any work if it is required to those work charged 
employees in order to seniority who have put l0 years of service. The relevant portion of para is reproduced as below: 


“It is accordingly, directed that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six 
months thereof for the maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be 
recruited or transferred from any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, 
the offer shall first be made to the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 
years’ continuous service or more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs 
subject to the medical fitness of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will 
not, however, be disturbed to their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected.“ 


0. Because the present workman had not completed 0 years of service so he is not entitled for re-employment. 
Learned representative for the management further contended that in this case workman was retrenched on 
29..978 after receiving due retrenchment compensation etc. and now he is claiming re-employment under Section 
25-H of the Act and his claim is hopelessly time barred as he has filed the present claim petition on 20.07.2005. To 
support this view he has placed reliance in the case titled as Chief Engineer Ranjit Sagar Dam & Anr. Vs. Sham Lal, 
AIR 2006, Supreme Court 2682, wherein in identical matters Court has not entertained writ petition due to inordinate 
delay. In the present case there is a delay of about 27 years. He also relied upon the case titled as Ram Chand Vs. The 
BBMB and another, CWP_no.2787 of 2078, decided on 0३. 72. 20/68(00765प्रा6 R-4) where the Hon’ble Himachal 
Pradesh High Court has held that dispute if any ought to be raised within a reasonable period as the ID Act does not 
prescribed time limit for referring such dispute. In the present case workman was engaged as Beldar in the year 97] 
and was discharged on 29..978 and he has sought re-employment after 34 years which was held to be highly time 
barred. Thus, he contended that claim of workman is time barred. Workman was discharged on 29..978 and 
thereafter he filed present claim before the Labour Conciliation Officer. 


ll. While arguing the case, learned AR for the workman contended that in this case workman was discharged on 
29..978 due to reduction in strength and he was issued discharge certificate by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB 
Sundernagar. He referred to Section 25-H of the ID Act which provides re-employment of retrenched workman. He 
further has drawn the attention of the Court towards the statement of the workman. He was required to be adjust in 
view of under Section 25-G of the Act by the management Discharge Certificate was issued by the Management. He 
was not given any employment. While arguing further, learned AR for the workman referred to Rule 77 and 78 of the 
Industrial Dispute Central Rule 957(hereinafter called Industrial Rule). Rule 77 provides maintenance of seniority 
list of workman and it states that before any worker is retrenched the appellant-establishment is required to place on 
the notice board the seniority list of all the workmen who were to be retrenched but nothing has been done in this 
regard before retrenchment of the present worker. She also referred to Rule 78 which provides that as and when any 
vacancy incurred then retrenched workmen were required to be given registered notice but nothing was done by the 
management. Moreover, question of limitation does not arise as no limitation period has been prescribed under the 
Act for seeking relief under Clause (d) of Sub-Section () of Section l0 of the ID Act. Learned AR for the workman 
further contended that even reference made by the Government dated 07.07.2005 was challenged by the management 
in the Hon’ble Punjab & Haryana High Court vide Writ Petition ।२०.३(00 of 2006 and their writ petition was 
dismissed by the Hon’ble High Court on 07.05.2007. Even SLP filed against the order dated 07.05.2007 was upheld 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in SLP No. 6979/2007 dated 08.07.204. 


2. Ihave given due consideration to the arguments advanced by the learned AR for the workman and also for the 
management. 


3. The management relied upon mainly in this case on the case titled as Jaswant Singh and another(supra), 
which is very material for decision of this case. The said judgment deals with two types of petitioners. First type of 
petitioners were employed by the BCB on purely temporary basis and they had also given written undertaking 
confirming the term of their appointment. The BCB appointed the first type of petitioners on ad hoc basis with a clear 
understanding that they will have no right to be retained in service after the completion of the Beas Project. They are 
Engineers, Section Officer, Accounts Clerk, Teacher etc. and they have claimed their parity with other employees 
who belonged to the services of the Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan Governments and who were serving on deputation 
in connection with the works of the BhakraNangal Scheme. 


4. Inrespect of these employees, it was held as follow:- 


[भाग I— ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 430I 


“To sum up, we are of the opinion that the petitioners are employees of the Central Government. Their 
conditions of service will be primarily governed by the terms of their appointment but, if they are entitled 
to the benefit of any of the rules of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules 7965, they may 
make representations in that behalf to the appropriate authorities. It is, however, not possible for this 
Court to grant to the petitioners any of the reliefs claimed by them as arising out of the provisions of the 
aforesaid rules, including the relief by way of a declaration that they shall be deemed to be in quasi- 
permanent service under rule 3. We are further of the opinion that the petitioners have no right to be 
transferred to the services of the Bhakra Management Board, now re-named as the Bhakra Beas 
Management Board. Lastly, the proposed retrenchment of the 


petitioners does not offend against the guarantee of equality contained in articles ॥4 and 76 of the 
Constitution, since the petitioners and the Deputationists belong to two different and distinct classes.” 


5. As regards, second type of employees i.e. work charged employees the judgment deals in Para 4, 42, 43, 44, 
45, 46 and 47 which read as follow:- 


“4I, A work-charged establishment broadly means an establishment of which the expenses, including 
the wages and allowances of the staff, are chargeable to "works". The pay and allowances of employees 
who are borne on a work-charged establishment are generally shown as a separate sub-head of the 
estimated cost of the work. 


42. The entire strength of labour employed for the purposes of the Beas Project was work-charged. The 
work-charged employees are engaged on a temporary basis and their appointments are made for the 
execution of a specified work. From the very nature of their employment, their services automatically 
come to an end on the completion of the works for the sole purpose of which they are employed. They do 
not get any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor do they receive any retrenchment benefits or 
any benefits under the Employees State Insurance Schemes. 


43. But though the work-charged employees are denied these benefits, they are industrial workers and 
are entitled to the benefits of the pro- visions contained in the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow 
from that special enactment under which even contracts of employment are open to adjustment9 and 
modification. The work-charged employees, therefore, are in a better position than temporary servant 
like the other petitioners who are liable to be thrown out of employment without any kind of 
compensatory benefits. 


44. The record of Writ Petition No. 4505 of 7976 shows that offers of alternative employment were 
made to the work- charged employees and many of them have accepted those offers. The rule of ‘last 
come, first go’ has also been consistently adopted while retrenching the work-charged employees. In fact 
the work-charged employees possess a unique right as industrial employees since, by reason of section 
25706) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the provisions of Chapter VA, "Lay-off and Retrenchment", have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law including standing 
orders made under the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, 7946. 


45. There were in all about 36000 work-charged employees working on the Beas Project. Out of them, 
about 26000 have already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the 
workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi, under section 72 of the Industrial Disputes Act, /947., All the 72 
unions of which the work-charged employees are members were parties to the said conciliation 
proceedings. By reason of section 76652 (6) of the Industrial Disputes Act, a settlement arrived at in the 
course of a conciliation proceeding is binding on all persons who were employed in the establishment to 
which the dispute relates, whether they were employed on the date of the dispute or subsequently. In 
Ramnagar Cane and Sugar Co. Ltd. v. JatinChakravorty and ors., it was held by this Court that it is not 
even necessary, in order to bind the work men to the settlement arrived at before the conciliator, to show 
that they belonged to the union which took part in the conciliation proceedings, since the policy 
underlying section 76 of the Act is to give an extended operation to such settlements. In the instant case, 
all the 72 unions which represented the workmen on the work-charged establishment were parties to the 
conciliation proceedings. The settlement will therefore bind all the work-charged employees. 


46. Apart from the settlement in the conciliation proceedings, an award was made by the Industrial 
Tribunal, Central, Chandigarh, in Reference No. 2-6 of 7977, in an industrial dispute between the work- 
charged employees of the Beas-Sutlej Link Project, Sundernagar, with which we are concerned, and the 
management. Under that award, as stated in the award itself, a consent formula was evolved to which 
the workmen "virtually agreed". The benefits which flow- to the work- charged employees under the 
aforesaid award dated May 75, 7974, have been accepted by almost all the work- charged employees, 
involving a burden of about Rs. 3 crores on the employers. 


4302 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


47. Since the work-charged employees are bound by the settlement dated June 28, 7977 effected 
between them and the management in the conciliation proceedings and since they are also bound by and 
have accepted benefits under the consent award dated May 75, 7974 they are not entitled to any rights 
apart from those flowing from the aforesaid settlement and the Award. SLP ५०. /246 of 7979 which is 
filed to challenge the Award and C.M.P. No.2077 of 7979 which is filed for condonation of the delay of 
over four and half years caused in filing the SLP shall have to be dismissed.” 


6. Thus, from the above observation of Supreme Court it is clear that work charged employees are engaged on a 
temporary basis and their appointments are made for the specified work and their service comes to an end on the 
completion of work for the sole purpose of which they are employed. 


7. Para 43 provides that work charged employees are industrial worker and entitled to the benefit of the provisions 
contained under the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow from that special enactment under which even contracts 
of employment are open to adjustment and modification. Para 45 as reproduced above further provides that in the 
conciliation proceeding it has been held that there were about 36000 work charged employees working on Beas 
Project out of them 26000 has already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the 
workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour Commissioner(Central), 
New Delhi under Section 2 of the ID Act. The said settlement is binding on all the work charge employees who are 
working in the establishment to which the dispute relates. In para 46 it is further stated that apart from the settlement 
in the conciliation proceeding an award was made by the CGIT Chandigarh in reference no.2-C in an industrial 
dispute between the work charged employee of the Beas Sutlej Project, Sundernagar with which we are concerned 
and the management. A consent formula was evolved to which the workmen virtually agreed. In the last para 47 itself 
specifically stated that work charged employees are bound by the settlement and award May |5, 974 and they were 
entitled to rights those flowing from the settlement and award. 


8. So far as the settlement executed between the work charged employees and management through unions, the 
same has not been produced by the management despite opportunity was given to file the same. Thus, adverse 
interference can be drawn against them. To support this view, reliance can be placed to the judgment of Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court in case held 35200/08) RSJ 382 Ambika Parashad Versus Punjab Urban Planning 
and Development Authority Chandigarh _and_Another_wherein it has been held “that respondent has not 
produced record in the Labour Court to prove that Workman has not completed 240 days of service though 
application was submitted by the Workman for production of record held that a person in possession of the 
best evidence has to produce the same, otherwise adverse inference can be drawn against the said party”. In 
this case also as per order dated 0.05.2024 of this Tribunal. Respondent were asked to produce the settlement arrived 
between the 2 union of the work charged employee and management under Section !2 of ID Act before the Regional 
Labour Commissioner, New Delhi and all the work charged employee were bound by the said settlement. However, 
despite of availing 2-3 opportunities i.e. 20.05.2024, 20.06.2024 and 09.07.2024 the said policy was not produced and 
as such adverse inference can be drawn against the management in view of the above law. 


9. As regards award passed by Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh, the relevant claim of the work 
charged employees was regarding their regularization services and the finding given by the Tribunal is as follow:- 


“Regulation of Services of the workcharged employees. 


It is an un-disputed fact that the entire strength of labour as employed in the Project is 
workcharged. The institution of workcharged establishment is not only necessary but sometime 
unavoidable. These workmen are engaged on temporary basis and their services are utilized for the 
execution of a specified work for which they may be suited. From the very nature of employment the 
services of such workman automatically come to an end on the completion of the work. A workcharged 
employee does not get any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor is he benefitted by the employees 
state Insurance Scheme. He does not indeed enjoy any retiral benefits. Before partition of the country in 
4947 it was not usual to have project, construction of which required a number of years to complete but 
after constituting ourselves into a democratic Republic and the Government having taken in hand five 
year plans for development of the country there are various schemes involving the construction of works 
for a period extending over several years as is the case of the instant Project. It commenced in 7962 and 
more than 72 years having passed the completion might take another few years. In such situation it 
seems reasonable and fair that a workman who has, like a regular employee, spent the part of his life 
ranging from 5-0 years upto 20 year, should not be thrown on the road and must be assured some 
benefits as are available to regular staff. The other aspect of the matter is that the employer could not 
compelled to retain workcharged employees after the work for which the latter had been engaged is 
completed, as after all, he was employed before a particular job and the employer, be it the Government 
or any of its public undertakings, cannot taken upon itself the responsibility of that workman for all time 
to come. It can be well argued that such a workmen should feel happy and content that instead of 
remaining un-employed be got employment for a long time. 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4303 


To assure Industrial peace and economic justice to such class of workmen some balance has 
in my opinion to be stuck between the two extremes. It is the duty of the State under the Directive 
Principles enunciated in part 4 of the constitution to secure and protect that social order in which 
justice, social and economic could be had by all institutions of national life. I fell that it is equally the 
duty of an adjudicator of industrial disputes charged with the duty of administering social justice to be 
guided by the fundamentals contained in this chapter though he has to bear In mind the limits of the 
economic capacity of the employer and Endeavour must have ever be made to secure work for every 
citizen do in our present economy. It is not possible to immediately achieve that object. The workman 
employed by the respondent management are drawn from different states out of which I am informed 
about 60 thousands are from Punjab about 22000 from Himachal Pradesh and the remaining from the 
states of Rajasthan and Haryana. Some of the workmen are from U.P and Bihar and a handful from 
Kerala. The board hasby and large been consistently following the Punjab pattern in the matter of wage 
structure, revision thereof from time to time and grant of dearness allowance. It is only with regard to 
categories not appearing in the common Schedule of Rates prepared by the erstwhile United State of 
Punjab that the board took its independence decisions on the recommendations of its own standing 
committee.Even Himachal Pradesh Government generally followed the Punjab policy.The state 
government of Punjab in its wisdom, and I should say rightly has declared that the services of work 
charged employees in building and roads branch who had worked for 70 years or more would stand 
regularized in the sense that the workmen would be treated at par with those in the regular service of the 
state government.The benefit of this announcement was afterwards extended to the employees of its 
irrigation branch as well at the workman who held from Punjab continue to stay in their parents state 
the services of those who had put in 70 years or more would have been regularized the respondent 
management too in pursuance of its policy to follow the Punjab pattern might have regularized the 
services of at least of those workmen who had come from Punjab but any such course would have 
created awkward situation as the workmen from other States could not be discriminated in this 
respect.Moreover financial implications and other complications are involved. 


In such circumstances stated aboveI would have directed that the services of those of the 
workman who have been continuously employed for more than 70 years should be regularized. But the 
other problems arising from such a direction including financial impact on the employer cannot be lost 
sight of The Central Government through the board is only managing on behalf of the state of Punjab, 
Rajasthan Haryana and Himachal Pradesh who are partners in the venture.Several aspects of the 
question were discussed with the workmen and the management in the course of arguments and a 
formula evolved to which the workman virtually agreed and I feel that such a solution as stated 
hereunder is quite just to all the parties provided it is work out, honestly stated. No doubt,what is referred 
to me is the matter of regularization of the services of work charge employees, but the directions that I 
am issuing in my opinion, amount to only granting lesser relief than claimed by the workmen. The 
management can also have no grievance if it wants industrial peace and is anxious to secure 
employment to the work-charged employees after the completion of the work. It is accordingly, directed 
that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six months thereof for the 
maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be recruited or transferred from 
any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, the offer shall first be made to 
the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 years’ continuous service or 
more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs subject to the medical fitness 
of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will not, however, be disturbed to 
their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected. The workmen have expressed an apprehension 
that near the completion of the Project trades of some of them might be changed so that it could be said 
that a suitable workman needed for a particular job was not available and an outsider was therefore 
necessary to be employed. To protect the workmen against this possible denial of their rights it is further 
directed that category or trade of no workman shall be changed within one year preceding the 
completion of the Project without his consent in writing and that if any such change without consent is 
made it will have no consequence inasmuch as such a workman will be entitled to the job of his earlier 
trade provided the vacancy relates to that trade. As regards those of the workmen who cannot be 
absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no reason to doubt that the State Government who are 
beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central Government will make every reasonable effort to get 
them re-employed at any other Project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of 
the country where there is a need for workmen of those trades.” 


20. A perusal of aforesaid findings made it ample clear that the order has been passed by the then learned Presiding 
Officer, CGIT, Chandigarh to maintain industrial peace and to secure employment to the work charged employees 
after the completion of the work and it was also held by the learned CGIT thatState Govt. who are beneficiary under 
the project and the Central Govt. will make every reasonable effort to get those workmen re-employed at any other 


4304 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of the country where there is a need of 
workmen of those trades. 


2l. Admittedly, in this case, no effort was made by the respondent to give any employment after the retrenchment 
of the workmen and even there is non-compliance of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules. The same are reproduced 
below: 


77. Maintenance of seniority list of workmen. -The employer shall prepare a list of all workmen in the 
particular category from which retrenchment is contemplated to be arranged according to the seniority of 
their service in that category and cause a copy thereof to be pasted on a notice board in a conspicuous 
place in the premises of the industrial establishment at least seven days before the actual date of 
retrenchment. 


78. Re-employment of retrenched workmen. - (7) At least ten days before the date on which vacancies are 
to be filled, the employer shall arrange for the display on a notice board in a conspicuous place in the 
premises of the industrial establishment details of those vacancies and shall also give intimation of those 
vacancies by registered post to every one of all the retrenched workmen eligible to be considered therefor, 
to the address given by him at the time of retrenchment or at any time thereafter: 


Provided that where the number of such vacancies is less than the number of retrenched workmen, it shall 
be sufficient if intimation is given by the employer individually to the senior-most retrenched workmen in 
the list referred to in rule 77 the number of such senior-most workmen being double the number of such 
vacancies: 


Provided further that where the vacancy is of a duration of less than one month there shall be no obligation 
on the employer to send intimation of such vacancy to individual retrenched workmen: 


Provided also that if a retrenched workman, without sufficient cause being shown in writing to the 
employer, does not offer himself for re-employment on the date or dates specified in the intimation sent to 
him by the employer under this sub-rule, the employer may not intimate to him the vacancies that may be 
filled on any subsequent occasion. ] 


(2) Immediately after complying with the provisions of sub-rule (2), the employer shall also inform the 
trade unions connected with the industrial establishment, of the number of vacancies to be filled and names 
of the retrenched workmen to whom intimation has been sent under that sub-rule: 


Provided that the provisions of this sub-rule need not be complied with by the employer in any case where 
an intimation is sent to every one of the workmen mentioned in the list prepared under rule 77. 


22. However, the present work charged employee and other work-charged employees have been retrenched long 
back and even at the stage it is impossible to re-employe them. However, certainly in respect of workcharged 
employees present Respondent was directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Judgment of Jaswant Singh (Supra) to 
give benefits in terms of settlement and award dated 5.05.974. The main purpose of Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
Ld. CGIT Chandigarh was to rehabilitate to some extent the work charged employees and restore peace and congenial 
atmosphere that is why Ld. CGIT Chandigarh had given directions to all state to re-employe them. Thus, it does not 
lie in the mouth of present Respondent that no relief can be granted against present Respondent as petitioners are not 
their employees. 


A. So far as this argument of Ld. AR of the management that those work charged employees only who have 
completed 0 years of service were required to be adjusted within 6 months from their retrenchment is concerned, the 
same is devoid of merit as no effort was made by the management to adjust the work charged employees. Moreover, 
no documentary evidence has been produced that any effort was made to adjust the workman after his retrenchment. 
Further, Ld. CGIT Chandigarh in its last lines concluded as under:- 


“As regards those of the workmen who cannot be absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no 
reason to doubt that the State Government who are beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central 
Government will make every reasonable effort to get them re-employed at any other Project or work 
whether in any one of these states or in any other part of the country where there is a need of workmen 
of those trades” 


Nothing has come on record that above directions were complied with. 


23. Moreover, in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees and management, it 
cannot be interfered what were the terms and conditions in the said settlement. Further, CGIT Chandigarh has fixed 
ten years time and accrual of vacancy within six months keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and 
has evolved his own formula to bring peace and harmony between work charged employees and management but it 
cannot be said to be a universal policy in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees 
and management. However, no effort was made to adjust the petitioners in view of order of CGIT. 


[भाग [—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4305 


24. As regard, this contention of learned AR of management that petitioners were not the employees of the BBMB 
but were the employees of BCB, the same is devoid of merit as Discharge certificate was issued by the BBMB. 
Moreover, as per respondent Beas Control Board was constituted in the year !960. BCB was constituted in the year 
966 and all the projects were transferred from Beas Control Board to BCB in the year |966 thereafter as per Section 
79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various 
works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB 
constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project 
has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project 
have been so transferred. All the projects under BCB were completed in the year 984 and BCB ceased to exist in 
984. When all work of BCB stands transferred to BBMB so it cannot be said that BBMB is separate identity than 
BCB. Rather BCB has merged in BBMB. Moreover, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh case(supra) in respect 
of work charged employees has no where stated that relief can be sought by work charged employees only against the 
BCB. So contention of Ld. AR of the management that BCB and BBMB are two separate entities is devoid of merit. 


25. So far this argument of Law Officer for the respondent that the case is hopelessly time barred is concerned, the 
same is again devoid of merits as there was non-compliance of Rule 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules which has been 
reproduced above. Moreover, there is no limitation period prescribed for filing a reference. Moreover, reference was 
received in the year 2005 and thereafter, several rounds of litigations have taken place. So far as case laws on the 
point of limitation the same are not attracted in the present case as there was no compliance of Judgment of Jawant 
Singh case (Supra). 


26. However, it is added that workman was allowed terminal benefits as admitted by him. Moreover, it is also not 
case of the petitioner that there is breach of Section 25 F of the Act. 


27. Further, there was non-compliance of Jaswant Singh Case (Supra), Reference No.2C of 97 and Rule 77 & 78 
of Industrial Rules and in this case it would be highly difficult to re-employe the workman. The only remedy left is to 
compensate the workman in term of money. 


28. Keeping in view the fact and circumstances of the present case and other connected case of similar nature the 
following scheme of compensation is deemed fit by this Tribunal: 


i. Work charged employee who has completed 5 years of service shall be entitled for Rs.50,000/- along with 
interest @9% per annum as compensation from the date of moving of application till the realization of amount. 


ii. Work charged employee who has completed less than 5 years but more than | year would be entitled 
Rs.25,000/- along with interest @9% per annum from the date of moving of application till the realization of 
amount. 


iii. Those employees who have not completed | year will not be entitled for any compensation in the present case. 


The present work charged workman was employed on 0.0.97] and was retrenched on 29..978 as 
mentioned in Discharge Certificate which is placed on file issued by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB 
Sundernagar, and has worked for 7 years and about | month (more than 5 years) so he is entitled of Rs.50,000/- 
along with interest @9% per annum from the date of moving the application till its realization. 


29. The reference is answered accordingly and stands disposed off. 


30. Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section 7 of the Act for 
publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 868.— siete = विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
बी. बी. एम. बी. के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह - श्रम न्यायालय नंबर Il चंडीगढ़ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 244/2005) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 29/08/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[फा. सं. Vet—2302/39/2004-arg. आर. (eft.T4-ID] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


4306 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 26th September, 2024 


S.O. 868.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 2/2005) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court NO 2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of BBMB and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 29/08/2024. 


[F. No. L-2302/39/2004— IR (CM-ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh. 
Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 


ID No. 2 /2005 
Registered on:- 03.08.2005 
Hem Prabh S/o Sh. Bali Ram, R/o Village Bhayarta, P.O. Chanahan, Teh. & Distt. Mandi (HP). 


ade 2३3०३ Workman 
Versus 
l. | Bhakra Beas management Board, Madhya Marg, Sector 9-B, Chandigarh through its Chairman. 
2. The Chief Engineer, BSL Project Sundernagar Township, Distt. Mandi, (HP). 
..... Respondents/Managements 
AWARD 
Passed on:- 8.07.2024 


Central Government vide Notification No.L-2302/39 /2004-IR(CM-II), dated 07.07.2005, under clause (d) of 
sub-section (l) of Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947(hereinafter called the Act), has referred the 
following Industrial dispute for adjudication to this Tribunal:- 


“Whether the demand of Shri Hem Prabh for reinstatement in the services of BBMB, Sunder Nagar 
is legal and justified? If so, to what relief the concerned workman is entitled and from which date? 


l. The brief facts, related to the case are that the construction of Beas Sutluj Link Project{hereinafter called as 
BSL(P)} started in the year 962 under Beas Control Board, which was constituted on 0.02.96l with its 
headquarter at Sundernagar and this project was under the control of Centre Government, who had been constructing, 
maintaining, operating and administrating it through various Boards in different phases. After passing of Pb. Re- 
Organisation Act, 966(hereinafter called “Re-Organisation Act”) Beas Control Board was replaced by Beas 
Construction Board (hereinafter called BCB). The workman was employed by BCB on 04.02.966. The workman 
who was employed in Beas Project(Unit-l) become the employee of Bhakra Beas Management Board(hereinafter 
called as BBMB) in pursuance of proviso (l) of Section 80(3) and Section 80(5) of Re-organisation Act and the 
workman become the employee of the Centre Government under the management of B.B.M.B. from 5.05.976. The 
workman has completed 240 days in every calendar year and was not interrupted till his retrenchment. The employer 
made a bulk retrenchment of project employees in the year 977 and 978 and also in stages thereafter till 984. The 
workman was also retrenched by the employer on 29.!2.977 on account of reduction in strength due to part 
completion of the BSL(P) and re-employment certificate was issued by the office of re-settlement B.S.L/B.B.M.B. 
Sundernagar for the re-employment of the retrenched workmen of B.S.L.(P)(BBMB) in accordance with provision of 
the Act. After the retrenchment of the workman, thousands of other persons were appointed secretly by employer, 
violating Section 25-G and Section 25-H of the I.D. Act, !947. The employer is also doing unfair labour practices as 
defined in Section 2(R)A of the ID Act. Management has also violated the provisions of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial 
Dispute(Central) Rule, !957(hereinafter called “The Industrial Rules”). By filling vacant posts, the employer declared 
some posts as surplus and retrenched the employees working on those posts. 


2. It is also maintained that the present workman and other workmen have filed a Civil Writ Petition No.403/996, 
titled as Sant Ram and 87 others Vs. BBMB in the Hon’ble High Court of Shimla for their re-employment and in the 
said writ petition management filed reply dated 6.04.996 by way of affidavit and admitted that retrenched workmen 
are employee of BBMB. The workmen have then withdrew the writ petition and filed civil suits for declaring them as 
a retrenched workmen of BBMB before the Sub-Judge, ।7 Class, Sunder Nagar, Distt. Mandi(HP), on 2.0.997 and 
later on those suits were decided on 05.07.2002 and all plaints were returned to the workmen to be filed before the 
competent authority on the basis of which the present proceedings were initiated after referring of the dispute of 
workman from the Ministry of Labour on 07.07.2005. Thereafter, management filed writ petition before the Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court against the order of Ministry on 07.07.2005 and the same was dismissed on 07.05.2007 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4307 


and Special Leave Petition filed bearing nos.l6939-!7007 of 2007 in Hon’ble Supreme Court of India by the 
management was also dismissed on 08.07.20I4. It is therefore, prayed that the claim petition of the workman may 
kindly be allowed and workman be continued in the service of the management and be regularized and further be 
given all the consequential benefits. 


3. Management filed written statement, alleging therein that workman is Ex-work charged employee of Beas 
Construction Board, which was constituted under Section 80(l) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was 
retrenched after completion of the work of BCB in the year 977, The workman was paid terminal benefits i.e. 
retrenchment compensation, gratuity, ex-gratia amount on account of his retrenchment from BCB as per provisions of 
ID Act. It is further maintained that BCB and present management are two distinct and separate entities. It is also 
maintained that construction of Beas Project was undertaken by the Punjab Govt. Irrigation Department prior to the 
re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab on 0.0!.966. After re-organisation the work of BSL(P) was taken 
over by the Central Govt. on behalf of partner states of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The Central Govt. constituted 
BCB under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act and further stipulated that any component of Beas Project in 
relation to which the construction has been completed be transferred by the Central Govt. to Bhakra Management 
Board(hereinafter called as BMB) constituted under Section 79(l) of the Re-organisation Act. It is further stated 
under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act that BMB would be re-named as BBMB when any component of Beas 
Project was transferred under Section 80(6) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was employed by the BCB. 
Thus, the workman never remained the employee of management. However, it is stated that 093 work-charged and 
2 contingent paid employees of Beas Project were sent on job order basis to RanjitSagar Dam, Punjab. They were 
taken over by the management under the benevolent policy of the Central Govt. as Central Govt. had given directions 
to BBMB to absorb these employees. The remaining work-charged employees were not entitled for the said benefit. 
Even work-charged employees of the BCB had filed a petition in the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, titled as 
Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., 79729 SCC 440,in which their claim for absorbing them in 
BBMB is not granted instead their retrenchment from BCB was upheld. Remaining averments have been denied and 
it is stated that the claim of the workman is hopelessly time barred and the workman has no legal enforceable right to 
claim employment in BBMB. It is prayed that claim be dismiss. 


4. _ A replication was also filed by workman contravening the facts taken in written statement as reiterating the 
facts as stated in claim petition. 


5. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 


6. | The workman has examined himself as WW and filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WWI/A and has been 
cross-examined by the learned law officer of management. He also tendered Ex.W-| Identity Card, Ex.W-2 Discharge 
Certificate both documents are of one Sant Ram and not of Workman, Ex.W-3 Application for re-employment, Ex. 
W-4 documents filed in Civil Court alongwith orders. 


7. The management has filed affidavit of N.M. Jain, Sub-Divisional Officer, Sub- Division BBMB Sunder Nagar, 
who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.MWI/A and has been cross-examined by the Ld. AR for workman. 


8. | While arguing the case, learned Law Officer for the management contended that initially Beas Control Board 
was constituted in the year 960. BCB was constituted in the year [966 and all the projects were transferred from 
Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB 
was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. 
Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be 
re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the 
BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project have been so transferred. All the projects under 
BCB were completed in the year 984 and BCB ceased to exist in 984. Present workman was employed as work 
charged employee 04.02.966 and was retrenched on 29.2.977. All similar work charged employees including the 
present workman was engaged by the BCB which ceased to exist in the year |984 therefore, the workmen cannot be 
termed as the employees of the BBMB because there does not exist BCB which was his parent department. Moreover, 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case titled as Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India &Anr., /929 SCC 
440 has held that work charged employees were bound by the settlement dated June 28, 977 effected by the 
management and also by the award 2-C of the year 97 before Sh. H.R. Sodhi, Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh 
between workman and employees of the Beas Construction Board, Sunder Nagar and published in the gazette on 
5.06.974 of the Govt. of India. 


9. So far as the claim of the workman regarding re-employment after retrenchment on 29.2.977 is concerned, 
workman was not entitled for re-instatement as in a case under reference no.2-C of 97 decided by Sh. H.R. Sodhi, 
the then Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh, it was held that management in order to establish an industrial peace 
and to secure the work charge employees after completing the work can engage after completion of project at any 
time within 6 months for the maintenance of staff for project of any work if it is required to those work charged 
employees in order to seniority who have put l0 years of service. The relevant portion of para is reproduced as below: 


4308 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


It is accordingly, directed that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six 
months thereof for the maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be 
recruited or transferred from any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, 
the offer shall first be made to the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 
years’ continuous service or more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs 
subject to the medical fitness of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will 
not, however, be disturbed to their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected.“ 


0. Because the present workman had not completed l0 years of service so he is not entitled for re-employment. 
Learned representative for the management further contended that in this case workmen was retrenched on 
29.2.977 after receiving due retrenchment compensation etc. and now he is claiming re-employment under Section 
25-H of the Act and his claim is hopelessly time barred as he has filed the present claim petition on 20.07.2005. To 
support this view he has placed reliance in the case titled as Chief Engineer RanjitSagar Dam &Anr. Vs. Sham Lal, 
AIR 2006, Supreme Court 2682, wherein in identical matters Court has not entertained writ petition due to inordinate 
delay. In the present case there is a delay of about 27 years. He also relied upon the case titled as Ram Chand Vs. The 
BBMB and another, CWP_no.2787 of 2078, decided on 03. / 2. 20/8(07765प्राठढ R-4) where the Hon’ble Himachal 
Pradesh High Court has held that dispute if any ought to be raised within a reasonable period as the ID Act does not 
prescribed time limit for referring such dispute. In the present case workman was engaged as Beldar in the year 966 
and was discharged on 29.2.977 and he has sought re-employment after 39 years which was held to be highly time 
barred. Thus, he contended that claim of workman is time barred. Workman was discharged on 29.2.977 and 
thereafter he filed present claim before the Labour Conciliation Officer. 


ll. While arguing the case, learned AR for the workman contended that in this case workman was discharged on 
29.2.977 due to reduction in strength and he was issued discharge certificate by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB 
Sundernagar. He referred to Section 25-H of the ID Act which provides re-employment of retrenched workman. He 
further has drawn the attention of the Court towards the statement of the workman. He was required to be adjust in 
view of under Section 25-G of the Act by the management Discharge Certificate was issued by the Management. He 
was not given any employment. While arguing further, learned AR for the workman referred to Rule 77 and 78 of the 
Industrial Dispute Central Rule 957(hereinafter called Industrial Rule). Rule 77 provides maintenance of seniority 
list of workman and it states that before any worker is retrenched the appellant-establishment is required to place on 
the notice board the seniority list of all the workmen who were to be retrenched but nothing has been done in this 
regard before retrenchment of the present worker. She also referred to Rule 78 which provides that as and when any 
vacancy incurred then retrenched workmen were required to be given registered notice but nothing was done by the 
management. Moreover, question of limitation does not arise as no limitation period has been prescribed under the 
Act for seeking relief under Clause (d) of Sub-Section () of Section 0 of the ID Act. Learned AR for the workman 
further contended that even reference made by the Government dated 07.07.2005 was challenged by the management 
in the Hon’ble Punjab & Haryana High Court vide Writ Petition No.3l00 of 2006 and their writ petition was 
dismissed by the Hon’ble High Court on 07.05.2007. Even SLP filed against the order dated 07.05.2007 was upheld 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in SLP No. 6979/2007 dated 08.07.204. 


2. Ihave given due consideration to the arguments advanced by the learned AR for the workman and also for the 
management. 


3. The management relied upon mainly in this case on the case titled as Jaswant Singh and another(supra), 
which is very material for decision of this case. The said judgment deals with two types of petitioners. First type of 
petitioners were employed by the BCB on purely temporary basis and they had also given written undertaking 
confirming the term of their appointment. The BCB appointed the first type of petitioners on ad hoc basis with a clear 
understanding that they will have no right to be retained in service after the completion of the Beas Project. They are 
Engineers, Section Officer, Accounts Clerk, Teacher etc. and they have claimed their parity with other employees 
who belonged to the services of the Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan Governments and who were serving on deputation 
in connection with the works of the BhakraNangal Scheme. 


4. Inrespect of these employees, it was held as follow:- 


“To sum up, we are of the opinion that the petitioners are employees of the Central Government. Their 
conditions of service will be primarily governed by the terms of their appointment but, if they are entitled 
to the benefit of any of the rules of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules 7965, they may 
make representations in that behalf to the appropriate authorities. It is, however, not possible for this 
Court to grant to the petitioners any of the reliefs claimed by them as arising out of the provisions of the 
aforesaid rules, including the relief by way of a declaration that they shall be deemed to be in quasi- 
permanent service under rule 3. We are further of the opinion that the petitioners have no right to be 
transferred to the services of the Bhakra Management Board, now re-named as the Bhakra Beas 
Management Board. Lastly, the proposed retrenchment of the petitioners does not offend against the 
guarantee of equality contained in articles ॥4 and 76 of the Constitution, since the petitioners and the 
Deputationists belong to two different and distinct classes.” 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4309 


5. As regards, second type of employees i.e. work charged employees the judgment deals in Para 4], 42, 43, 44, 
45, 46 and 47 which read as follow:- 


“4I, A work-charged establishment broadly means an establishment of which the expenses, including 
the wages and allowances of the staff, are chargeable to "works". The pay and allowances of employees 
who are borne on a work-charged establishment are generally shown as a separate sub-head of the 
estimated cost of the work. 


42. The entire strength of labour employed for the purposes of the Beas Project was work-charged. The 
work-charged employees are engaged on a temporary basis and their appointments are made for the 
execution of a specified work. From the very nature of their employment, their services automatically 
come to an end on the completion of the works for the sole purpose of which they are employed. They do 
not get any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor do they receive any retrenchment benefits or 
any benefits under the Employees State Insurance Schemes. 


43. But though the work-charged employees are denied these benefits, they are industrial workers and 
are entitled to the benefits of the pro- visions contained in the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow 
from that special enactment under which even contracts of employment are open to adjustment9 and 
modification. The work-charged employees, therefore, are in a better position than temporary servant 
like the other petitioners who are liable to be thrown out of employment without any kind of 
compensatory benefits. 


44. The record of Writ Petition No. 4505 of 7976 shows that offers of alternative employment were 
made to the work- charged employees and many of them have accepted those offers. The rule of ‘last 
come, first go’ has also been consistently adopted while retrenching the work-charged employees. In fact 
the work-charged employees possess a unique right as industrial employees since, by reason of section 
25706) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the provisions of Chapter VA, "Lay-off and Retrenchment", have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law including standing 
orders made under the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, 7946. 


45. There were in all about 36000 work-charged employees working on the Beas Project. Out of them, 
about 26000 have already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the 
workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi, under section 72 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 7947, All the 72 
unions of which the work-charged employees are members were parties to the said conciliation 
proceedings. By reason of section 7665) (6) of the Industrial Disputes Act, a settlement arrived at in the 
course of a conciliation proceeding is binding on all persons who were employed in the establishment to 
which the dispute relates, whether they were employed on the date of the dispute or subsequently. In 
Ramnagar Cane and Sugar Co. Ltd. v. JatinChakravorty and ors., it was held by this Court that it is not 
even necessary, in order to bind the work men to the settlement arrived at before the conciliator, to show 
that they belonged to the union which took part in the conciliation proceedings, since the policy 
underlying section 76 of the Act is to give an extended operation to such settlements. In the instant case, 
all the 72 unions which represented the workmen on the work-charged establishment were parties to the 
conciliation proceedings. The settlement will therefore bind all the work-charged employees. 


46. Apart from the settlement in the conciliation proceedings, an award was made by the Industrial 
Tribunal, Central, Chandigarh, in Reference No. 2-6 of 7977, in an industrial dispute between the work- 
charged employees of the Beas-Sutlej Link Project, Sundernagar, with which we are concerned, and the 
management. Under that award, as stated in the award itself, a consent formula was evolved to which 
the workmen "virtually agreed". The benefits which flow- to the work- charged employees under the 
aforesaid award dated May 75, 7974, have been accepted by almost all the work- charged employees, 
involving a burden of about Rs. 3 crores on the employers. 


47. Since the work-charged employees are bound by the settlement dated June 28, 7977 effected 
between them and the management in the conciliation proceedings and since they are also bound by and 
have accepted benefits under the consent award dated May 75, 7974 they are not entitled to any rights 
apart from those flowing from the aforesaid settlement and the Award. SLP ४०. 7246 of 7979 which is 
filed to challenge the Award and C.M.P. No.2077 of 7979 which is filed for condonation of the delay of 
over four and half years caused in filing the SLP shall have to be dismissed.” 


6. Thus, from the above observation of Supreme Court it is clear that work charged employees are engaged on a 
temporary basis and their appointments are made for the specified work and their service comes to an end on the 
completion of work for the sole purpose of which they are employed. 


7. Para 43 provides that work charged employees are industrial worker and entitled to the benefit of the 
provisions contained under the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow from that special enactment under which 


430 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


even contracts of employment are open to adjustment and modification. Para 45 as reproduced above further provides 
that in the conciliation proceeding it has been held that there were about 36000 work charged employees working on 
Beas Project out of them 26000 has already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived 
between the workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour 
Commissioner(Central), New Delhi under Section 2 of the ID Act. The said settlement is binding on all the work 
charge employees who are working in the establishment to which the dispute relates. In para 46 it is further stated that 
apart from the settlement in the conciliation proceeding an award was made by the CGIT Chandigarh in reference 
no.2-C in an industrial dispute between the work charged employee of the Beas Sutlej Project, Sundernagar with 
which we are concerned and the management. A consent formula was evolved to which the workmen virtually agreed. 
In the last para 47 itself specifically stated that work charged employees are bound by the settlement and award May 
5, |974 and they were entitled to rights those flowing from the settlement and award. 


8. So far as the settlement executed between the work charged employees and management through unions, the 
same has not been produced by the management despite opportunity was given to file the same. Thus, adverse 
interference can be drawn against them. To support this view, reliance can be placed to the judgment of Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court in case held 35200/(8) RSJ 382 Ambika Parashad Versus Punjab Urban Planning 


and Development Authority Chandigarh कब Another_wherein it has been held “that respondent has not 
produced record in the Labour Court to prove that Workman has not completed 240 days of service though 


application was submitted by the Workman for production of record held that a person in possession of the 
best evidence has to produce the same, otherwise adverse inference can be drawn against the said party”. In 
this case also as per order dated 0.05.2024 of this Tribunal. Respondent were asked to produce the settlement arrived 
between the 2 union of the work charged employee and management under Section 2 of ID Act before the Regional 
Labour Commissioner, New Delhi and all the work charged employee were bound by the said settlement. However, 
despite of availing 2-3 opportunities i.e. 20.05.2024, 20.06.2024 and 09.07.2024 the said policy was not produced and 
as such adverse inference can be drawn against the management in view of the above law. 


9. As regards award passed by Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh, the relevant claim of the work 
charged employees was regarding their regularization services and the finding given by the Tribunal is as follow:- 


“Regulation of Services of the workcharged employees. 


It is an un-disputed fact that the entire strength of labour as employed in the Project is 
workcharged. The institution of workcharged establishment is not only necessary but sometime 
unavoidable. These workmen are engaged on temporary basis and their services are utilized for the 
execution of a specified work for which they may be suited. From the very nature of employment the 
services of such workman automatically come to an end on the completion of the work. A workcharged 
employee does not get any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor is he benefitted by the employees 
state Insurance Scheme. He does not indeed enjoy any retiral benefits. Before partition of the country in 
3947 it was not usual to have project, construction of which required a number of years to complete but 
after constituting ourselves into a democratic Republic and the Government having taken in hand five 
year plans for development of the country there are various schemes involving the construction of works 
for a period extending over several years as is the case of the instant Project. It commenced in 7962 and 
more than 72 years having passed the completion might take another few years. In such situation it 
seems reasonable and fair that a workman who has, like a regular employee, spent the part of his life 
ranging from 5-0 years upto 20 year, should not be thrown on the road and must be assured some 
benefits as are available to regular staff. The other aspect of the matter is that the employer could not 
compelled to retain workcharged employees after the work for which the latter had been engaged is 
completed, as after all, he was employed before a particular job and the employer, be it the Government 
or any of its public undertakings, cannot taken upon itself the responsibility of that workman for all time 
to come. It can be well argued that such a workmen should feel happy and content that instead of 
remaining un-employed be got employment for a long time. 


To assure Industrial peace and economic justice to such class of workmen some balance has 
in my opinion to be stuck between the two extremes. It is the duty of the State under the Directive 
Principles enunciated in part 4 of the constitution to secure and protect that social order in which 
justice, social and economic could be had by all institutions of national life. I fell that it is equally the 
duty of an adjudicator of industrial disputes charged with the duty of administering social justice to be 
guided by the fundamentals contained in this chapter though he has to bear In mind the limits of the 
economic capacity of the employer and Endeavour must have ever be made to secure work for every 
citizen do in our present economy. It is not possible to immediately achieve that object. The workman 
employed by the respondent management are drawn from different states out of which I am informed 
about 6,/70 thousands are from Punjab about 22000 from Himachal Pradesh and the remaining from the 
states of Rajasthan and Haryana. Some of the workmen are from U.P and Bihar and a handful from 
Kerala. The board hasby and large been consistently following the Punjab pattern in the matter of wage 
structure, revision thereof from time to time and grant of dearness allowance. It is only with regard to 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 43i] 


categories not appearing in the common Schedule of Rates prepared by the erstwhile United State of 
Punjab that the board took its independence decisions on the recommendations of its own standing 
committee.Even Himachal Pradesh Government generally followed the Punjab policy.The state 
government of Punjab in its wisdom, and I should say rightly has declared that the services of work 
charged employees in building and roads branch who had worked for 70 years or more would stand 
regularized in the sense that the workmen would be treated at par with those in the regular service of the 
state government.The benefit of this announcement was afterwards extended to the employees of its 
irrigation branch as well at the workman who held from Punjab continue to stay in their parents state 
the services of those who had put in 70 years or more would have been regularized the respondent 
management too in pursuance of its policy to follow the Punjab pattern might have regularized the 
services of at least of those workmen who had come from Punjab but any such course would have 
created awkward situation as the workmen from other States could not be discriminated in this 
respect.Moreover financial implications and other complications are involved. 


In such circumstances stated aboveI would have directed that the services of those of the 
workman who have been continuously employed for more than 70 years should be regularized. But the 
other problems arising from such a direction including financial impact on the employer cannot be lost 
sight of The Central Government through the board is only managing on behalf of the state of Punjab, 
Rajasthan Haryana and Himachal Pradesh who are partners in the venture.Several aspects of the 
question were discussed with the workmen and the management in the course of arguments and a 
formula evolved to which the workman virtually agreed and I feel that such a solution as stated 
hereunder is quite just to all the parties provided it is work out, honestly stated. No doubt,what is referred 
to me is the matter of regularization of the services of work charge employees, but the directions that I 
am issuing in my opinion, amount to only granting lesser relief than claimed by the workmen. The 
management can also have no grievance if it wants industrial peace and is anxious to secure 
employment to the work-charged employees after the completion of the work. It is accordingly, directed 
that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six months thereof for the 
maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be recruited or transferred from 
any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, the offer shall first be made to 
the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 years’ continuous service or 
more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs subject to the medical fitness 
of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will not, however, be disturbed to 
their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected. The workmen have expressed an apprehension 
that near the completion of the Project trades of some of them might be changed so that it could be said 
that a suitable workman needed for a particular job was not available and an outsider was therefore 
necessary to be employed. To protect the workmen against this possible denial of their rights it is further 
directed that category or trade of no workman shall be changed within one year preceding the 
completion of the Project without his consent in writing and that if any such change without consent is 
made it will have no consequence inasmuch as such a workman will be entitled to the job of his earlier 
trade provided the vacancy relates to that trade. As regards those of the workmen who cannot be 
absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no reason to doubt that the State Government who are 
beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central Government will make every reasonable effort to get 
them re-employed at any other Project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of 
the country where there is a need for workmen of those trades.” 


20. A perusal of aforesaid findings made it ample clear that the order has been passed by the then learned Presiding 
Officer, CGIT, Chandigarh to maintain industrial peace and to secure employment to the work charged employees 
after the completion of the work and it was also held by the learned CGIT thatState Govt. who are beneficiary under 
the project and the Central Govt. will make every reasonable effort to get those workmen re-employed at any other 
project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of the country where there is a need of 
workmen of those trades. 


2l. Admittedly, in this case, no effort was made by the respondent to give any employment after the retrenchment 
of the workmen and even there is non-compliance of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules. The same are reproduced 
below: 


77. Maintenance of seniority list of workmen. -The employer shall prepare a list of all workmen in the 
particular category from which retrenchment is contemplated to be arranged according to the seniority of 
their service in that category and cause a copy thereof to be pasted on a notice board in a conspicuous 
place in the premises of the industrial establishment at least seven days before the actual date of 
retrenchment. 


78. Re-employment of retrenched workmen. - (7) At least ten days before the date on which vacancies are 
to be filled, the employer shall arrange for the display on a notice board in a conspicuous place in the 


432 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


premises of the industrial establishment details of those vacancies and shall also give intimation of those 
vacancies by registered post to every one of all the retrenched workmen eligible to be considered therefor, 
to the address given by him at the time of retrenchment or at any time thereafter: 


Provided that where the number of such vacancies is less than the number of retrenched workmen, it shall 
be sufficient if intimation is given by the employer individually to the senior-most retrenched workmen in 
the list referred to in rule 77 the number of such senior-most workmen being double the number of such 
vacancies: 


Provided further that where the vacancy is of a duration of less than one month there shall be no obligation 
on the employer to send intimation of such vacancy to individual retrenched workmen: 


Provided also that if a retrenched workman, without sufficient cause being shown in writing to the 
employer, does not offer himself for re-employment on the date or dates specified in the intimation sent to 
him by the employer under this sub-rule, the employer may not intimate to him the vacancies that may be 
filled on any subsequent occasion.] 


(2) Immediately after complying with the provisions of sub-rule (/), the employer shall also inform the 
trade unions connected with the industrial establishment, of the number of vacancies to be filled and names 
of the retrenched workmen to whom intimation has been sent under that sub-rule: 


Provided that the provisions of this sub-rule need not be complied with by the employer in any case where 
an intimation is sent to every one of the workmen mentioned in the list prepared under rule 77. 


22. However, the present work charged employee and other work-charged employees have been retrenched long 
back and even at the stage it is impossible to re-employe them. However, certainly in respect of workcharged 
employees present Respondent was directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Judgment of Jaswant Singh (Supra) to 
give benefits in terms of settlement and award dated 5.05.974. The main purpose of Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
Ld. CGIT Chandigarh was to rehabilitate to some extent the work charged employees and restore peace and congenial 
atmosphere that is why Ld. CGIT Chandigarh had given directions to all state to re-employe them. Thus, it does not 
lie in the mouth of present Respondent that no relief can be granted against present Respondent as petitioners are not 
their employees. 


A. So far as this argument of Ld. AR of the management that those work charged employees only who have 
completed 0 years of service were required to be adjusted within 6 months from their retrenchment is concerned, the 
same is devoid of merit as no effort was made by the management to adjust the work charged employees. Moreover, 
no documentary evidence has been produced that any effort was made to adjust the workman after his retrenchment. 
Further, Ld. CGIT Chandigarh in its last lines concluded as under:- 


“As regards those of the workmen who cannot be absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no 
reason to doubt that the State Government who are beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central 
Government will make every reasonable effort to get them re-employed at any other Project or work 
whether in any one of these states or in any other part of the country where there is a need of workmen 
of those trades” 


Nothing has come on record that above directions were complied with. 


23. Moreover, in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees and management, it 
cannot be interfered what were the terms and conditions in the said settlement. Further, CGIT Chandigarh has fixed 
ten years time and accrual of vacancy within six months keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and 
has evolved his own formula to bring peace and harmony between work charged employees and management but it 
cannot be said to be a universal policy in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees 
and management. However, no effort was made to adjust the petitioners in view of order of CGIT. 


24. As regard, this contention of learned AR of management that petitioners were not the employees of the BBMB 
but were the employees of BCB, the same is devoid of merit as Discharge certificate was issued by the BBMB. 
Moreover, as per respondent Beas Control Board was constituted in the year !960. BCB was constituted in the year 
966 and all the projects were transferred from Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 
79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various 
works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB 
constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project 
has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project 
have been so transferred. All the projects under BCB were completed in the year 984 and BCB ceased to exist in 
984. When all work of BCB stands transferred to BBMB so it cannot be said that BBMB is separate identity than 
BCB. Rather BCB has merged in BBMB. Moreover, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh case(supra) in respect 
of work charged employees has no where stated that relief can be sought by work charged employees only against the 
BCB. So contention of Ld. AR of the management that BCB and BBMB are two separate entities is devoid of merit. 


[भाग [—avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 433 


25. So far this argument of Law Officer for the respondent that the case is hopelessly time barred is concerned, the 
same is again devoid of merits as there was non-compliance of Rule 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules which has been 
reproduced above. Moreover, there is no limitation period prescribed for filing a reference. Moreover, reference was 
received in the year 2005 and thereafter, several rounds of litigations have taken place. So far as case laws on the 
point of limitation the same are not attracted in the present case as there was no compliance of Judgment of Jaswant 
Singh case (Supra). 

26. However, it is added that workman was allowed terminal benefits as admitted by him. Moreover, it is also not 
case of the petitioner that there is breach of Section 25 F of the Act. 


27. Further, there was non-compliance of Jaswant Singh Case (Supra), Reference No.2C of 97 and Rule 77 & 78 
of Industrial Rules and in this case it would be highly difficult to re-employe the workman. The only remedy left is to 
compensate the workman in term of money. 


28. Keeping in view the fact and circumstances of the present case and other connected case of similar nature the 
following scheme of compensation is deemed fit by this Tribunal: 


i. Work charged employee who has completed 5 years of service shall be entitled for Rs.50,000/- along with 
interest @9% per annum as compensation from the date of moving of application till the realization of 
amount. 


ii. Work charged employee who has completed less than 5 years but more than | year would be entitled 
Rs.25,000/- along with interest @9% per annum from the date of moving of application till the realization of 
amount. 


iii. Those employees who have not completed | year will not be entitled for any compensation in the present 
case. 


The present workman has claimed that he has worked from 4.2.966 to 29.l2.977 which fact is not denied by 
the management in its written statement. The workman was also subjected to cross-examination but this fact 
cannot be rebutted. Thus, it is held that workman worked from 04.02.966 to 29.2.977(more than 5 years. He 
is entitled of Rs.50,000/- along with interest @9% per annum from the date of moving the application till its 
realization. 


29. The reference is answered accordingly and stands disposed of. 


30. Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section |7 of the Act for 
publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. (869.—aileifta = विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
बी. बी. एम. बी. के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह - श्रम न्यायालय नंबर Il चंडीगढ़ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 449/2005) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 29/08/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[फा. सं. Va—-2302/49/2004-arg. आर. (सी.एम- ID] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 26th September, 2024 


S.O. 869.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. १२०.4१/2005) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court NO 2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of BBMB and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 29/08/2024 


[F. No. L-2302/49/2004— IR (CM-ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 


43[4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 
In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh. 
Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 


ID No. 49 /2005 

Registered on:- 25.07.2005 

Shyam Lal S/o Sh. Bhuru Ram, C/o Shri Hem Prabh S/o Sh. Bali Ram, R/o Village Bhayarta, P.O. Chanahan, Teh. & 
Distt. Mandi (HP). 


Versus 
l. | Bhakra Beas management Board, Madhya Marg, Sector 9-B, Chandigarh through its Chairman. 
2. The Chief Engineer, BSL Project Sundernagar Township, Distt. Mandi, (HP). 
..... Respondents/Managements 
AWARD 
Passed on:- 5.07.2024 


Central Government vide Notification No.L-2302/49/2004-IR(CM-ID, dated 07.07.2005, under clause (d) of 
sub-section (l) of Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947(hereinafter called the Act), has referred the 
following Industrial dispute for adjudication to this Tribunal:- 


“Whether the demand of Shri Shyam Lal for reinstatement in the services of BBMB, Sunder Nagar 
is legal and justified? If so, to what relief the concerned workman is entitled and from which date? 


l. The brief facts, related to the case are that the construction of Beas Sutluj Link Project {hereinafter called as 
BSL(P)} started in the year 962 under Beas Control Board, which was constituted on 0.02.96l with its 
headquarter at Sundernagar and this project was under the control of Centre Government, who had been constructing, 
maintaining, operating and administrating it through various Boards in different phases. After passing of Pb. Re- 
Organisation Act, l966(hereinafter called “Re-Organisation Act”) Beas Control Board was replaced by Beas 
Construction Board (hereainfter called “BCB”). The workman was employed by BCB on 09.06.!972. The workman 
who was employed in Beas Project(Unit-l) become the employee of Bhakra Beas Management Board(hereinafter 
called as BBMB) in pursuance of proviso (l) of Section 80(3) and Section 80(5) of Re-organisation Act and the 
workman become the employee of the Centre Government under the management of B.B.M.B. from 5.05.976. The 
workman has completed 240 days in every calendar year and was not interrupted till his retrenchment. The employer 
made a bulk retrenchment of project employees in the year [977 and 978 and also in stages thereafter till |984. The 
workman was also retrenched by the employer on 8.0.!978 on account of reduction in strength due to part 
completion of the BSL(P) and re-employment certificate was issued by the office of re-settlement B.S.L/B.B.M.B. 
Sundernagar for the re-employment of the retrenched workmen of B.S.L.(P)(BBMB) in accordance with provision of 
the Act. After the retrenchment of the workman, thousands of other persons were appointed secretly by employer, 
violating Section 25-G and Section 25-H of the I.D. Act, !947. The employer is also doing unfair labour practices as 
defined in Section 2(R)A of the ID Act. Management has also violated the provisions of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial 
Dispute(Central) Rule, !957(hereinafter called “The Industrial Rules”). By filling vacant posts, the employer declared 
some posts as surplus and retrenched the employees working on those posts. 


2. It is also maintained that the present workman and other workmen have filed a Civil Writ Petition No.403/I996, 
titled as Sant Ram and 87 others Vs. BBMB in the Hon’ble High Court of Shimla for their re-employment and in the 
said writ petition management filed reply dated 6.04.996 by way of affidavit and admitted that retrenched workmen 
are employee of BBMB. The workmen have then withdrew the writ petition and filed civil suits for declaring them as 
a retrenched workmen of BBMB before the Sub-Judge, [7 Class, Sunder Nagar, Distt. Mandi(HP), on 2.0.997 and 
later on those suits were decided on 05.07.2002 and all plaints were returned to the workmen to be filed before the 
competent authority on the basis of which the present proceedings were initiated after referring of the dispute of 
workman from the Ministry of Labour on 07.07.2005. Thereafter, management filed writ petition before the Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court against the order of Ministry on 07.07.2005 and the same was dismissed on 07.05.2007 
and Special Leave Petition filed bearing nos.l6939-!7007 of 2007 in Hon’ble Supreme Court of India by the 
management was also dismissed on 08.07.204. It is therefore, prayed that the claim petition of the workman may 
kindly be allowed and workman be continued in the service of the management and be regularized and further be 
given all the consequential benefits. 


3. Management filed written statement, alleging therein that workman is Ex-work charged employee of Beas 
Construction Board, which was constituted under Section 80(l) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was 
retrenched after completion of the work of BCB in the year 978. The workman was paid terminal benefits i.e. 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 435 


retrenchment compensation, gratuity, ex-gratia amount on account of his retrenchment from BCB as per provisions of 
ID Act. It is further maintained that BCB and present management are two distinct and separate entities. It is also 
maintained that construction of Beas Project was undertaken by the Punjab Govt. Irrigation Department prior to the 
re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab on 0I.0!.966. After re-organisation the work of BSL(P) was taken 
over by the Central Govt. on behalf of partner states of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The Central Govt. constituted 
BCB under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act and further stipulated that any component of Beas Project in 
relation to which the construction has been completed be transferred by the Central Govt. to Bhakra Management 
Board(hereinafter called as BMB) constituted under Section 79(l) of the Re-organisation Act. It is further stated 
under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act that BMB would be re-named as BBMB when any component of Beas 
Project was transferred under Section 80(6) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was employed by the BCB. 
Thus, the workman never remained the employee of management. However, it is stated that 093 work-charged and 
2 contingent paid employees of Beas Project were sent on job order basis to Ranjit Sagar Dam, Punjab. They were 
taken over by the management under the benevolent policy of the Central Govt. as Central Govt. had given directions 
to BBMB to absorb these employees. The remaining work-charged employees were not entitled for the said benefit. 
Even work-charged employees of the BCB had filed a petition in the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, titled as 
Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., /979 SCC 440, in which their claim for absorbing them in 
BBMB is not granted instead their retrenchment from BCB was upheld. Remaining averments have been denied and 
it is stated that the claim of the workman is hopelessly time barred and the workman has no legal enforceable right to 
claim employment in BBMB. It is prayed that claim be dismiss. 


4. __ A replication was also filed by workman contravening the facts taken in written statement as reiterating the 
facts as stated in claim petition. 


5. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 


6. | The workman has examined himself as WW and filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WWI/A and has been 
cross-examined by the learned law officer of management. He also tendered document Ex. W-| Discharge Certificate, 
Ex.W-2 Identity Card. 


7. The management has filed affidavit of N.M. Jain, Sub-Divisional Officer, Sub- Division BBMB Sunder Nagar, 
who filed his affidavit in evidence as ४5.५० ]/५ and has been cross-examined by the learned counsel of workman. 


8. | While arguing the case, learned Law Officer for the management contended that initially Beas Control Board 
was constituted in the year !960. BCB was constituted in the year 966 and all the projects were transferred from 
Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB 
was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. 
Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be 
re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the 
BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project have been so transferred. All the projects under 
BCB were completed in the year !984 and BCB ceased to exist in 984. Present workman was employed as work 
charged employee 09.06.972 and was retrenched on 8.!0.978. All similar work charged employees including the 
present workman was engaged by the BCB which ceased to exist in the year 984 therefore, the workmen cannot be 
termed as the employees of the BBMB because there does not exist BCB which was his parent department. Moreover, 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case titled as Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., 7/929 SCC 
440 has held that work charged employees were bound by the settlement dated June 28, 977 effected by the 
management and also by the award 2-C of the year |97 before Sh. H.R. Sodhi, Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh 
between workman and employees of the Beas Construction Board, Sunder Nagar and published in the gazette on 
5.06.974 of the Govt. of India. 


9. So far as the claim of the workman regarding re-employment after retrenchment on 8.0.l978 is concerned, 
workman was not entitled for re-instatement as in a case under reference no.2-C of 97 decided by Sh. H.R. Sodhi, 
the then Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh, it was held that management in order to establish an industrial peace 
and to secure the work charge employees after completing the work can engage after completion of project at any 
time within 6 months for the maintenance of staff for project of any work if it is required to those work charged 
employees in order to seniority who have put l0 years of service. The relevant portion of para is reproduced as below: 


“It is accordingly, directed that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six 
months thereof for the maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be 
recruited or transferred from any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, 
the offer shall first be made to the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 
years’ continuous service or more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs 
subject to the medical fitness of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will 
not, however, be disturbed to their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected.“ 


0. Because the present workman had not completed 0 years of service so he is not entitled for re-employment. 
Learned representative for the management further contended that in this case workman was retrenched on 


436 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


8.0.978 after receiving due retrenchment compensation etc. and now he is claiming re-employment under Section 
25-H of the Act and his claim is hopelessly time barred as he has filed the present claim petition on 20.07.2005. To 
support this view he has placed reliance in the case titled as Chief Engineer Ranjit Sagar Dam & Anr. Vs. Sham Lal, 
AIR 2006, Supreme Court 2682, wherein in identical matters Court has not entertained writ petition due to inordinate 
delay. In the present case there is a delay of about 27 years. He also relied upon the case titled as Ram Chand Vs. The 
BBMB and another, CWP_no.2787 of 2078, decided on 03. /2. 20/8(0776हप्राढ R-4) where the Hon’ble Himachal 
Pradesh High Court has held that dispute if any ought to be raised within a reasonable period as the ID Act does not 
prescribed time limit for referring such dispute. In the present case workman was engaged as Beldar in the year 972 
and was discharged on 8.0.978 and he has sought re-employment after 33 years which was held to be highly time 
barred. Thus, he contended that claim of workman is time barred. Workman was discharged on 8.0.978 and 
thereafter he filed present claim before the Labour Conciliation Officer on 30..2005. 


ll. While arguing the case, learned AR for the workman contended that in this case workman was discharged on 
8.0.978 due to reduction in strength and he was issued discharge certificate by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB 
Sundernagar. He referred to Section 25-H of the ID Act which provides re-employment of retrenched workman. He 
further has drawn the attention of the Court towards the statement of the workman. He was required to be adjust in 
view of under Section 25-G of the Act by the management Discharge Certificate was issued by the Management. He 
was not given any employment. While arguing further, learned AR for the workman referred to Rule 77 and 78 of the 
Industrial Dispute Central Rule 957(hereinafter called Industrial Rule). Rule 77 provides maintenance of seniority 
list of workman and it states that before any worker is retrenched the appellant-establishment is required to place on 
the notice board the seniority list of all the workmen who were to be retrenched but nothing has been done in this 
regard before retrenchment of the present worker. She also referred to Rule 78 which provides that as and when any 
vacancy incurred then retrenched workmen were required to be given registered notice but nothing was done by the 
management. Moreover, question of limitation does not arise as no limitation period has been prescribed under the 
Act for seeking relief under Clause (d) of Sub-Section (l) of Section 0 of the ID Act. Learned AR for the workman 
further contended that even reference made by the Government dated 07.07.2005 was challenged by the management 
in the Hon’ble Punjab & Haryana High Court vide Writ Petition ।०.३(00 of 2006 and their writ petition was 
dismissed by the Hon’ble High Court on 07.05.2007. Even SLP filed against the order dated 07.05.2007 was upheld 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in SLP No. 6979/2007 dated 08.07.204. 


2. Ihave given due consideration to the arguments advanced by the learned AR for the workman and also for the 
management. 


3. The management relied upon mainly in this case on the case titled as Jaswant Singh and _another(supra), 
which is very material for decision of this case. The said judgment deals with two types of petitioners. First type of 
petitioners were employed by the BCB on purely temporary basis and they had also given written undertaking 
confirming the term of their appointment. The BCB appointed the first type of petitioners on ad hoc basis with a clear 
understanding that they will have no right to be retained in service after the completion of the Beas Project. They are 
Engineers, Section Officer, Accounts Clerk, Teacher etc. and they have claimed their parity with other employees 
who belonged to the services of the Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan Governments and who were serving on deputation 
in connection with the works of the BhakraNangal Scheme. 


4. In respect of these employees, it was held as follow:- 


“To sum up, we are of the opinion that the petitioners are employees of the Central Government. Their 
conditions of service will be primarily governed by the terms of their appointment but, if they are entitled 
to the benefit of any of the rules of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules 7/965, they may 
make representations in that behalf to the appropriate authorities. It is, however, not possible for this 
Court to grant to the petitioners any of the reliefs claimed by them as arising out of the provisions of the 
aforesaid rules, including the relief by way of a declaration that they shall be deemed to be in quasi- 
permanent service under rule 3. We are further of the opinion that the petitioners have no right to be 
transferred to the services of the Bhakra Management Board, now re-named as the Bhakra Beas 
Management Board. Lastly, the proposed retrenchment of the petitioners does not offend against the 
guarantee of equality contained in articles ॥4 and 76 of the Constitution, since the petitioners and the 
Deputationists belong to two different and distinct classes.” 


I5. As regards, second type of employees i.e. work charged employees the judgment deals in Para 4, 42, 43, 44, 
45, 46 and 47 which read as follow:- 


“4I, A work-charged establishment broadly means an establishment of which the expenses, including 
the wages and allowances of the staff, are chargeable to "works". The pay and allowances of employees 
who are borne on a work-charged establishment are generally shown as a separate sub-head of the 
estimated cost of the work. 


42. The entire strength of labour employed for the purposes of the Beas Project was work-charged. The 
work-charged employees are engaged on a temporary basis and their appointments are made for the 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 437 


execution of a specified work. From the very nature of their employment, their services automatically 
come to an end on the completion of the works for the sole purpose of which they are employed. They do 
not get any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor do they receive any retrenchment benefits or 
any benefits under the Employees State Insurance Schemes. 


43. But though the work-charged employees are denied these benefits, they are industrial workers and 
are entitled to the benefits of the pro- visions contained in the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow 
from that special enactment under which even contracts of employment are open to adjustment9 and 
modification. The work-charged employees, therefore, are in a better position than temporary servant 
like the other petitioners who are liable to be thrown out of employment without any kind of 
compensatory benefits. 


44. The record of Writ Petition No. 4505 of 7976 shows that offers of alternative employment were 
made to the work- charged employees and many of them have accepted those offers. The rule of ‘last 
come, first go’ has also been consistently adopted while retrenching the work-charged employees. In fact 
the work-charged employees possess a unique right as industrial employees since, by reason of section 
25706) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the provisions of Chapter VA, "Lay-off and Retrenchment", have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law including standing 
orders made under the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, 7946. 


45. There were in all about 36000 work-charged employees working on the Beas Project. Out of them, 
about 26000 have already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the 
workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi, under section 72 of the Industrial Disputes Act, /947., All the 72 
unions of which the work-charged employees are members were parties to the said conciliation 
proceedings. By reason of section 7665) (6) of the Industrial Disputes Act, a settlement arrived at in the 
course of a conciliation proceeding is binding on all persons who were employed in the establishment to 
which the dispute relates, whether they were employed on the date of the dispute or subsequently. In 
Ramnagar Cane and Sugar Co. Ltd. v. JatinChakravorty and ors., it was held by this Court that it is not 
even necessary, in order to bind the work men to the settlement arrived at before the conciliator, to show 
that they belonged to the union which took part in the conciliation proceedings, since the policy 
underlying section 76 of the Act is to give an extended operation to such settlements. In the instant case, 
all the 72 unions which represented the workmen on the work-charged establishment were parties to the 
conciliation proceedings. The settlement will therefore bind all the work-charged employees. 


46. Apart from the settlement in the conciliation proceedings, an award was made by the Industrial 
Tribunal, Central, Chandigarh, in Reference No. 2-6 of 7977, in an industrial dispute between the work- 
charged employees of the Beas-Sutlej Link Project, Sundernagar, with which we are concerned, and the 
management. Under that award, as stated in the award itself, a consent formula was evolved to which 
the workmen "virtually agreed". The benefits which flow- to the work- charged employees under the 
aforesaid award dated May 75, 7974, have been accepted by almost all the work- charged employees, 
involving a burden of about Rs. 3 crores on the employers. 


47. Since the work-charged employees are bound by the settlement dated June 28, 7977 effected 
between them and the management in the conciliation proceedings and since they are also bound by and 
have accepted benefits under the consent award dated May 75, 79724 they are not entitled to any rights 
apart from those flowing from the aforesaid settlement and the Award. SLP ४०, /246 of 7979 which is 
filed to challenge the Award and C.M.P. No.2077 of 7979 which is filed for condonation of the delay of 
over four and half years caused in filing the SLP shall have to be dismissed.” 


6. Thus, from the above observation of Supreme Court it is clear that work charged employees are engaged on a 
temporary basis and their appointments are made for the specified work and their service comes to an end on the 
completion of work for the sole purpose of which they are employed. 


7. Para 43 provides that work charged employees are industrial worker and entitled to the benefit of the provisions 
contained under the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow from that special enactment under which even contracts 
of employment are open to adjustment and modification. Para 45 as reproduced above further provides that in the 
conciliation proceeding it has been held that there were about 36000 work charged employees working on Beas 
Project out of them 26000 has already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the 
workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour Commissioner(Central), 
New Delhi under Section 2 of the ID Act. The said settlement is binding on all the work charge employees who are 
working in the establishment to which the dispute relates. In para 46 it is further stated that apart from the settlement 
in the conciliation proceeding an award was made by the CGIT Chandigarh in reference no.2-C in an industrial 
dispute between the work charged employee of the Beas Sutlej Project, Sundernagar with which we are concerned 
and the management. A consent formula was evolved to which the workmen virtually agreed. In the last para 47 itself 


438 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


specifically stated that work charged employees are bound by the settlement and award May |5, 974 and they were 
entitled to rights those flowing from the settlement and award. 


8. So far as the settlement executed between the work charged employees and management through unions, the 
same has not been produced by the management despite opportunity was given to file the same. Thus, adverse 
interference can be drawn against them. To support this view, reliance can be placed to the judgment of Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court in case held 45200/08) RSJ 382 Ambika Parashad Versus Punjab Urban Planning 
and Development Authority Chandigarh and Another_wherein it has been held “that respondent has not 
produced record in the Labour Court to prove that Workman has not completed 240 days of service though 
application was submitted by the Workman for production of record held that a person in possession of the 
best evidence has to produce the same, otherwise adverse inference can be drawn against the said party”. In 
this case also as per order dated 0!.05.2024 of this Tribunal. Respondent were asked to produce the settlement arrived 
between the 2 union of the work charged employee and management under Section !2 of ID Act before the Regional 
Labour Commissioner, New Delhi and all the work charged employee were bound by the said settlement. However, 
despite of availing 2-3 opportunities i.e. 20.05.2024, 20.06.2024 and 09.07.2024 the said policy was not produced and 
as such adverse inference can be drawn against the management in view of the above law. 


9. As regards award passed by Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh, the relevant claim of the work 
charged employees was regarding their regularization services and the finding given by the Tribunal is as follow:- 


“Regulation of Services of the workcharged employees. 


It is an un-disputed fact that the entire strength of labour as employed in the Project is 
workcharged. The institution of workcharged establishment is not only necessary but sometime 
unavoidable. These workmen are engaged on temporary basis and their services are utilized for the 
execution of a specified work for which they may be suited. From the very nature of employment the 
services of such workman automatically come to an end on the completion of the work. A workcharged 
employee does not get any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor is he benefitted by the employees 
state Insurance Scheme. He does not indeed enjoy any retiral benefits. Before partition of the country in 
4947 it was not usual to have project, construction of which required a number of years to complete but 
after constituting ourselves into a democratic Republic and the Government having taken in hand five 
year plans for development of the country there are various schemes involving the construction of works 
for a period extending over several years as is the case of the instant Project. It commenced in 7/962 and 
more than 72 years having passed the completion might take another few years. In such situation it 
seems reasonable and fair that a workman who has, like a regular employee, spent the part of his life 
ranging from 5-0 years upto 20 year, should not be thrown on the road and must be assured some 
benefits as are available to regular staff. The other aspect of the matter is that the employer could not 
compelled to retain workcharged employees after the work for which the latter had been engaged is 
completed, as after all, he was employed before a particular job and the employer, be it the Government 
or any of its public undertakings, cannot taken upon itself the responsibility of that workman for all time 
to come. It can be well argued that such a workmen should feel happy and content that instead of 
remaining un-employed be got employment for a long time. 


To assure Industrial peace and economic justice to such class of workmen some balance has 
in my opinion to be stuck between the two extremes. It is the duty of the State under the Directive 
Principles enunciated in part 4 of the constitution to secure and protect that social order in which 
justice, social and economic could be had by all institutions of national life. I fell that it is equally the 
duty of an adjudicator of industrial disputes charged with the duty of administering social justice to be 
guided by the fundamentals contained in this chapter though he has to bear In mind the limits of the 
economic capacity of the employer and Endeavour must have ever be made to secure work for every 
citizen do in our present economy. It is not possible to immediately achieve that object. The workman 
employed by the respondent management are drawn from different states out of which I am informed 
about 60 thousands are from Punjab about 22000 from Himachal Pradesh and the remaining from the 
states of Rajasthan and Haryana. Some of the workmen are from U.P and Bihar and a handful from 
Kerala. The board hasby and large been consistently following the Punjab pattern in the matter of wage 
structure, revision thereof from time to time and grant of dearness allowance. It is only with regard to 
categories not appearing in the common Schedule of Rates prepared by the erstwhile United State of 
Punjab that the board took its independence decisions on the recommendations of its own standing 
committee.Even Himachal Pradesh Government generally followed the Punjab policy.The state 
government of Punjab in its wisdom, and I should say rightly has declared that the services of work 
charged employees in building and roads branch who had worked for 70 years or more would stand 
regularized in the sense that the workmen would be treated at par with those in the regular service of the 
state government.The benefit of this announcement was afterwards extended to the employees of its 
irrigation branch as well at the workman who held from Punjab continue to stay in their parents state 
the services of those who had put in ॥0 years or more would have been regularized the respondent 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 439 


management too in pursuance of its policy to follow the Punjab pattern might have regularized the 
services of at least of those workmen who had come from Punjab but any such course would have 
created awkward situation as the workmen from other States could not be discriminated in this 
respect.Moreover financial implications and other complications are involved. 


In such circumstances stated abovel would have directed that the services of those of the 
workman who have been continuously employed for more than 70 years should be regularized. But the 
other problems arising from such a direction including financial impact on the employer cannot be lost 
sight of The Central Government through the board is only managing on behalf of the state of Punjab, 
Rajasthan Haryana and Himachal Pradesh who are partners in the venture.Several aspects of the 
question were discussed with the workmen and the management in the course of arguments and a 
formula evolved to which the workman virtually agreed and I feel that such a solution as stated 
hereunder is quite just to all the parties provided it is work out, honestly stated. No doubt,what is referred 
to me is the matter of regularization of the services of work charge employees, but the directions that I 
am issuing in my opinion, amount to only granting lesser relief than claimed by the workmen. The 
management can also have no grievance if it wants industrial peace and is anxious to secure 
employment to the work-charged employees after the completion of the work. It is accordingly, directed 
that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six months thereof for the 
maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be recruited or transferred from 
any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, the offer shall first be made to 
the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in ॥0 years’ continuous service or 
more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs subject to the medical fitness 
of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will not, however, be disturbed to 
their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected. The workmen have expressed an apprehension 
that near the completion of the Project trades of some of them might be changed so that it could be said 
that a suitable workman needed for a particular job was not available and an outsider was therefore 
necessary to be employed. To protect the workmen against this possible denial of their rights it is further 
directed that category or trade of no workman shall be changed within one year preceding the 
completion of the Project without his consent in writing and that if any such change without consent is 
made it will have no consequence inasmuch as such a workman will be entitled to the job of his earlier 
trade provided the vacancy relates to that trade. As regards those of the workmen who cannot be 
absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no reason to doubt that the State Government who are 
beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central Government will make every reasonable effort to get 
them re-employed at any other Project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of 
the country where there is a need for workmen of those trades.” 


20. A perusal of aforesaid findings made it ample clear that the order has been passed by the then learned Presiding 
Officer, CGIT, Chandigarh to maintain industrial peace and to secure employment to the work charged employees 
after the completion of the work and it was also held by the learned CGIT thatState Govt. who are beneficiary under 
the project and the Central Govt. will make every reasonable effort to get those workmen re-employed at any other 
project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of the country where there is a need of 
workmen of those trades. 


2l. Admittedly, in this case, no effort was made by the respondent to give any employment after the retrenchment 
of the workmen and even there is non-compliance of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules. The same are reproduced 
below: 


77. Maintenance of seniority list of workmen. -The employer shall prepare a list of all workmen in the 
particular category from which retrenchment is contemplated to be arranged according to the seniority of 
their service in that category and cause a copy thereof to be pasted on a notice board in a conspicuous 
place in the premises of the industrial establishment at least seven days before the actual date of 
retrenchment. 


78. Re-employment of retrenched workmen. - (7) At least ten days before the date on which vacancies are 
to be filled, the employer shall arrange for the display on a notice board in a conspicuous place in the 
premises of the industrial establishment details of those vacancies and shall also give intimation of those 
vacancies by registered post to every one of all the retrenched workmen eligible to be considered therefor, 
to the address given by him at the time of retrenchment or at any time thereafter: 


Provided that where the number of such vacancies is less than the number of retrenched workmen, it shall 
be sufficient if intimation is given by the employer individually to the senior-most retrenched workmen in 
the list referred to in rule 77 the number of such senior-most workmen being double the number of such 
vacancies: 


4320 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Provided further that where the vacancy is of a duration of less than one month there shall be no obligation 
on the employer to send intimation of such vacancy to individual retrenched workmen: 


Provided also that if a retrenched workman, without sufficient cause being shown in writing to the 
employer, does not offer himself for re-employment on the date or dates specified in the intimation sent to 
him by the employer under this sub-rule, the employer may not intimate to him the vacancies that may be 
filled on any subsequent occasion. ] 


(2) Immediately after complying with the provisions of sub-rule (/), the employer shall also inform the 
trade unions connected with the industrial establishment, of the number of vacancies to be filled and names 
of the retrenched workmen to whom intimation has been sent under that sub-rule: 


Provided that the provisions of this sub-rule need not be complied with by the employer in any case where 
an intimation is sent to every one of the workmen mentioned in the list prepared under rule 77. 


22. However, the present work charged employee and other work-charged employees have been retrenched long 
back and even at the stage it is impossible to re-employe them. However, certainly in respect of workcharged 
employees present Respondent was directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Judgment of Jaswant Singh (Supra) to 
give benefits in terms of settlement and award dated 5.05.974. The main purpose of Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
Ld. CGIT Chandigarh was to rehabilitate to some extent the work charged employees and restore peace and congenial 
atmosphere that is why Ld. CGIT Chandigarh had given directions to all state to re-employe them. Thus, it does not 
lie in the mouth of present Respondent that no relief can be granted against present Respondent as petitioners are not 
their employees. 


A. So far as this argument of Ld. AR of the management that those work charged employees only who have 
completed 0 years of service were required to be adjusted within 6 months from their retrenchment is concerned, the 
same is devoid of merit as no effort was made by the management to adjust the work charged employees. Moreover, 
no documentary evidence has been produced that any effort was made to adjust the workman after his retrenchment. 
Further, Ld. CGIT Chandigarh in its last lines concluded as under:- 


“As regards those of the workmen who cannot be absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no 
reason to doubt that the State Government who are beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central 
Government will make every reasonable effort to get them re-employed at any other Project or work 
whether in any one of these states or in any other part of the country where there is a need of workmen 
of those trades” 


Nothing has come on record that above directions were complied with. 


23. Moreover, in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees and management, it 
cannot be interfered what were the terms and conditions in the said settlement. Further, CGIT Chandigarh has fixed 
ten years time and accrual of vacancy within six months keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and 
has evolved his own formula to bring peace and harmony between work charged employees and management but it 
cannot be said to be a universal policy in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees 
and management. However, no effort was made to adjust the petitioners in view of order of CGIT. 


24. As regard, this contention of learned AR of management that petitioners were not the employees of the BBMB 
but were the employees of BCB, the same is devoid of merit as Discharge certificate was issued by the BBMB. 
Moreover, as per respondent Beas Control Board was constituted in the year |960. BCB was constituted in the year 
966 and all the projects were transferred from Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 
79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various 
works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB 
constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project 
has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project 
have been so transferred. All the projects under BCB were completed in the year 984 and BCB ceased to exist in 
984. When all work of BCB stands transferred to BBMB so it cannot be said that BBMB is separate identity than 
BCB. Rather BCB has merged in BBMB. Moreover, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh case(supra) in respect 
of work charged employees has no where stated that relief can be sought by work charged employees only against the 
BCB. So contention of Ld. AR of the management that BCB and BBMB are two separate entities is devoid of merit. 


25. So far this argument of Law Officer for the respondent that the case is hopelessly time barred is concerned, the 
same is again devoid of merits as there was non-compliance of Rule 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules which has been 
reproduced above. Moreover, there is no limitation period prescribed for filing a reference. Moreover, reference was 
received in the year 2005 and thereafter, several rounds of litigations have taken place. So far as case laws on the 
point of limitation the same are not attracted in the present case as there was no compliance of Judgment of Jawant 
Singh case (Supra). 


26. However, it is added that workman was allowed terminal benefits as admitted by him. Moreover, it is also not 
case of the petitioner that there is breach of.0 Section 25 F of the Act. 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 432] 


27. Further, there was non-compliance of Jaswant Singh Case (Supra), Reference No.2C of 97 and Rule 77 & 78 
of Industrial Rules and in this case it would be highly difficult to re-employe the workman. The only remedy left is to 
compensate the workman in term of money. 


28. Keeping in view the fact and circumstances of the present case and other connected case of similar nature the 
following scheme of compensation is deemed fit by this Tribunal: 


i. Work charged employee who has completed 5 years of service shall be entitled for Rs.50,000/- along with 
interest @9% per annum as compensation from the date of moving of application till the realization of 
amount. 


ii. Work charged employee who has completed less than 5 years but more than | year would be entitled 
Rs.25,000/- along with interest @9% per annum from the date of moving of application till the realization 
of amount. 


iii. Those employees who have not completed | year will not be entitled for any compensation in the present 
case. 


The present work charged workman was employed on 09.06.!972 and was retrenched on 8.0.978 as 
mentioned in Discharge Certificate which is placed on file issued by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB 
Sundernagar, and has worked for 6 years and about 4 months (more than 5 years) so he is entitled of 
Rs.50,000/- along with interest @9% per annum from the date of moving the application till its 
realization. 


29. The reference is answered accordingly and stands disposed off. 


30. Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section 7 of the Act for 
publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 870.— siete = विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
बी. बी. एम. बी. के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह - श्रम न्यायालय नंबर Il चंडीगढ़ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 243/2005) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 29/08/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[फा. सं. Va—-2302/76/2004-arg. आर. (S.C4-ID] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 26th September, 2024 


S.O. 870.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. १४०.2३/2005) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court NO 2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of BBMB and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 29/08/2024. 


[F. No. L-2302/76/2004— IR (CM-ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh. 
Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 


ID No. 23 /2005 

Registered on:- 03.08.2005 

Mangloo Ram S/o Siblu, C/o Shri Hem Prabh S/o Sh. Bali Ram, R/o Village Bhayarta, P.O. Chanahan, Teh. & Distt. 
Mandi (HP). 


"0०००० Workman 


4322 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Versus 
l. | Bhakra Beas management Board, Madhya Marg, Sector 9-B, Chandigarh through its Chairman. 
2. The Chief Engineer, BSL Project Sundernagar Township, Distt. Mandi, (HP). 
..... Respondents/Managements 
AWARD 
Passed on:- 5.07.2024 


Central Government vide Notification No.L-2302/76/2004-IR(CM-ID), dated 07.07.2005, under clause (d) of sub- 
section (l) of Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947(hereinafter called the Act), has referred the following 
Industrial dispute for adjudication to this Tribunal:- 


“Whether the demand of Shri Mangloo Ram for reinstatement in the services of BBMB, Sunder 
Nagar is legal and justified? If so, to what relief the concerned workman is entitled and from which 
date? 


l. The brief facts, related to the case are that the construction of Beas Sutluj Link Project{hereinafter called as 
BSL(P)} started in the year 962 under Beas Control Board, which was constituted on 0.02.96l with its 
headquarter at Sundernagar and this project was under the control of Centre Government, who had been constructing, 
maintaining, operating and administrating it through various Boards in different phases. After passing of Pb. Re- 
Organisation Act, 966(hereinafter called “Re-Organisation Act”) Beas Control Board was replaced by Beas 
Construction Board (hereinafter called “BCB”). The workman was employed by Beas Construction Board on 
0.I.972. The workman who was employed in Beas Project(Unit-l) become the employee of Bhakra Beas 
Management Board(hereinafter called as BBMB) in pursuance of proviso () of Section 80(3) and Section 80(5) of 
Re-organisation Act and the workman become the employee of the Centre Government under the management of 
B.B.M.B. from 5.05.!976. The workman has completed 240 days in every calendar year and was not interrupted till 
his retrenchment. The employer made a bulk retrenchment of project employees in the year 977 and 978 and also in 
stages thereafter till !984. The workman was also retrenched by the employer on 0.2.978 on account of reduction 
in strength due to part completion of the BSL(P) and re-employment certificate was issued by the office of re- 
settlement B.S.L/B.B.M.B. Sundernagar for the re-employment of the retrenched workmen of B.S.L.(P)(BBMB) in 
accordance with provision of the Act. After the retrenchment of the workman, thousands of other persons were 
appointed secretly by employer, violating Section 25-G and Section 25-H of the I.D. Act, !947. The employer is also 
doing unfair labour practices as defined in Section 2(R)A of the ID Act. Management has also violated the provisions 
of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial Dispute(Central) Rule, !957(hereinafter called “The Industrial Rules”). By filling 
vacant posts, the employer declared some posts as surplus and retrenched the employees working on those posts. 


2. It is also maintained that the present workman and other workmen have filed a Civil Writ Petition No.403/I996, 
titled as Sant Ram and 87 others Vs. BBMB in the Hon’ble High Court of Shimla for their re-employment and in the 
said writ petition management filed reply dated 6.04.996 by way of affidavit and admitted that retrenched workmen 
are employee of BBMB. The workmen have then withdrew the writ petition and filed civil suits for declaring them as 
a retrenched workmen of BBMB before the Sub-Judge, ।7 Class, Sunder Nagar, Distt. Mandi(HP), on 2.0.997 and 
later on those suits were decided on 05.07.2002 and all plaints were returned to the workmen to be filed before the 
competent authority on the basis of which the present proceedings were initiated after referring of the dispute of 
workman from the Ministry of Labour on 07.07.2005. Thereafter, management filed writ petition before the Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court against the order of Ministry on 07.07.2005 and the same was dismissed on 07.05.2007 
and Special Leave Petition filed bearing nos.l6939-!7007 of 2007 in Hon’ble Supreme Court of India by the 
management was also dismissed on 08.07.20]4. It is therefore, prayed that the claim petition of the workman may 
kindly be allowed and workman be continued in the service of the management and be regularized and further be 
given all the consequential benefits. 


3. Management filed written statement, alleging therein that workman is Ex-work charged employee of Beas 
Construction Board, which was constituted under Section 80(.) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was 
retrenched after completion of the work of BCB in the year 978. The workman was paid terminal benefits i.e. 
retrenchment compensation, gratuity, ex-gratia amount on account of his retrenchment from BCB as per provisions of 
ID Act. It is further maintained that BCB and present management are two distinct and separate entities. It is also 
maintained that construction of Beas Project was undertaken by the Punjab Govt. Irrigation Department prior to the 
re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab on 0.0!.966. After re-organisation the work of BSL(P) was taken 
over by the Central Govt. on behalf of partner states of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The Central Govt. constituted 
BCB under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act and further stipulated that any component of Beas Project in 
relation to which the construction has been completed be transferred by the Central Govt. to Bhakra Management 
Board(hereinafter called as BMB) constituted under Section 79(l) of the Re-organisation Act. It is further stated 
under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act that BMB would be re-named as BBMB when any component of Beas 
Project was transferred under Section 80(6) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was employed by the BCB. 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4323 


Thus, the workman never remained the employee of management. However, it is stated that 093 work-charged and 
2 contingent paid employees of Beas Project were sent on job order basis to Ranjit Sagar Dam, Punjab. They were 
taken over by the management under the benevolent policy of the Central Govt. as Central Govt. had given directions 
to BBMB to absorb these employees. The remaining work-charged employees were not entitled for the said benefit. 
Even work-charged employees of the BCB had filed a petition in the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, titled as 
Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., /979 SCC 440, in which their claim for absorbing them in 
BBMB is not granted instead their retrenchment from BCB was upheld. Remaining averments have been denied and 
it is stated that the claim of the workman is hopelessly time barred and the workman has no legal enforceable right to 
claim employment in BBMB. It is prayed that claim be dismiss. 


4. A replication was also filed by workman contravening the facts taken in written statement as reiterating the 
facts as stated in claim petition. 


5. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 


6. |The workman has examined himself as WW and filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WWI/A and has been 
cross-examined by the learned law officer of management. He also tendered document Ex. W-| Discharge Certificate, 
Ex.W-2 Identity Card. 


7. The management has filed affidavit of N.M. Jain, Sub-Divisional Officer, Sub- Division BBMB Sunder Nagar, 
who filed his affidavit in evidence as ४5.५० ]/५ and has been cross-examined by the learned counsel of workman. 


8. While arguing the case, learned Law Officer for the management contended that initially Beas Control Board 
was constituted in the year !960. BCB was constituted in the year 966 and all the projects were transferred from 
Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB 
was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. 
Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be 
re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the 
BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project have been so transferred. All the projects under 
BCB were completed in the year !984 and BCB ceased to exist in 984. Present workman was employed as work 
charged employee 0I..972 and was retrenched on 0I.2.978. All similar work charged employees including the 
present workman was engaged by the BCB which ceased to exist in the year 984 therefore, the workmen cannot be 
termed as the employees of the BBMB because there does not exist BCB which was his parent department. Moreover, 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case titled as Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., 7/929 SCC 
440 has held that work charged employees were bound by the settlement dated June 28, 977 effected by the 
management and also by the award 2-C of the year !97 before Sh. H.R. Sodhi, Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh 
between workman and employees of the Beas Construction Board, Sunder Nagar and published in the gazette on 
5.06.974 of the Govt. of India. 


9. So far as the claim of the workman regarding re-employment after retrenchment on 0I.2.978 is concerned, 
workman was not entitled for re-instatement as in a case under reference no.2-C of 97 decided by Sh. H.R. Sodhi, 
the then Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh, it was held that management in order to establish an industrial peace 
and to secure the work charge employees after completing the work can engage after completion of project at any 
time within 6 months for the maintenance of staff for project of any work if it is required to those work charged 
employees in order to seniority who have put l0 years of service. The relevant portion of para is reproduced as below: 


“It is accordingly, directed that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six 
months thereof for the maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be 
recruited or transferred from any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, 
the offer shall first be made to the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 
years’ continuous service or more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs 
subject to the medical fitness of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will 
not, however, be disturbed to their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected.“ 


0. Because the present workman had not completed 0 years of service so he is not entitled for re-employment. 
Learned representative for the management further contended that in this case workman was retrenched on 
0.2.978 after receiving due retrenchment compensation etc. and now he is claiming re-employment under Section 
25-H of the Act and his claim is hopelessly time barred as he has filed the present claim petition on 20.07.2005. To 
support this view he has placed reliance in the case titled as Chief Engineer Ranjit Sagar Dam & Anr. Vs. Sham Lal, 
AIR 2006, Supreme Court 2682, wherein in identical matters Court has not entertained writ petition due to inordinate 
delay. In the present case there is a delay of about 27 years. He also relied upon the case titled as Ram Chand Vs. The 
BBMB and another, CWP_no.2787 of 2078, decided ०७ 03३. ।2, 20/8(0॥765प्रा6 R-4) where the Hon’ble Himachal 
Pradesh High Court has held that dispute if any ought to be raised within a reasonable period as the ID Act does not 
prescribed time limit for referring such dispute. In the present case workman was engaged as Beldar in the year 972 
and was discharged on 0.2.978 and he has sought re-employment after 33 years which was held to be highly time 


4324 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


barred. Thus, he contended that claim of workman is time barred. Workman was discharged on 0I.2.978 and 
thereafter he filed present claim before the Labour Conciliation Officer on 30..2005. 


ll. While arguing the case, learned AR for the workman contended that in this case workman was discharged on 
0.2.978 due to reduction in strength and he was issued discharge certificate by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB 
Sundernagar. He referred to Section 25-H of the ID Act which provides re-employment of retrenched workman. He 
further has drawn the attention of the Court towards the statement of the workman. He was required to be adjust in 
view of under Section 25-G of the Act by the management Discharge Certificate was issued by the Management. He 
was not given any employment. While arguing further, learned AR for the workman referred to Rule 77 and 78 of the 
Industrial Dispute Central Rule 957(hereinafter called Industrial Rule). Rule 77 provides maintenance of seniority 
list of workman and it states that before any worker is retrenched the appellant-establishment is required to place on 
the notice board the seniority list of all the workmen who were to be retrenched but nothing has been done in this 
regard before retrenchment of the present worker. She also referred to Rule 78 which provides that as and when any 
vacancy incurred then retrenched workmen were required to be given registered notice but nothing was done by the 
management. Moreover, question of limitation does not arise as no limitation period has been prescribed under the 
Act for seeking relief under Clause (d) of Sub-Section (l) of Section 0 of the ID Act. Learned AR for the workman 
further contended that even reference made by the Government dated 07.07.2005 was challenged by the management 
in the Hon’ble Punjab & Haryana High Court vide Writ Petition ।२०.३(00 of 2006 and their writ petition was 
dismissed by the Hon’ble High Court on 07.05.2007. Even SLP filed against the order dated 07.05.2007 was upheld 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in SLP No. 6979/2007 dated 08.07.204. 


2. Ihave given due consideration to the arguments advanced by the learned AR for the workman and also for the 
management. 


3. The management relied upon mainly in this case on the case titled as Jaswant Singh and another(supra), 
which is very material for decision of this case. The said judgment deals with two types of petitioners. First type of 
petitioners were employed by the BCB on purely temporary basis and they had also given written undertaking 
confirming the term of their appointment. The BCB appointed the first type of petitioners on ad hoc basis with a clear 
understanding that they will have no right to be retained in service after the completion of the Beas Project. They are 
Engineers, Section Officer, Accounts Clerk, Teacher etc. and they have claimed their parity with other employees 
who belonged to the services of the Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan Governments and who were serving on deputation 
in connection with the works of the BhakraNangal Scheme. 


4. Inrespect of these employees, it was held as follow:- 


“To sum up, we are of the opinion that the petitioners are employees of the Central Government. Their 
conditions of service will be primarily governed by the terms of their appointment but, if they are entitled 
to the benefit of any of the rules of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules 7/965, they may 
make representations in that behalf to the appropriate authorities. It is, however, not possible for this 
Court to grant to the petitioners any of the reliefs claimed by them as arising out of the provisions of the 
aforesaid rules, including the relief by way of a declaration that they shall be deemed to be in quasi- 
permanent service under rule 3. We are further of the opinion that the petitioners have no right to be 
transferred to the services of the Bhakra Management Board, now re-named as the Bhakra Beas 
Management Board. Lastly, the proposed retrenchment of the petitioners does not offend against the 
guarantee of equality contained in articles ॥4 and 76 of the Constitution, since the petitioners and the 
Deputationists belong to two different and distinct classes.” 


l5. As regards, second type of employees i.e. work charged employees the judgment deals in Para 4, 42, 43, 44, 
45, 46 and 47 which read as follow:- 


“4I, A work-charged establishment broadly means an establishment of which the expenses, including 
the wages and allowances of the staff, are chargeable to "works". The pay and allowances of employees 
who are borne on a work-charged establishment are generally shown as a separate sub-head of the 
estimated cost of the work. 


42. The entire strength of labour employed for the purposes of the Beas Project was work-charged. The 
work-charged employees are engaged on a temporary basis and their appointments are made for the 
execution of a specified work. From the very nature of their employment, their services automatically 
come to an end on the completion of the works for the sole purpose of which they are employed. They do 
not get any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor do they receive any retrenchment benefits or 
any benefits under the Employees State Insurance Schemes. 


43. But though the work-charged employees are denied these benefits, they are industrial workers and 
are entitled to the benefits of the pro- visions contained in the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow 
from that special enactment under which even contracts of employment are open to adjustment9 and 


[भाग —ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4325 


modification. The work-charged employees, therefore, are in a better position than temporary servant 
like the other petitioners who are liable to be thrown out of employment without any kind of 
compensatory benefits. 


44. The record of Writ Petition No. 4505 of 79768 shows that offers of alternative employment were 
made to the work- charged employees and many of them have accepted those offers. The rule of ‘last 
come, first go’ has also been consistently adopted while retrenching the work-charged employees. In fact 
the work-charged employees possess a unique right as industrial employees since, by reason of section 
25706) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the provisions of Chapter VA, "Lay-off and Retrenchment", have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law including standing 
orders made under the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, 7946. 


45. There were in all about 36000 work-charged employees working on the Beas Project. Out of them, 
about 26000 have already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the 
workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi, under section 72 of the Industrial Disputes Act, /947, All the 72 
unions of which the work-charged employees are members were parties to the said conciliation 
proceedings. By reason of section 76652 (6) of the Industrial Disputes Act, a settlement arrived at in the 
course of a conciliation proceeding is binding on all persons who were employed in the establishment to 
which the dispute relates, whether they were employed on the date of the dispute or subsequently. In 
Ramnagar Cane and Sugar Co. Ltd. v. JatinChakravorty and ors., it was held by this Court that it is not 
even necessary, in order to bind the work men to the settlement arrived at before the conciliator, to show 
that they belonged to the union which took part in the conciliation proceedings, since the policy 
underlying section 76 of the Act is to give an extended operation to such settlements. In the instant case, 
all the 72 unions which represented the workmen on the work-charged establishment were parties to the 
conciliation proceedings. The settlement will therefore bind all the work-charged employees. 


46. Apart from the settlement in the conciliation proceedings, an award was made by the Industrial 
Tribunal, Central, Chandigarh, in Reference No. 2-6 of 7977, in an industrial dispute between the work- 
charged employees of the Beas-Sutlej Link Project, Sundernagar, with which we are concerned, and the 
management. Under that award, as stated in the award itself, a consent formula was evolved to which 
the workmen "virtually agreed". The benefits which flow- to the work- charged employees under the 
aforesaid award dated May 75, 7974, have been accepted by almost all the work- charged employees, 
involving a burden of about Rs. 3 crores on the employers. 


47. Since the work-charged employees are bound by the settlement dated June 28, 7977 effected 
between them and the management in the conciliation proceedings and since they are also bound by and 
have accepted benefits under the consent award dated May 75, 79724 they are not entitled to any rights 
apart from those flowing from the aforesaid settlement and the Award. SLP ४०. /246 of 7979 which is 
filed to challenge the Award and C.M.P. No.2077 of 7979 which is filed for condonation of the delay of 
over four and half years caused in filing the SLP shall have to be dismissed.” 


6. Thus, from the above observation of Supreme Court it is clear that work charged employees are engaged on a 
temporary basis and their appointments are made for the specified work and their service comes to an end on the 
completion of work for the sole purpose of which they are employed. 


7. Para 43 provides that work charged employees are industrial worker and entitled to the benefit of the provisions 
contained under the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow from that special enactment under which even contracts 
of employment are open to adjustment and modification. Para 45 as reproduced above further provides that in the 
conciliation proceeding it has been held that there were about 36000 work charged employees working on Beas 
Project out of them 26000 has already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the 
workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour Commissioner(Central), 
New Delhi under Section 2 of the ID Act. The said settlement is binding on all the work charge employees who are 
working in the establishment to which the dispute relates. In para 46 it is further stated that apart from the settlement 
in the conciliation proceeding an award was made by the CGIT Chandigarh in reference no.2-C in an industrial 
dispute between the work charged employee of the Beas Sutlej Project, Sundernagar with which we are concerned 
and the management. A consent formula was evolved to which the workmen virtually agreed. In the last para 47 itself 
specifically stated that work charged employees are bound by the settlement and award May |5, 974 and they were 
entitled to rights those flowing from the settlement and award. 


8. So far as the settlement executed between the work charged employees and management through unions, the 
same has not been produced by the management despite opportunity was given to file the same. Thus, adverse 
interference can be drawn against them. To support this view, reliance can be placed to the judgment of Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court in case held 45200/08) RSJ 382 Ambika Parashad Versus Punjab Urban Planning 
and Development Authority Chandigarh _and_Another_wherein it has been held “that respondent has not 


4326 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


produced record in the Labour Court to prove that Workman has not completed 240 days of service though 
application was submitted by the Workman for production of record held that a person in possession of the 
best evidence has to produce the same, otherwise adverse inference can be drawn against the said party”. In 
this case also as per order dated 0.05.2024 of this Tribunal. Respondent were asked to produce the settlement arrived 
between the 2 union of the work charged employee and management under Section !2 of ID Act before the Regional 
Labour Commissioner, New Delhi and all the work charged employee were bound by the said settlement. However, 
despite of availing 2-3 opportunities i.e. 20.05.2024, 20.06.2024 and 09.07.2024 the said policy was not produced and 
as such adverse inference can be drawn against the management in view of the above law. 


9. As regards award passed by Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh, the relevant claim of the work 
charged employees was regarding their regularization services and the finding given by the Tribunal is as follow:- 


“Regulation of Services of the workcharged employees. 


It is an un-disputed fact that the entire strength of labour as employed in the Project is 
workcharged. The institution of workcharged establishment is not only necessary but sometime 
unavoidable. These workmen are engaged on temporary basis and their services are utilized for the 
execution of a specified work for which they may be suited. From the very nature of employment the 
services of such workman automatically come to an end on the completion of the work. A workcharged 
employee does not get any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor is he benefitted by the employees 
state Insurance Scheme. He does not indeed enjoy any retiral benefits. Before partition of the country in 
4947 it was not usual to have project, construction of which required a number of years to complete but 
after constituting ourselves into a democratic Republic and the Government having taken in hand five 
year plans for development of the country there are various schemes involving the construction of works 
for a period extending over several years as is the case of the instant Project. It commenced in /962 and 
more than 72 years having passed the completion might take another few years. In such situation it 
seems reasonable and fair that a workman who has, like a regular employee, spent the part of his life 
ranging from 5-0 years upto 20 year, should not be thrown on the road and must be assured some 
benefits as are available to regular staff. The other aspect of the matter is that the employer could not 
compelled to retain workcharged employees after the work for which the latter had been engaged is 
completed, as after all, he was employed before a particular job and the employer, be it the Government 
or any of its public undertakings, cannot taken upon itself the responsibility of that workman for all time 
to come. It can be well argued that such a workmen should feel happy and content that instead of 
remaining un-employed be got employment for a long time. 


To assure Industrial peace and economic justice to such class of workmen some balance has 
in my opinion to be stuck between the two extremes. It is the duty of the State under the Directive 
Principles enunciated in part 4 of the constitution to secure and protect that social order in which 
justice, social and economic could be had by all institutions of national life. I fell that it is equally the 
duty of an adjudicator of industrial disputes charged with the duty of administering social justice to be 
guided by the fundamentals contained in this chapter though he has to bear In mind the limits of the 
economic capacity of the employer and Endeavour must have ever be made to secure work for every 
citizen do in our present economy. It is not possible to immediately achieve that object. The workman 
employed by the respondent management are drawn from different states out of which I am informed 
about 60 thousands are from Punjab about 22000 from Himachal Pradesh and the remaining from the 
states of Rajasthan and Haryana. Some of the workmen are from U.P and Bihar and a handful from 
Kerala. The board hasby and large been consistently following the Punjab pattern in the matter of wage 
structure, revision thereof from time to time and grant of dearness allowance. It is only with regard to 
categories not appearing in the common Schedule of Rates prepared by the erstwhile United State of 
Punjab that the board took its independence decisions on the recommendations of its own standing 
committee.Even Himachal Pradesh Government generally followed the Punjab policy.The state 
government of Punjab in its wisdom, and I should say rightly has declared that the services of work 
charged employees in building and roads branch who had worked for 70 years or more would stand 
regularized in the sense that the workmen would be treated at par with those in the regular service of the 
state government.The benefit of this announcement was afterwards extended to the employees of its 
irrigation branch as well at the workman who held from Punjab continue to stay in their parents state 
the services of those who had put in 70 years or more would have been regularized the respondent 
management too in pursuance of its policy to follow the Punjab pattern might have regularized the 
services of at least of those workmen who had come from Punjab but any such course would have 
created awkward situation as the workmen from other States could not be discriminated in this 
respect.Moreover financial implications and other complications are involved. 


In such circumstances stated abovel would have directed that the services of those of the 
workman who have been continuously employed for more than 70 years should be regularized. But the 
other problems arising from such a direction including financial impact on the employer cannot be lost 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4327 


sight of The Central Government through the board is only managing on behalf of the state of Punjab, 
Rajasthan Haryana and Himachal Pradesh who are partners in the venture.Several aspects of the 
question were discussed with the workmen and the management in the course of arguments and a 
formula evolved to which the workman virtually agreed and I feel that such a solution as stated 
hereunder is quite just to all the parties provided it is work out, honestly stated. No doubt,what is referred 
to me is the matter of regularization of the services of work charge employees, but the directions that I 
am issuing in my opinion, amount to only granting lesser relief than claimed by the workmen. The 
management can also have no grievance if it wants industrial peace and is anxious to secure 
employment to the work-charged employees after the completion of the work. It is accordingly, directed 
that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six months thereof for the 
maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be recruited or transferred from 
any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, the offer shall first be made to 
the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 7/0 years’ continuous service or 
more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs subject to the medical fitness 
of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will not, however, be disturbed to 
their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected. The workmen have expressed an apprehension 
that near the completion of the Project trades of some of them might be changed so that it could be said 
that a suitable workman needed for a particular job was not available and an outsider was therefore 
necessary to be employed. To protect the workmen against this possible denial of their rights it is further 
directed that category or trade of no workman shall be changed within one year preceding the 
completion of the Project without his consent in writing and that if any such change without consent is 
made it will have no consequence inasmuch as such a workman will be entitled to the job of his earlier 
trade provided the vacancy relates to that trade. As regards those of the workmen who cannot be 
absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no reason to doubt that the State Government who are 
beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central Government will make every reasonable effort to get 
them re-employed at any other Project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of 
the country where there is a need for workmen of those trades.” 


20. A perusal of aforesaid findings made it ample clear that the order has been passed by the then learned Presiding 
Officer, CGIT, Chandigarh to maintain industrial peace and to secure employment to the work charged employees 
after the completion of the work and it was also held by the learned CGIT thatState Govt. who are beneficiary under 
the project and the Central Govt. will make every reasonable effort to get those workmen re-employed at any other 
project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of the country where there is a need of 
workmen of those trades. 


2l. Admittedly, in this case, no effort was made by the respondent to give any employment after the retrenchment 
of the workmen and even there is non-compliance of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules. The same are reproduced 
below: 


77. Maintenance of seniority list of workmen. -The employer shall prepare a list of all workmen in the 
particular category from which retrenchment is contemplated to be arranged according to the seniority of 
their service in that category and cause a copy thereof to be pasted on a notice board in a conspicuous 
place in the premises of the industrial establishment at least seven days before the actual date of 
retrenchment. 


78. Re-employment of retrenched workmen. - (7) At least ten days before the date on which vacancies are 
to be filled, the employer shall arrange for the display on a notice board in a conspicuous place in the 
premises of the industrial establishment details of those vacancies and shall also give intimation of those 
vacancies by registered post to every one of all the retrenched workmen eligible to be considered therefor, 
to the address given by him at the time of retrenchment or at any time thereafter: 


Provided that where the number of such vacancies is less than the number of retrenched workmen, it shall 
be sufficient if intimation is given by the employer individually to the senior-most retrenched workmen in 
the list referred to in rule 77 the number of such senior-most workmen being double the number of such 
vacancies: 


Provided further that where the vacancy is of a duration of less than one month there shall be no obligation 
on the employer to send intimation of such vacancy to individual retrenched workmen: 


Provided also that if a retrenched workman, without sufficient cause being shown in writing to the 
employer, does not offer himself for re-employment on the date or dates specified in the intimation sent to 
him by the employer under this sub-rule, the employer may not intimate to him the vacancies that may be 
filled on any subsequent occasion. ] 


4328 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(2) Immediately after complying with the provisions of sub-rule (7), the employer shall also inform the 
trade unions connected with the industrial establishment, of the number of vacancies to be filled and names 
of the retrenched workmen to whom intimation has been sent under that sub-rule: 


Provided that the provisions of this sub-rule need not be complied with by the employer in any case where 
an intimation is sent to every one of the workmen mentioned in the list prepared under rule 77. 


22. However, the present work charged employee and other work-charged employees have been retrenched long 
back and even at the stage it is impossible to re-employe them. However, certainly in respect of workcharged 
employees present Respondent was directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Judgment of Jaswant Singh (Supra) to 
give benefits in terms of settlement and award dated 5.05.974. The main purpose of Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
Ld. CGIT Chandigarh was to rehabilitate to some extent the work charged employees and restore peace and congenial 
atmosphere that is why Ld. CGIT Chandigarh had given directions to all state to re-employe them. Thus, it does not 
lie in the mouth of present Respondent that no relief can be granted against present Respondent as petitioners are not 
their employees. 


A. So far as this argument of Ld. AR of the management that those work charged employees only who have 
completed 0 years of service were required to be adjusted within 6 months from their retrenchment is concerned, the 
same is devoid of merit as no effort was made by the management to adjust the work charged employees. Moreover, 
no documentary evidence has been produced that any effort was made to adjust the workman after his retrenchment. 
Further, Ld. CGIT Chandigarh in its last lines concluded as under:- 


“As regards those of the workmen who cannot be absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no 
reason to doubt that the State Government who are beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central 
Government will make every reasonable effort to get them re-employed at any other Project or work 
whether in any one of these states or in any other part of the country where there is a need of workmen 
of those trades” 


Nothing has come on record that above directions were complied with. 


23. Moreover, in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees and management, it 
cannot be interfered what were the terms and conditions in the said settlement. Further, CGIT Chandigarh has fixed 
ten years time and accrual of vacancy within six months keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and 
has evolved his own formula to bring peace and harmony between work charged employees and management but it 
cannot be said to be a universal policy in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees 
and management. However, no effort was made to adjust the petitioners in view of order of CGIT. 


24. As regard, this contention of learned AR of management that petitioners were not the employees of the BBMB 
but were the employees of BCB, the same is devoid of merit as Discharge certificate was issued by the BBMB. 
Moreover, as per respondent Beas Control Board was constituted in the year !960. BCB was constituted in the year 
966 and all the projects were transferred from Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 
79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various 
works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB 
constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project 
has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project 
have been so transferred. All the projects under BCB were completed in the year 984 and BCB ceased to exist in 
984. When all work of BCB stands transferred to BBMB so it cannot be said that BBMB is separate identity than 
BCB. Rather BCB has merged in BBMB. Moreover, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh case(supra) in respect 
of work charged employees has no where stated that relief can be sought by work charged employees only against the 
BCB. So contention of Ld. AR of the management that BCB and BBMB are two separate entities is devoid of merit. 


25. So far this argument of Law Officer for the respondent that the case is hopelessly time barred is concerned, the 
same is again devoid of merits as there was non-compliance of Rule 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules which has been 
reproduced above. Moreover, there is no limitation period prescribed for filing a reference. Moreover, reference was 
received in the year 2005 and thereafter, several rounds of litigations have taken place. So far as case laws on the 
point of limitation the same are not attracted in the present case as there was no compliance of Judgment of Jawant 
Singh case (Supra). 

26. However, it is added that workman was allowed terminal benefits as admitted by him. Moreover, it is also not 
case of the petitioner that there is breach of Section 25 F of the Act. 


27. Further, there was non-compliance of Jaswant Singh Case (Supra), Reference No.2C of 97 and Rule 77 & 78 
of Industrial Rules and in this case it would be highly difficult to re-employe the workman. The only remedy left is to 
compensate the workman in term of money. 


28. Keeping in view the fact and circumstances of the present case and other connected case of similar nature the 
following scheme of compensation is deemed fit by this Tribunal: 


[भाग I—arvs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4329 


i. Work charged employee who has completed 5 years of service shall be entitled for Rs.50,000/- along with 
interest @9% per annum as compensation from the date of moving of application till the realization of 
amount. 


ii. Work charged employee who has completed less than 5 years but more than | year would be entitled 
Rs.25,000/- along with interest @9% per annum from the date of moving of application till the realization of 
amount. 


iii. Those employees who have not completed | year will not be entitled for any compensation in the present 
case. 


The present work charged workman was employed on 0I.!.972 and was retrenched on 0.I2.978 as 
mentioned in Discharge Certificate (Ex.W-) issued by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB Sundernagar, and has worked 
for 6 years and about | month (more than 5 years) so he is entitled of Rs.50,000/- along with interest @9% per annum 
from the date of moving the application till its realization. 


29. The reference is answered accordingly and stands disposed off. 


30. Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section |7 of the Act for 
publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 26 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 874.— siete विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
बी. बी. एम. बी. के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह - श्रम न्यायालय नंबर Il चंडीगढ़ के Gare (संदर्भ संख्या 232/2005) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 29/08/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[फा. सं. Va-2302/65/2004-srg. आर. (सी.एम-.)] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 26th September, 2024 


S.O. 87.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No.232/2005) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court NO 2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of BBMB and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 29/08/2024. 


[F. No. L-2302/65/2004— IR (CM-ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh. 
Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 


ID No. 232 /2005 
Registered on:- 20.07.2005 
Niaz Mohd., S/o Shri Roshan Mohd deceased workman being represented through his following legal heirs: 


i.Gulzar Bibi W/o Niaz Mohd. 
ii. Mohammad Rafi S/o Niaz Mohd. 
All residents of Village & Post Officer Neer Chowk, The. Balh. Distt Mandi. 


Versus 
l. | Bhakra Beas management Board, Madhya Marg, Sector 9-B, Chandigarh through its Chairman. 
2. The Chief Engineer, BSL Project Sundernagar Township, Distt. Mandi, (HP). 


..... Respondents/Managements 


4330 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 
Passed on:- 8.07.2024 


Central Government vide Notification No.L-2302/65 /2004-IR(CM-II), dated 07.07.2005, under clause (d) of 
sub-section (l) of Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947(hereinafter called the Act), has referred the 
following Industrial dispute for adjudication to this Tribunal: - 


“Whether the demand of Shri Niaz Mohd for reinstatement in the services of BBMB, Sunder Nagar 
is legal and justified? If so, to what relief the concerned workman is entitled and from which date? 


l. At the very outset it is pertinent to mention here that Niaz Mohd. Expired on 2..2022 during the pendency of 
reference and his LRs were impleaded as party in his place on 25.0.2023 


2. The brief facts, related to the case are that the construction of Beas Sutluj Link Project{hereinafter called as 
BSL(P)} started in the year 962 under Beas Control Board, which was constituted on 0.02.96l with its 
headquarter at Sundernagar and this project was under the control of Centre Government, who had been constructing, 
maintaining, operating and administrating it through various Boards in different phases. After passing of Pb. Re- 
Organisation Act, l966(hereinafter called “Re-Organisation Act”) Beas Control Board was replaced by Beas 
Construction Board (hereinafter called as BCB). The workman was employed by Beas Construction Board on 
27..965. The workman who was employed in Beas Project(Unit-l) become the employee of Bhakra Beas 
Management Board(hereinafter called as BBMB) in pursuance of proviso (l) of Section 80(3) and Section 80(5) of 
Re-organisation Act and the workman become the employee of the Centre Government under the management of 
B.B.M.B. from 5.05.l976. The workman has completed 240 days in every calendar year and was not interrupted till 
his retrenchment. The employer made a bulk retrenchment of project employees in the year [977 and I978 and also in 
stages thereafter till |984. The workman was also retrenched by the employer on 28.08.978 on account of reduction 
in strength due to part completion of the BSL(P) and re-employment certificate was issued by the office of re- 
settlement B.S.L/B.B.M.B. Sundernagar for the re-employment of the retrenched workmen of B.S.L.(P)(BBMB) in 
accordance with provision of the Act. After the retrenchment of the workman, thousands of other persons were 
appointed secretly by employer, violating Section 25-G and Section 25-H of the I.D. Act, !947. The employer is also 
doing unfair labour practices as defined in Section 2(R)A of the ID Act. Management has also violated the provisions 
of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial Dispute(Central) Rule, !957(hereinafter called “The Industrial Rules”). By filling 
vacant posts, the employer declared some posts as surplus and retrenched the employees working on those posts. 


3. It is also maintained that the present workman and other workmen have filed a Civil Writ Petition १२०.403/996, 
titled as Sant Ram and 87 others Vs. BBMB in the Hon’ble High Court of Shimla for their re-employment and in the 
said writ petition management filed reply dated 6.04.996 by way of affidavit and admitted that retrenched workmen 
are employee of BBMB. The workmen have then withdrew the writ petition and filed civil suits for declaring them as 
a retrenched workmen of BBMB before the Sub-Judge, ।7 Class, Sunder Nagar, Distt. Mandi(HP), on 2.0.997 and 
later on those suits were decided on 05.07.2002 and all plaints were returned to the workmen to be filed before the 
competent authority on the basis of which the present proceedings were initiated after referring of the dispute of 
workman from the Ministry of Labour on 07.07.2005. Thereafter, management filed writ petition before the Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court against the order of Ministry on 07.07.2005 and the same was dismissed on 07.05.2007 
and Special Leave Petition filed bearing nos.l6939-!7007 of 2007 in Hon’ble Supreme Court of India by the 
management was also dismissed on 08.07.204. It is therefore, prayed that the claim petition of the workman may 
kindly be allowed and workman be continued in the service of the management and be regularized and further be 
given all the consequential benefits. 


4. Management filed written statement, alleging therein that workman is Ex-work charged employee of Beas 
Construction Board, which was constituted under Section 80(|) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was 
retrenched after completion of the work of BCB in the year 978. The workman was paid terminal benefits i.e. 
retrenchment compensation, gratuity, ex-gratia amount on account of his retrenchment from BCB as per provisions of 
ID Act. It is further maintained that BCB and present management are two distinct and separate entities. It is also 
maintained that construction of Beas Project was undertaken by the Punjab Govt. Irrigation Department prior to the 
re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab on 0.0!.966. After re-organisation the work of BSL(P) was taken 
over by the Central Govt. on behalf of partner states of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The Central Govt. constituted 
BCB under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act and further stipulated that any component of Beas Project in 
relation to which the construction has been completed be transferred by the Central Govt. to Bhakra Management 
Board(hereinafter called as BMB) constituted under Section 79(l) of the Re-organisation Act. It is further stated 
under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act that BMB would be re-named as BBMB when any component of Beas 
Project was transferred under Section 80(6) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was employed by the BCB. 
Thus, the workman never remained the employee of management. However, it is stated that 093 work-charged and 
2 contingent paid employees of Beas Project were sent on job order basis to Ranjit Sagar Dam, Punjab. They were 
taken over by the management under the benevolent policy of the Central Govt. as Central Govt. had given directions 
to BBMB to absorb these employees. The remaining work-charged employees were not entitled for the said benefit. 
Even work-charged employees of the BCB had filed a petition in the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, titled as 


[भाग —ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 433] 


Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., /979 SCC 440, in which their claim for absorbing them in 


BBMB is not granted instead their retrenchment from BCB was upheld. Remaining averments have been denied and 
it is stated that the claim of the workman is hopelessly time barred and the workman has no legal enforceable right to 
claim employment in BBMB. It is prayed that claim be dismiss. 


5. 86 replication was also filed by workman contravening the facts taken in written statement as reiterating the 
facts as stated in claim petition. 


6. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 


7. The workman Niaz Mohd. has examined himself as WW and filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW/A and 
has been cross-examined by the learned law officer of management. 


8. The management has filed affidavit of N.M. Jain, Sub-Divisional Officer, Sub- Division BBMB Sunder Nagar, 
who filed his affidavit in evidence as ४5.५० ]/५ and has been cross-examined by the learned counsel of workman. 


9. While arguing the case, learned Law Officer for the management contended that initially Beas Control Board 
was constituted in the year !960. BCB was constituted in the year 966 and all the projects were transferred from 
Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB 
was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. 
Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be 
re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the 
BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project have been so transferred. All the projects under 
BCB were completed in the year !984 and BCB ceased to exist in 984. Present workman was employed as work 
charged employee on 27..965 and was retrenched on 28.08.978. All similar work charged employees including 
the present workman was engaged by the BCB which ceased to exist in the year 984 therefore, the workmen cannot 
be termed as the employees of the BBMB because there does not exist BCB which was his parent department. 
Moreover, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case titled as Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., 
2929 SCC 440 has held that work charged employees were bound by the settlement dated June 28, [977 effected by 
the management and also by the award 2-C of the year 97l before Sh. H.R. Sodhi, Presiding Officer, CGIT- 
Chandigarh between workman and employees of the Beas Construction Board, Sunder Nagar and published in the 
gazette on 5.06.974 of the Govt. of India. 


0. So far as the claim of the workman regarding re-employment after retrenchment on 28.08.l978 is concerned, 
workman was not entitled for re-instatement as in a case under reference no.2-C of 97 decided by Sh. H.R. Sodhi, 
the then Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh, it was held that management in order to establish an industrial pleas 
and to secure the work charge employees after completing the work can engage after completion of project at any 
time within 6 months for the maintenance of staff for project of any work if it is required to those work charged 
employees in order to seniority who have put l0 years of service. The relevant portion of para is reproduced as below: 


“It is accordingly, directed that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six 
months thereof for the maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be 
recruited or transferred from any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, 
the offer shall first be made to the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 
years’ continuous service or more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs 
subject to the medical fitness of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will 
not, however, be disturbed to their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected Because the present 
workmen had not completed 0 years of service so they are not entitled for re-employment. Learned 
representative for the management further contended that in this case workmen were retrenched on 
28.08.978 after receiving due retrenchment compensation etc. and now they are claiming re-employment 
under Section 25-H of the Act and their claim is hopelessly time barred as they have filed the present claim 
petition on 20.07.2005. To support this view he has placed reliance in the case titled as Chief Engineer 


Ranjit Sagar Dam_& Anr. Vs. Sham Lal, AIR 2006, Supreme Court 2682, wherein in identical matters 
Court has not entertained writ petition due to inordinate delay. In the present case there is a delay of about 


27 years. He also relied upon the case titled as Ram Chand Vs. The BBMB and another, CWP _no.2787 of 
20708, decided on 03. /2. 20/8(3॥765प्रा6 R-4) where the Hon’ble Himachal Pradesh High Court has held 
that dispute if any ought to be raised within a reasonable period as the ID Act does not prescribed time limit 
for referring such dispute. In the present case workman was engaged as Beldar in the year 965 and was 
discharged on 28.08.978 and he has sought re-employment after 40 years which was held to be highly 
time barred. Thus, he contended that claim of workman is time barred. Workman was discharged on 
28.08.978 and thereafter he filed present claim before the Labour Conciliation Officer on 0.2.2005. 


ll. While arguing the case, learned AR for the workman contended that in this case workman was discharged on 
28.08.978 due to reduction in strength and he was issued discharge certificate by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB 
Sundernagar. He referred to Section 25-H of the ID Act which provides re-employment of retrenched workman. He 
further has drawn the attention of the Court towards the statement of the workman. He was required to be adjust in 


4332 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


view of under Section 25-G of the Act by the management Discharge Certificate was issued by the Management. He 
was not given any employment. While arguing further, learned AR for the workman referred to Rule 77 and 78 of the 
Industrial Dispute Central Rule 957(hereinafter called Industrial Rule). Rule 77 provides maintenance of seniority 
list of workman and it states that before any worker is retrenched the appellant-establishment is required to place on 
the notice board the seniority list of all the workmen who were to be retrenched but nothing has been done in this 
regard before retrenchment of the present worker. She also referred to Rule 78 which provides that as and when any 
vacancy incurred then retrenched workmen were required to be given registered notice but nothing was done by the 
management. Moreover, question of limitation does not arise as no limitation period has been prescribed under the 
Act for seeking relief under Clause (d) of Sub-Section () of Section 0 of the ID Act. Learned AR for the workman 
further contended that even reference made by the Government dated 07.07.2005 was challenged by the management 
in the Hon’ble Punjab & Haryana High Court vide Writ Petition ।०.३(00 of 2006 and their writ petition was 
dismissed by the Hon’ble High Court on 07.05.2007. Even SLP filed against the order dated 07.05.2007 was upheld 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in SLP No. 6979/2007 dated 08.07.204. 


2. Ihave given due consideration to the arguments advanced by the learned AR for the workman and also for the 
management. 


3. The management relied upon mainly in this case on the case titled as Jaswant Singh and _another(supra), 
which is very material for decision of this case. The said judgment deals with two types of petitioners. First type of 
petitioners were employed by the BCB on purely temporary basis and they had also given written undertaking 
confirming the term of their appointment. The BCB appointed the first type of petitioners on ad hoc basis with a clear 
understanding that they will have no right to be retained in service after the completion of the Beas Project. They are 
Engineers, Section Officer, Accounts Clerk, Teacher etc. and they have claimed their parity with other employees 
who belonged to the services of the Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan Governments and who were serving on deputation 
in connection with the works of the BhakraNangal Scheme. 


4. In respect of these employees, it was held as follow:- 


“To sum up, we are of the opinion that the petitioners are employees of the Central Government. Their 
conditions of service will be primarily governed by the terms of their appointment but, if they are entitled 
to the benefit of any of the rules of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules 7965, they may 
make representations in that behalf to the appropriate authorities. It is, however, not possible for this 
Court to grant to the petitioners any of the reliefs claimed by them as arising out of the provisions of the 
aforesaid rules, including the relief by way of a declaration that they shall be deemed to be in quasi- 
permanent service under rule 3. We are further of the opinion that the petitioners have no right to be 
transferred to the services of the Bhakra Management Board, now re-named as the Bhakra Beas 
Management Board. Lastly, the proposed retrenchment of the petitioners does not offend against the 
guarantee of equality contained in articles ॥4 and 76 of the Constitution, since the petitioners and the 
Deputationists belong to two different and distinct classes.” 


l5. As regards, second type of employees i.e. work charged employees the judgment deals in Para 4, 42, 43, 44, 
45, 46 and 47 which read as follow:- 


“4I,_ A work-charged establishment broadly means an establishment of which the expenses, including 
the wages and allowances of the staff, are chargeable to "works". The pay and allowances of employees 
who are borne on a work-charged establishment are generally shown as a separate sub-head of the 
estimated cost of the work. 


42. The entire strength of labour employed for the purposes of the Beas Project was work-charged. The 
work-charged employees are engaged on a temporary basis and their appointments are made for the 
execution of a specified work. From the very nature of their employment, their services automatically 
come to an end on the completion of the works for the sole purpose of which they are employed. They do 
not get any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor do they receive any retrenchment benefits or 
any benefits under the Employees State Insurance Schemes. 


43. But though the work-charged employees are denied these benefits, they are industrial workers and 
are entitled to the benefits of the pro- visions contained in the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow 
from that special enactment under which even contracts of employment are open to adjustment9 and 
modification. The work-charged employees, therefore, are in a better position than temporary servant 
like the other petitioners who are liable to be thrown out of employment without any kind of 
compensatory benefits. 


44. The record of Writ Petition No. 4505 of 7976 shows that offers of alternative employment were 
made to the work- charged employees and many of them have accepted those offers. The rule of ‘last 
come, first go’ has also been consistently adopted while retrenching the work-charged employees. In fact 
the work-charged employees possess a unique right as industrial employees since, by reason of section 
25706) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the provisions of Chapter VA, "Lay-off and Retrenchment", have 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4333 


effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law including standing 
orders made under the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, 7946. 


45. There were in all about 36000 work-charged employees working on the Beas Project. Out of them, 
about 26000 have already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the 
workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi, under section 72 of the Industrial Disputes Act, /947, All the 72 
unions of which the work-charged employees are members were parties to the said conciliation 
proceedings. By reason of section 76652 (6) of the Industrial Disputes Act, a settlement arrived at in the 
course of a conciliation proceeding is binding on all persons who were employed in the establishment to 
which the dispute relates, whether they were employed on the date of the dispute or subsequently. In 
Ramnagar Cane and Sugar Co. Ltd. v. JatinChakravorty and ors., it was held by this Court that it is not 
even necessary, in order to bind the work men to the settlement arrived at before the conciliator, to show 
that they belonged to the union which took part in the conciliation proceedings, since the policy 
underlying section 76 of the Act is to give an extended operation to such settlements. In the instant case, 
all the 72 unions which represented the workmen on the work-charged establishment were parties to the 
conciliation proceedings. The settlement will therefore bind all the work-charged employees. 


46. Apart from the settlement in the conciliation proceedings, an award was made by the Industrial 
Tribunal, Central, Chandigarh, in Reference No. 2-6 of 7977, in an industrial dispute between the work- 
charged employees of the Beas-Sutlej Link Project, Sundernagar, with which we are concerned, and the 
management. Under that award, as stated in the award itself, a consent formula was evolved to which 
the workmen "virtually agreed". The benefits which flow- to the work- charged employees under the 
aforesaid award dated May 75, 7974, have been accepted by almost all the work- charged employees, 
involving a burden of about Rs. 3 crores on the employers. 


47. Since the work-charged employees are bound by the settlement dated June 28, 7977 effected 
between them and the management in the conciliation proceedings and since they are also bound by and 
have accepted benefits under the consent award dated May 75, 79724 they are not entitled to any rights 
apart from those flowing from the aforesaid settlement and the Award. SLP ४०. /246 of 7979 which is 
filed to challenge the Award and C.M.P. No.2077 of 7979 which is filed for condonation of the delay of 
over four and half years caused in filing the SLP shall have to be dismissed.” 


6. Thus, from the above observation of Supreme Court it is clear that work charged employees are engaged on a 
temporary basis and their appointments are made for the specified work and their service comes to an end on the 
completion of work for the sole purpose of which they are employed. 


7. Para 43 provides that work charged employees are industrial worker and entitled to the benefit of the provisions 
contained under the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow from that special enactment under which even contracts 
of employment are open to adjustment and modification. Para 45 as reproduced above further provides that in the 
conciliation proceeding it has been held that there were about 36000 work charged employees working on Beas 
Project out of them 26000 has already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the 
workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour Commissioner(Central), 
New Delhi under Section 2 of the ID Act. The said settlement is binding on all the work charge employees who are 
working in the establishment to which the dispute relates. In para 46 it is further stated that apart from the settlement 
in the conciliation proceeding an award was made by the CGIT Chandigarh in reference no.2-C in an industrial 
dispute between the work charged employee of the Beas Sutlej Project, Sundernagar with which we are concerned 
and the management. A consent formula was evolved to which the workmen virtually agreed. In the last para 47 itself 
specifically stated that work charged employees are bound by the settlement and award May |5, 974 and they were 
entitled to rights those flowing from the settlement and award. 


8. So far as the settlement executed between the work charged employees and management through unions, the 
same has not been produced by the management despite opportunity was given to file the same. Thus, adverse 
interference can be drawn against them. To support this view, reliance can be placed to the judgment of Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court in case held 35200/08)/ RSJ 382 Ambika Parashad Versus Punjab Urban Planning 


and Development Authority Chandigarh _and_Another_wherein it has been held “that respondent has not 
produced record in the Labour Court to prove that Workman has not completed 240 days of service though 


application was submitted by the Workman for production of record held that a person in possession of the 
best evidence has to produce the same, otherwise adverse inference can be drawn against the said party”. In 
this case also as per order dated 0.05.2024 of this Tribunal. Respondent were asked to produce the settlement arrived 
between the 2 union of the work charged employee and management under Section !2 of ID Act before the Regional 
Labour Commissioner, New Delhi and all the work charged employee were bound by the said settlement. However, 
despite of availing 2-3 opportunities i.e. 20.05.2024, 20.06.2024 and 09.07.2024 the said policy was not produced and 
as such adverse inference can be drawn against the management in view of the above law. 


4334 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


9. As regards award passed by Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh, the relevant claim of the work 
charged employees was regarding their regularization services and the finding given by the Tribunal is as follow:- 


“Regulation of Services of the workcharged employees. 


It is an un-disputed fact that the entire strength of labour as employed in the Project is 
workcharged. The institution of workcharged establishment is not only necessary but sometime 
unavoidable. These workmen are engaged on temporary basis and their services are utilized for the 
execution of a specified work for which they may be suited. From the very nature of employment the 
services of such workman automatically come to an end on the completion of the work. A workcharged 
employee does not get any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor is he benefitted by the employees 
state Insurance Scheme. He does not indeed enjoy any retiral benefits. Before partition of the country in 
4947 it was not usual to have project, construction of which required a number of years to complete but 
after constituting ourselves into a democratic Republic and the Government having taken in hand five 
year plans for development of the country there are various schemes involving the construction of works 
for a period extending over several years as is the case of the instant Project. It commenced in 7/962 and 
more than 72 years having passed the completion might take another few years. In such situation it 
seems reasonable and fair that a workman who has, like a regular employee, spent the part of his life 
ranging from 5-0 years upto 20 year, should not be thrown on the road and must be assured some 
benefits as are available to regular staff. The other aspect of the matter is that the employer could not 
compelled to retain workcharged employees after the work for which the latter had been engaged is 
completed, as after all, he was employed before a particular job and the employer, be it the Government 
or any of its public undertakings, cannot taken upon itself the responsibility of that workman for all time 
to come. It can be well argued that such a workmen should feel happy and content that instead of 
remaining un-employed be got employment for a long time. 


To assure Industrial peace and economic justice to such class of workmen some balance has in my 
opinion to be stuck between the two extremes. It is the duty of the State under the Directive Principles 
enunciated in part 4 of the constitution to secure and protect that social order in which justice, social 
and economic could be had by all institutions of national life. I fell that it is equally the duty of an 
adjudicator of industrial disputes charged with the duty of administering social justice to be guided by 
the fundamentals contained in this chapter though he has to bear In mind the limits of the economic 
capacity of the employer and Endeavour must have ever be made to secure work for every citizen do in 
our present economy. It is not possible to immediately achieve that object. The workman employed by the 
respondent management are drawn from different states out of which I am informed about 6/0 
thousands are from Punjab about 22000 from Himachal Pradesh and the remaining from the states of 
Rajasthan and Haryana. Some of the workmen are from U.P and Bihar and a handful from Kerala. The 
board hasby and large been consistently following the Punjab pattern in the matter of wage structure, 
revision thereof from time to time and grant of dearness allowance. It is only with regard to categories 
not appearing in the common Schedule of Rates prepared by the erstwhile United State of Punjab that 
the board took its independence decisions on the recommendations of its own standing committee.Even 
Himachal Pradesh Government generally followed the Punjab policy.The state government of Punjab in 
its wisdom, and I should say rightly has declared that the services of work charged employees in building 
and roads branch who had worked for /0 years or more would stand regularized in the sense that the 
workmen would be treated at par with those in the regular service of the state government. The benefit of 
this announcement was afterwards extended to the employees of its irrigation branch as well at the 
workman who held from Punjab continue to stay in their parents state the services of those who had put 
in ॥8 years or more would have been regularized the respondent management too in pursuance of its 
policy to follow the Punjab pattern might have regularized the services of at least of those workmen who 
had come from Punjab but any such course would have created awkward situation as the workmen from 
other States could not be discriminated in this respect.Moreover financial implications and other 
complications are involved. 


In such circumstances stated abovel would have directed that the services of those of the workman 
who have been continuously employed for more than 70 years should be regularized. But the other 
problems arising from such a direction including financial impact on the employer cannot be lost sight 
of The Central Government through the board is only managing on behalf of the state of Punjab, 
Rajasthan Haryana and Himachal Pradesh who are partners in the venture.Several aspects of the 
question were discussed with the workmen and the management in the course of arguments and a 
formula evolved to which the workman virtually agreed and I feel that such a solution as stated 
hereunder is quite just to all the parties provided it is work out, honestly stated. No doubt,what is referred 
to me is the matter of regularization of the services of work charge employees, but the directions that I 
am issuing in my opinion, amount to only granting lesser relief than claimed by the workmen. The 
management can also have no grievance if it wants industrial peace and is anxious to secure 


[भाग I—avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4335 


employment to the work-charged employees after the completion of the work. It is accordingly, directed 
that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six months thereof for the 
maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be recruited or transferred from 
any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, the offer shall first be made to 
the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 years’ continuous service or 
more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs subject to the medical fitness 
of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will not, however, be disturbed to 
their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected. The workmen have expressed an apprehension 
that near the completion of the Project trades of some of them might be changed so that it could be said 
that a suitable workman needed for a particular job was not available and an outsider was therefore 
necessary to be employed. To protect the workmen against this possible denial of their rights it is further 
directed that category or trade of no workman shall be changed within one year preceding the 
completion of the Project without his consent in writing and that if any such change without consent is 
made it will have no consequence inasmuch as such a workman will be entitled to the job of his earlier 
trade provided the vacancy relates to that trade. As regards those of the workmen who cannot be 
absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no reason to doubt that the State Government who are 
beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central Government will make every reasonable effort to get 
them re-employed at any other Project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of 
the country where there is a need for workmen of those trades.” 


20. A perusal of aforesaid findings made it ample clear that the order has been passed by the then learned Presiding 
Officer, CGIT, Chandigarh to maintain industrial peace and to secure employment to the work charged employees 
after the completion of the work and it was also held by the learned CGIT thatState Govt. who are beneficiary under 
the project and the Central Govt. will make every reasonable effort to get those workmen re-employed at any other 
project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of the country where there is a need of 
workmen of those trades. 


2l. Admittedly, in this case, no effort was made by the respondent to give any employment after the retrenchment 
of the workmen and even there is non-compliance of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules. The same are reproduced 
below: 


77. Maintenance of seniority list of workmen. -The employer shall prepare a list of all workmen in the 
particular category from which retrenchment is contemplated to be arranged according to the seniority of 
their service in that category and cause a copy thereof to be pasted on a notice board in a conspicuous 
place in the premises of the industrial establishment at least seven days before the actual date of 
retrenchment. 


78. Re-employment of retrenched workmen. - (7) At least ten days before the date on which vacancies are 
to be filled, the employer shall arrange for the display on a notice board in a conspicuous place in the 
premises of the industrial establishment details of those vacancies and shall also give intimation of those 
vacancies by registered post to every one of all the retrenched workmen eligible to be considered therefor, 
to the address given by him at the time of retrenchment or at any time thereafter: 


Provided that where the number of such vacancies is less than the number of retrenched workmen, it shall 
be sufficient if intimation is given by the employer individually to the senior-most retrenched workmen in 
the list referred to in rule 77 the number of such senior-most workmen being double the number of such 
vacancies: 


Provided further that where the vacancy is of a duration of less than one month there shall be no obligation 
on the employer to send intimation of such vacancy to individual retrenched workmen: 


Provided also that if a retrenched workman, without sufficient cause being shown in writing to the 
employer, does not offer himself for re-employment on the date or dates specified in the intimation sent to 
him by the employer under this sub-rule, the employer may not intimate to him the vacancies that may be 
filled on any subsequent occasion. ] 


(2) Immediately after complying with the provisions of sub-rule (2), the employer shall also inform the 
trade unions connected with the industrial establishment, of the number of vacancies to be filled and names 
of the retrenched workmen to whom intimation has been sent under that sub-rule: 


Provided that the provisions of this sub-rule need not be complied with by the employer in any case where 
an intimation is sent to every one of the workmen mentioned in the list prepared under rule 77. 


22. However, the present work charged employee and other work-charged employees have been retrenched long 
back and even at the stage it is impossible to re-employe them. However, certainly in respect of workcharged 
employees present Respondent was directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Judgment of Jaswant Singh (Supra) to 


4336 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


give benefits in terms of settlement and award dated 5.05.974. The main purpose of Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
Ld. CGIT Chandigarh was to rehabilitate to some extent the work charged employees and restore peace and congenial 
atmosphere that is why Ld. CGIT Chandigarh had given directions to all state to re-employe them. Thus, it does not 
lie in the mouth of present Respondent that no relief can be granted against present Respondent as petitioners are not 
their employees. 


A. So far as this argument of Ld. AR of the management that those work charged employees only who have 
completed 0 years of service were required to be adjusted within 6 months from their retrenchment is concerned, the 
same is devoid of merit as no effort was made by the management to adjust the work charged employees. Moreover, 
no documentary evidence has been produced that any effort was made to adjust the workman after his retrenchment. 
Further, Ld. CGIT Chandigarh in its last lines concluded as under:- 


“As regards those of the workmen who cannot be absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no 
reason to doubt that the State Government who are beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central 
Government will make every reasonable effort to get them re-employed at any other Project or work 
whether in any one of these states or in any other part of the country where there is a need of workmen 
of those trades” 


Nothing has come on record that above directions were complied with. 


23. Moreover, in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees and management, it 
cannot be interfered what were the terms and conditions in the said settlement. Further, CGIT Chandigarh has fixed 
ten years time and accrual of vacancy within six months keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and 
has evolved his own formula to bring peace and harmony between work charged employees and management but it 
cannot be said to be a universal policy in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees 
and management. However, no effort was made to adjust the petitioners in view of order of CGIT. 


24. As regard, this contention of learned AR of management that petitioners were not the employees of the BBMB 
but were the employees of BCB, the same is devoid of merit as Discharge certificate was issued by the BBMB. 
Moreover, as per respondent Beas Control Board was constituted in the year !960. BCB was constituted in the year 
966 and all the projects were transferred from Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 
79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various 
works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB 
constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project 
has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project 
have been so transferred. All the projects under BCB were completed in the year 984 and BCB ceased to exist in 
984. When all work of BCB stands transferred to BBMB so it cannot be said that BBMB is separate identity than 
BCB. Rather BCB has merged in BBMB. Moreover, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh case(supra) in respect 
of work charged employees has no where stated that relief can be sought by work charged employees only against the 
BCB. So contention of Ld. AR of the management that BCB and BBMB are two separate entities is devoid of merit. 


25. So far this argument of Law Officer for the respondent that the case is hopelessly time barred is concerned, the 
same is again devoid of merits as there was non-compliance of Rule 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules which has been 
reproduced above. Moreover, there is no limitation period prescribed for filing a reference. Moreover, reference was 
received in the year 2005 and thereafter, several rounds of litigations have taken place. So far as case laws on the 
point of limitation the same are not attracted in the present case as there was no compliance of Judgment of Jaswant 
Singh case (Supra). 


26. However, it is added that workman was allowed terminal benefits as admitted by him. Moreover, it is also not 
case of the petitioner that there is breach of Section 25 F of the Act. 


27. Further, there was non-compliance of Jaswant Singh Case (Supra), Reference No.2C of 97l and Rule 77 & 78 
of Industrial Rules and in this case it would be highly difficult to re-employe the workman. The only remedy left is to 
compensate the workman in term of money. 


28. Keeping in view the fact and circumstances of the present case and other connected case of similar nature the 
following scheme of compensation is deemed fit by this Tribunal: 


i. Work charged employee who has completed 5 years of service shall be entitled for Rs.50,000/- along with 
interest @9% per annum as compensation from the date of moving of application till the realization of 
amount. 


ii. Work charged employee who has completed less than 5 years but more than | year would be entitled 
Rs.25,000/- along with interest @9% per annum from the date of moving of application till the realization of 
amount. 


iii. Those employees who have not completed | year will not be entitled for any compensation in the present 
case. 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4337 


The present workman (being represented by his Legal Heirs) was employed on 27.!.965 and was retrenched 
on 28.08.978. There is no denial of period of working of Workman by the Management in its reply to claim. 
Hence, it is held that Workman has worded from 27..965 to 28.08.978 above 9 years and l0 months (more 
than 5 years) so his Legal Heirs are entitled of Rs.50,000/- along with interest @9% per annum from the date of 
moving the application till its realization. 


29. The reference is answered accordingly and stands disposed off. 


30. Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section 7 of the Act for 
publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4872.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
मेसर्स इंस्टिट्यूट ऑफ़ Paces एंड मैटेरियल्स टेक्नोलॉजी; मेसर्स बॉम्बे इंटेलिजेंस सिक्योरिटी (इंडिया) लिमिटेड; मेसर्स 
इंडस्ट्रियल सिक्‍योरिटी एंड अलाइड सर्विसेज प्राइवेट लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री प्रमोद प्रधान के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, भुबनेश्वर, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न. 
47/2024) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
27.09.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. जेड-46025/04/2024-आईआर(एम)-426] 
दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


S.O. 872.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 47/202) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court, Bhubaneswar as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to M/s Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology; M/s Bombay Intelligence Security (India) 
Limited; M/s Industrial Security and Allied Services Private Limited and Shri Pramod Pradhan which was 
received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 27.09.2024. 


[F. No. Z-6025/04/2024-IR(M)-26] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT BHUBANESWAR 
Present: 


Sri Dinesh Kumar Singh, 
Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-cum-Labour Court, 
Bhubaneswar. 


INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 47/202] 
Date of Passing Order -9™ July 2024 
Between: 


l. The Director, M/s. Institute of Minerals & Materials 
Technology, Bhubaneswar. 


2. The Director, M/s. Bombay Intelligence Security (India) Ltd., 
0l, Omega House, Hiranandini Gardens, 
Powai, Mumbai. 


4338 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


3. The Director, M/s. Industrial Security & Allied Services 
Pvt. Ltd., F-3-F-5, Indradhanu Market, IRC Village, 


Bhubaneswar. 
]४ Party-Managements. 
(And) 
Shri Pramod Pradhan, 
S/o. Trinath Pradhan, Vill/Po. Gamundi, 
Dist. Ganjam — 76] 33. 
27 Party-Workman. 
Appearances: 
None. oat For the ।* Party-Managements. 
None. ४३5 For the 2™ Party-Workman. 
ORDER 


In the present case, a reference was received from the office of the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner 
(Central), Bhubaneswar vide order No. 8(3)/2020-B.IV/ADJ/2/B.I, dated 29.07.202 under clause (d) of sub-section 
(l) and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 for adjudication of a dispute, under the 
following schedule:- 


“Whether the action of M/s. Bombay Intelligence Security (India) Ltd., the contractor of the Management 
of M/s. Institute of Minerals Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, terminating the service of Sri Pramod 
Pradhan (Security Guard) without retrenchment benefits is just, fair and legal? If not, to what relief the 
concerned workman is entitled to?” 


2. In the reference order, the Deputy chief Labour Commissioner (Central), Bhubaneswar commanded the parties 
raising the dispute to file statement of claim, complete with relevant documents, list of reliance and witnesses with 
this Tribunal within |5 days of receipt of the reference order and to forward a copy of such statement of claim to each 
one of the opposite parties involved in the dispute. 


3. Despite directions so given, no statement of claim is received from the 27 party-workman. 


4. On receipt of the above reference, notice was sent to the 2" Party-Workman on 20.2.202] and on dated 
03.04.2023 for appearance and for filing of statement of claim. Neither the postal article sent to the 27 Party- 
Workman, referred to above, was received back nor was it observed by the Tribunal that postal services remained 
unserved in the period, referred to above. Therefore, every presumption lies in favour of the fact that the above 
notices were served upon the 27 Party-Workman. Despite service of the notice, the 27 Party-Workman opted to 
abstain away from the proceedings. No claim statement was filed on its behalf. Thus, it is clear that the 27 Party- 
Workman is not interested in adjudication of the reference on merits. 


5. Since the 2" Party-Workman has neither filed statement of claim nor has led any evidence so as to prove its 
cause against the Management, it is presumed that there is no claim of workman against the Management. 


6. In view of such, no claim Order is passed by this Tribunal. 


7. Let this order be sent to the appropriate Government, as required under Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947, for publication. 


DINESH KUMAR SINGH, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 

का.आ. 4873.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 

सेलेबी एयरपोर्ट सर्विसेज इंडिया प्राइवेट लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और सेलेबी एम्प्लाइज यूनियन के बीच 

अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-4, नई दिल्ली, Tare (रिफरेन्स न. 

460/2023) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
27.09.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 

[फा. सं. Weat-707/40/2023-arsarz(T)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


[भाग I—avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4339 


New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


S.O. 873.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 60/2023) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-l, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to CELEBI Airport Services India Private Limited and CELEBI Employees Union which 
was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 27.09.2024. 


[F. No. L-0/0/2023-IR(M)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI - ], 
NEW DELHI. 
ID No. 60/2023 


The General Secretary, 

CELEBI Employees Union (Regd.), 
BTR Bhawan, 3-0, Rouse Avenue, 
New Delhi-0002. 


Workman... 
Versus 


CELEBI Airport Services India Private Limited, 
(Formerly CELEBI Ground Handling Private Limited) 
IGI Airport, New Delhi-!0037. 


Management... 
AWARD 


In the present case, a reference was received from the appropriate Government vide letter No-L- 
0/0/2023-IR(M)) dated 03.07.2023 under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Act, for adjudication of a dispute, terms of which are as under: 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the claim of CELEBI Employees Union (Regd.) vide their representation dated 4.99, 2077 
against the management of CELEBI Airport Services India Private Limited (Formerly CELEBI Ground 
Handling Private Limited), IGI Airport, New Delhi for the 70% wage hike since the April, 2077 as per the 
terms of settlement dated 2/./0.205 is proper, legal and justified? If yes, to what relief is the disputant 
union entitled and what directions, if any, are necessary in this regard?” 


2. In the reference order, the appropriate Government commanded the parties raising the dispute to file statement 
of claim, complete with relevant documents, list of reliance and witnesses with this Tribunal within |5 days of receipt 
of the reference order and to forward a copy of such statement of claim to the opposite parties involved in the dispute. 
Despite directions so given, Claimant union opted not to file the claim statement with the Tribunal. 


3. On receipt of the above reference, notice was sent to the workman as well as the managements. Neither the 
postal article sent to the claimant, referred above, was received back nor was it observed by the Tribunal that postal 
services remained unserved in the period, referred above. Therefore, every presumption lies in favor of the fact that 
the above notice was served upon the claimant. Despite service of the notice, claimant opted to abstain away from the 
proceedings. No claim statement was filed on his behalf. Thus, it is clear that the workman is not interested in 
adjudication of the reference on merits. 


4... Since the workman has neither put in his appearance nor he led any evidence so as to prove his cause against 
the management, this Tribunal is left with no choice, except to pass a ‘No Dispute/Claim’ award. Let this award be 
sent to the appropriate Government, as required under Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, for publication. 


Dated : 0.09.2024 Justice VIKAS KUNVAR SRIVASTAVA, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4874.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
सेलेबी एयरपोर्ट सर्विसेज इंडिया प्राइवेट लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और सेलेबी एम्प्लाइज यूनियन के बीच 


4340 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम aarea-l, नई दिल्ली, Tare (रिफरेन्स न. 
484/2023) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 


27.09.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 
[फा. सं. Wet-707/26/2023-ars are (TH) 
दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


S.O. 874.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 84/2023) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-l, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to CELEBI Airport Services India Private Limited and CELEBI Employees Union which 
was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 27.09.2024. 

[F. No. L-0]/26/2023-IR(M)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI - I, 
NEW DELHI. 


ID No. 84/2023 

The General Secretary, 

CELEBI Employees Union (Regd.), 
BTR Bhawan, 3-0, Rouse Avenue, 
New Delhi-0002. 


Workman... 
Versus 


CELEBI Airport Services India Private Limited, 
(Formerly CELEBI Ground Handling Private Limited) 
IGI Airport, New Delhi-!0037. 


Management... 
AWARD 


In the present case, a reference was received from the appropriate Government vide letter No-L- 
0/26/2023-IR(M)) dated 7.07.2023 under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Act, for adjudication of a dispute, terms of which are as under: 


SCHEDULE 


“i) Whether the claim of CELEBI Employees Union (Regd.) that the action of the management of CELEBI 
Airport Services India Private Limited in not inviting and holding discussion with the Celebi Employees 
Union on the charter of demands dated 92.04.2078 (Annexure-2) and instead signing the settlement dated 
94.04.20/68 with a committee of workmen is illegal and/or unjustified, is proper and legally justified? If 
yes, to what reliefs are the disputant Union entitled and what directions, if any, are necessary in this 
regard? 


ii) If the above issue at S.No. I is answered in favour of the disputant union, then whether the demands as 
raised in charter of demand dated 92.04.2078 (Annexure-2) to the management are proper, legal and 
justified? If yes, to what reliefs are the disputant Union entitled and what directions, if any, are necessary 
in this regard?” 


2. In the reference order, the appropriate Government commanded the parties raising the dispute to file statement 
of claim, complete with relevant documents, list of reliance and witnesses with this Tribunal within 5 days of receipt 
of the reference order and to forward a copy of such statement of claim to the opposite parties involved in the dispute. 
Despite directions so given, Claimant union opted not to file the claim statement with the Tribunal. 


3. On receipt of the above reference, notice was sent to the workman as well as the managements. Neither the 
postal article sent to the claimant, referred above, was received back nor was it observed by the Tribunal that postal 


[भाग I—avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 434] 


services remained unserved in the period, referred above. Therefore, every presumption lies in favor of the fact that 
the above notice was served upon the claimant. Despite service of the notice, claimant opted to abstain away from the 
proceedings. No claim statement was filed on his behalf. Thus, it is clear that the workman is not interested in 
adjudication of the reference on merits. 


4... Since the workman has neither put in his appearance nor he led any evidence so as to prove his cause against 
the management, this Tribunal is left with no choice, except to pass a ‘No Dispute/Claim’ award. Let this award be 
sent to the appropriate Government, as required under Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947, for publication. 


Dated : 0.09.2024 Justice VIKAS KUNVAR SRIVASTAVA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4875.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 74) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
मेसर्स एयरपोर्ट ऑथोरिटी ऑफ़ इंडिया; मेसर्स स्पाइस जेट लिमिटेड; मेसर्स सन शाइन इंटरप्राइजेज के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध 
नियोजकों और श्री धर्मेंद्र कुमार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-4, नई 
दिल्ली, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 229/2047) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय 
सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 27.09.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. जेड-46025/04/2024-आईआर(एम)-427] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


S.O. 875.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 229/20l7) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-l, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to M/s Airports Authority of India; M/s Spice Jet Limited; M/s Sun Shine Enterprises and 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
27.09.2024. 


[F. No. Z-6025/04/2024-IR(M)-27] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI ४०0.] NEW 
DELHI. 


ID.No. 229/207 

Sh. Dharmendra Kumar S/o Sh. Hira Lal, 

Through Hindustan Engineering and General Mazdoor Union (Regd.) 
D-2/24, Sultanpuri, 

Delhi. 


..... Workman 
Versus 


l. M/s Airport Authority of India, 

Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan, 

New Delhi- 0005. 

2. M/s Spice Jet Ltd., 

Domestic Interstate Airport Terminated No.! D, 
Palam Airport, New Delhi- 0037. 

3. | M/s Sun Shine Enterprises, 

49, Ground Floor, 

Kailash Colony Metro Station Sant Nagar., 
New Delhi-0049. 


०० Management 


4342 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 


l. This is an application under Section 2-A of the I.D. Act whereby, the applicant made prayer that his termination 
from the service on 8.!.204 by the management which be declare illegal and unjustified and he be reinstated with 
full back wages. He has not been provided any legal facilities. When the workman went to join his job he was 
illegally terminated form his service on |8..20l4 without any rhyme or reason and without conducted any domestic 
enquiry by the management. He has initiated the conciliation proceeding but, no result. Hence, he had filed the 
present claim petition. 


2. Management No.2 is not appearing since long therefore they are proceeded ex-parte. However, Management 
no.|&3 appeared and filed the rebuttal written statement. After that, rejoinder was filed and issues were framed. And 
after that, case was listed for claimant listed on 6.05.2024. Thereafter, the AR for the claimant informed that the 
claimant did not contact him for a long time. Also, the claimant is not appearing in the tribunal to substantiate his 
claim. 


3. Hence, in these circumstances this tribunal has no option except to pass the no dispute award. No dispute award 
is passed accordingly. File is consigned to the record room. A copy of this award is hereby send to the appropriate 
government for notification under section |7 of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Let a copy of this Award be sent for publication as required under Section 7 of Act. 
Dated : 3.09.2024 Justice VIKAS KUNVAR SRIVASTAVA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4876.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
मेसर्स एयरपोर्ट ऑथोरिटी ऑफ़ इंडिया; मेसर्स स्पाइस जेट लिमिटेड; मेसर्स सन शाइन इंटरप्राइजेज के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध 
नियोजकों और श्री दीपक कुमार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-, नई 
दिल्ली, tare (रिफरेन्स न. 230/207) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार 
को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 27.09.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. जेड-46025/04/2024-आईआर(एम)-428] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


S.O. 876.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 230/20I7) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-l, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to M/s Airports Authority of India; M/s Spice Jet Limited; M/s Sun Shine Enterprises and 
Shri Deepak Kumar which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
27.09.2024. 


[F. No. Z-6025/04/2024-IR(M)-28] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 


THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI ४०0.] NEW 
DELHI. 


ID.No. 230/207 

Sh. Deepak Kumar S/o Sh. Rajindra Kumar, 

Through Hindustan Engineering and General Mazdoor Union (Regd.) 
D-2/24, Sultanpuri, 

Delhi. 


..... Workman 


[भाग I—avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4343 


Versus 


l. M/s Airport Authority of India, 
Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan, 
New Delhi- 0005. 


2. M/s Spice Jet Ltd., 
Domestic Interstate Airport Terminated No.! D, 
Palam Airport, New Delhi- !0037. 


3. | M/s Sun Shine Enterprises, 
49, Ground Floor, 
Kailash Colony Metro Station Sant Nagar., 
New Delhi-0049. 


Hosta Management 
AWARD 


l. This is an application under Section 2-A of the I.D. Act whereby, the applicant made prayer that his termination 
from the service on 3.03.20l4 by the management which be declare illegal and unjustified and he be reinstated with 
full back wages. He has not been provided any legal facilities. When the workman went to join his job he was 
illegally terminated form his service on 3.03.20l4 without any rhyme or reason and without conducted any domestic 
enquiry by the management. He has initiated the conciliation proceeding but, no result. Hence, he had filed the 
present claim petition. 


2. Management No.2 is not appearing since long therefore they are proceeded ex-parte. However, Management 
no.|&3 appeared and filed the rebuttal written statement. After that, rejoinder was filed and issues were framed. And 
after that, case was listed for claimant listed on 6.05.2024. Thereafter, the AR for the claimant informed that the 
claimant did not contact him for a long time. Also, the claimant is not appearing in the tribunal to substantiate his 
claim. 


3. Hence, in these circumstances this tribunal has no option except to pass the no dispute award. No dispute award 
is passed accordingly. File is consigned to the record room. A copy of this award is hereby send to the appropriate 
government for notification under section |7 of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Let a copy of this Award be sent for publication as required under Section 7 of Act. 
Dated : 3.09.2024 Justice VIKAS KUNVAR SRIVASTAVA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4877.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
मेसर्स एयरपोर्ट ऑथोरिटी ऑफ़ इंडिया; मेसर्स स्पाइस जेट लिमिटेड; मेसर्स सन शाइन इंटरप्राइजेज के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध 
नियोजकों और श्री दिनेश कुमार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-, नई 
दिल्ली, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न. 234/2047) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार 
को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 27.09.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. जेड-46025/04/2024-आईआर(एम)-429] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


S.O. 877.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 23/20I7) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-l, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to M/s Airports Authority of India; M/s Spice Jet Limited; M/s Sun Shine Enterprises and 
Shri Dinesh Kumar which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
27.09.2024. 


[F. No. Z-6025/04/2024-IR(M)-29] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 


4344 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 


THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI ४०0.] NEW 
DELHI. 


ID.No. 23/207 

Sh. Dinesh Kumar S/o Sh. Hira Lal, 

Through Hindustan Engineering and General Mazdoor Union (Regd.) 
D-2/24, Sultanpuri, 

Delhi. 


..... Workman 
Versus 


l. M/s Airport Authority of India, 
Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan, 
New Delhi- 0005. 


2. M/s Spice Jet Ltd., 
Domestic Interstate Airport Terminated No.! D, 
Palam Airport, New Delhi- 0037. 


3. | M/s Sun Shine Enterprises, 
49, Ground Floor, 
Kailash Colony Metro Station Sant Nagar., 
New Delhi-0049. 


हल Management 


AWARD 


l. This is an application under Section 2-A of the I.D. Act whereby, the applicant made prayer that his termination 
from the service on 23.l!.204 by the management which be declare illegal and unjustified and he be reinstated with 
full back wages. He has not been provided any legal facilities. When the workman went to join his job he was 
illegally terminated form his service on 23..20l4 without any rhyme or reason and without conducted any domestic 
enquiry by the management. He has initiated the conciliation proceeding but, no result. Hence, he had filed the 
present claim petition. 

2. Management No.2 is not appearing since long therefore they are proceeded ex-parte. However, Management 
no.|&3 appeared and filed the rebuttal written statement. After that, rejoinder was filed and issues were framed. And 
after that, case was listed for claimant listed on 6.05.2024. Thereafter, the AR for the claimant informed that the 
claimant did not contact him for a long time. Also, the claimant is not appearing in the tribunal to substantiate his 
claim. 

3. Hence, in these circumstances this tribunal has no option except to pass the no dispute award. No dispute award 
is passed accordingly. File is consigned to the record room. A copy of this award is hereby send to the appropriate 
government for notification under section |7 of the I.D. Act, 947. 

Let a copy of this Award be sent for publication as required under Section |7 of Act. 


Dated : 3.09.2024 Justice VIKAS KUNVAR SRIVASTAVA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4878.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
Fad एयरपोर्ट ऑथोरिटी ऑफ़ इंडिया; मेसर्स स्पाइस जेट लिमिटेड; मेसर्स सन शाइन इंटरप्राइजेज के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध 
नियोजकों और श्री राम चन्द्र कुमार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-4, 
नई दिल्ली, tare (रिफरेन्स न. 242/2047) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय 
सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 27.09.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. SIS-76025/04/2024-aTS az (TH)-730] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


[भाग I—avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4345 


New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


S.O. 878.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 242/20I7) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-l, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to M/s Airports Authority of India; M/s Spice Jet Limited; M/s Sun Shine Enterprises and 
Shri Ram Chandra Kumar which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
27.09.2024. 


[F. No. Z-6025/04/2024-IR(M)-30] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI [४०0.] NEW 
DELHI. 


ID.No. 242/207 

Sh. Ram Chandra Kumar S/o Sh. Kishan Chand, 

Through Hindustan Engineering and General Mazdoor Union (Regd.) 
D-2/24, Sultanpuri, 

Delhi. 


..... Workman 
Versus 


l. M/s Airport Authority of India, 
Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan, 
New Delhi- 0005. 


2. M/s Spice Jet Ltd., 
Domestic Interstate Airport Terminated No.! D, 
Palam Airport, New Delhi- !0037. 


3. | M/s Sun Shine Enterprises, 
49, Ground Floor, 
Kailash Colony Metro Station Sant Nagar., 
New Delhi-0049. 


seen Management 
AWARD 


l. This is an application under Section 2-A of the I.D. Act whereby, the applicant made prayer that his termination 
from the service on 3l.l0.204 by the management which be declare illegal and unjustified and he be reinstated with 
full back wages. He has not been provided any legal facilities. When the workman went to join his job he was 
illegally terminated form his service on 3.0.20l4 without any rhyme or reason and without conducted any domestic 
enquiry by the management. He has initiated the conciliation proceeding but, no result. Hence, he had filed the 
present claim petition. 


2. Management No.2 is not appearing since long therefore they are proceeded ex-parte. However, Management 
no.|&3 appeared and filed the rebuttal written statement. After that, rejoinder was filed and issues were framed. And 
after that, case was listed for claimant listed on 6.05.2024. Thereafter, the AR for the claimant informed that the 
claimant did not contact him for a long time. Also, the claimant is not appearing in the tribunal to substantiate his 
claim. 


3. Hence, in these circumstances this tribunal has no option except to pass the no dispute award. No dispute award 
is passed accordingly. File is consigned to the record room. A copy of this award is hereby send to the appropriate 
government for notification under section |7 of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Let a copy of this Award be sent for publication as required under Section l7 of Act. 


Dated : 3.09.2024 Justice VIKAS KUNVAR SRIVASTAVA, Presiding Officer 


4346 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4879.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
सेल-राईट्स बंगाल वैगन इंडस्ट्री प्राइवेट लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री सिउली चटर्जी के बीच अनुबंध 
में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, आसनसोल, Tate (रिफरेन्स न. 23/2023) को जैसा 
कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 27.09.2024 को प्राप्त 
हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. जेड-46025/04/2024-आईआर(एम)-434] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


S.O. 879.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 23/2023) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court, Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to 
SALE-RITES Bengal Wagon Industry Private Limited and Shri Siuli Chatterjee which was received along with 
soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 27.09.2024. 


[F. No. Z-6025/04/2024-IR(M)-3] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM- LABOUR COURT, ASANSOL. 


PRESENT: = Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 
Presiding Officer, 
C.G.I.T-cum-L.C., Asansol. 


REFERENCE CASE NO. 23 OF 2023 


PARTIES: Siuli Chatterjee 
Vs. 
Management of SAIL-RITES Bengal Wagon Industry Pvt. Ltd. 

REPRESENTATIVES: 
For the Employee : Mr. Debashis Mondal, Advocate. 

Mr. Tuhin Mitra, Advocate. 
For the Management : Mr. Ayan Ranjan Mukherjee, Advocate. 

Mr. Deep Narayan Dan, Advocate. 
INDUSTRY: Steel-Railways. 
STATE: West Bengal. 
Dated: 27.08.2024 

AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Ministry of Labour, Government of India through the Office of the 
Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), Asansol, vide its Order No. (4)/2023/E dated 3.04.2023 has been 
pleased to refer the following dispute between the employer, that is the Management of SAIL-RITES Bengal Wagon 
Industry Private Limited and their employee for adjudication by this Tribunal. 


SCHEDULE 


“ Whether the action of the management of SAIL-RITES Bengal Wagon Industry Pvt Ltd in termination 
the service of Mrs Siuli Chatterjee, Senior Assistant (OA) vide termination letter dated 097/7/2020 is legal 
and justified? If not, to what relief Mrs Siuli Chatterjee is entitled to ? ” 


[भाग —ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4347 


l. On receiving Order No. (4)/2023/E dated 3.04.2023 from the Office of the Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central), Asansol, Ministry of Labour, Government of India, for adjudication of the dispute 
Reference case No. 23 of 2023 was registered on 02.05.2023 and an order was passed for issuing notice to the parties 
through registered post, directing them to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant documents in 
support of their claims and a list of witnesses. 


2. The aggrieved employee filed her written statement on 2.06.2023 assailing the impugned order of her 
termination from service, issued by the General Manager (P&M), communicated through his letter No. 
SRBWIPL/Termination from Service/0I dated 09..2020. 


3. The fact of the case disclosed in the written statement of the dismissed employee is that, she was a permanent 
employee of SAIL-RITES Bengal Wagon Industry Private Limited (hereinafter referred to as SRBWIPL) since 
.06.2020. The petitioner was appointed as an Assistant Executive at SRBWIPL by their letter No. 
SRBWIPL/KULTI/HR/20-2 dated 09.06.2020. Thereafter petitioner was re-designated from Assistant Executive to 
Executive. Considering her past performance in the company, she was promoted to the post of Executive-Secretary to 
the Chief Executive Officer (hereinafter referred to as CEO) by company’s letter No. SRBWIPL/KULTI/HR/20-2 
dated 07.09.2020. The petitioner / employee rendered unblemished service to the company with dedication and 
received appropriate increment in her salary. 


4. Within three months the petitioner found herself in a difficult situation when K. Chandrasekar, CEO, under 
whom she functioned as an Executive-Secretary, started sexually abusing her and subjected her to harassment. She 
could not raise any complaint against the CEO before the company as she was under threat of dire consequences and 
termination from service, if she divulged the sexual harassment by the CEO to any person. On her protest the 
petitioner was degraded to lower post. It is the case of the petitioner that K. Chandrasekar tried to establish an extra- 
marital relationship with her and called her to his bungalow on the pretext of learning Bengali language from her. He 
also tried to seduce the petitioner and used social networking sites like Facebook and WhatsApp to communicate with 
her in order to impress her that her promotion and increment depended upon his satisfaction. When the 
move of the CEO to get intimate with the petitioner went in vain the employment of Mr. Soumita Chatterjee, the 
petitioner’s husband, who was working under the principal employer through contractor was forcefully terminated. 


5. The aggrieved employee tried her best to keep a distance from the CEO for which the CEO started abusing her 
and constantly kept her in fear of termination of service. On 05.!0.2020 a letter was issued to her by the General 
Manager (P&M), alleging violation of service rules by her due to her engagement with a puja committee and 
collecting of subscription. The petitioner reciprocated to such false allegation by raising objection. The petitioner 
wrote to the Secretary of Post Office Para Sarbojonin Durgapuja Committee, Kulti, wanting to know why her name 
was incorporated in the subscription vouchers when the she was not a member of the puja committee. Ms. Indrani 
Gupta, Member of the committee replied to her letter, informing that due to misunderstanding her name has been 
incorporated in the Subscription Vouchers of the puja committee. A police complaint was lodged in this matter by her 
on 08.0.2020. The management of the company after having a fair explanation and documentary proof from the 
petitioner, on the instruction of the CEO reduced the rank of the petitioner from El to NE4 post and thereby reduced 
her pay by their letter dated 4.0.2020. Mr. Sayantan Banerjee, Manager issued a letter to the petitioner bearing No. 
SRBWIPL/KULTI/SAFETY SHOE/20-2! dated 07.0.2020 making whimsical accusation against the employee, 
alleging violation of safety rules by not wearing safety shoes in the shop floor during inspection. According to the 
petitioner she submitted her reply to the Manager, QA department through email on 08.0.2020, informing that shoes 
of her size were neither available in the company’s store nor in the open market but the reply did not satisfy the CEO, 
who pressurize the Manager, QA, to compel the petitioner to leave her job. On 08.!0.2020 the petitioner received 
another letter from the Deputy General Manager, QA, alleging gross violation of discipline by the petitioner. She 
replied through email and apologized for her mistake. It is contended that K. Chandrasekar, CEO, became vindictive 
towards her and harassed her physically and mentally raising frivolous allegations against her. On 09.0.2020 the 
petitioner was accused of violation of service rules and she defended herself against such false allegation. The 
management did not follow the basic rules of Departmental Enquiry and in order to fructify the deep-rooted 
conspiracy of the CEO, the charge of violation of service rule was levelled against her. The Deputy General Manager, 
Quality Assurance in his letter No. SRBWIPL/KULTI/POOR PERFORMANCE/20-2 dated 2.0.2020 accused the 
petitioner of poor performance in the Quality Assurance Department. On 03.!.2020 the Deputy General Manager, 
QA of the employer company issued another letter to the petitioner informing her that disciplinary action will be 
taken against her and asked her to submit explanation regarding violating the service rules due to unauthorized entry 
to in the factory premises without valid Gate Pass. The petitioner submitted her explanation on 03..2020 through 
email to the CEO and the General Manager, informing them as to why she entered into the premises of the factory but 
the employer company in an arbitrary and whimsical manner and without holding any Departmental Enquiry held the 
petitioner guilty of a false charge. It is stated that the petitioner was not allowed to submit any reply against the 
Charge Sheet to defend herself which is a clear violation of the principles of natural justice. The petitioner was then 
terminated from her employment through a whimsical decision of the management without giving any opportunity of 
hearing her and adducing evidence in her favour. It is urged that the General Manager (P&M) issued a letter of 
termination bearing No. SRBWIPL/Termination from Service/0 dated 09..2020, terminating the service of the 


4348 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


petitioner in an illegal and whimsical manner. The petitioner informed the entire matter to the Managing 
Director, SRBWIPL at Laxmi Nagar, Delhi, by lodging a complaint dated 3.2.2020. An enquiry was held over the 
matter on 23.02.202] at City Centre, Durgapur, West Bengal. Petitioner received a letter dated 07.07.2022 from Ms. 
Sujata Savant, General Manager, UE&S, the Chairman of the Prevention of Sexual Harassment Committee 
(hereinafter referred to as PoSH Committee) of RITES Limited along with a copy of Enquiry Report dated 
29.04.2022 held on the basis of the petitioner’s complaint dated 3.!2.2020 and she was informed that the 
management has decided to take necessary action against the respondent i.e. CEO and assistance shall be provided to 
her to undergo a suitable skill development programme which can help her to gain necessary expertise for future 
career prospects. It is contended by the petitioner that K. Chandrasekar, CEO, who subjected her to sexual harassment 
at her place of work was relegated to lower post as a punishment but the petitioner who was subjected to such sexual 
harassment and was terminated in an arbitrary manner was neither reinstated in service nor did she received any 
monetary compensation for the sexual harassment she suffered while working under the company. On 3.2.2020 the 
petitioner wrote a letter addressed to the Managing Director, SRBWIPL with a prayer for reinstating her but she 
received no relief. On 07.07.2022, Ms. Sujata Savant, General Manager, UE&S informed the petitioner that the guilt 
of K. Chandrasekar, CEO has been proved before the PoSH Committee Members and the management was asked to 
take necessary action against the CEO but refused to reinstate the petitioner. The petitioner thereafter approached the 
Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), Asansol and raised an Industrial Dispute regarding her dismissal and 
non-payment of back wages and compensation. The conciliation proceeding before the Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central), Asansol failed and by exercising the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Labour, Government of 
India the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), Asansol has referred the Industrial Dispute before this 
Industrial Tribunal for adjudication. The petitioner in her pleading has prayed for setting aside the order of 
termination issued against Siuli Chatterjee and for her reinstatement in the post of Senior Assistant, QA with back 
wages w.e.f. 09..2020. 


6. |The management of SRBWIPL contested the Industrial Dispute by filing their written statement on 2.06.2023. 
It is contended that the Industrial Dispute is not maintainable and the same is liable to be dismissed. It is their case 
that the petitioner’s case disclosed in her written statement is replete with distorted version and suppression of truth. It 
is their case that SRBWIPL is a joint venture company of Steel Authority of India Limited (a Central Public Sector 
Undertaking under the Ministry of Steel, Government of India) and Rail India Technical and Economic Service 
Limited (a Central Public Sector Undertaking under the Ministry of Railways, Government of India). The company 
was incorporated on 30.l2.20l0 and as per the joint venture agreement the CEO was deputed from Rail India 
Technical and Economic Service Limited and the Chief Finance Officer was deputed from Steel Authority of India 
Limited. All other employees recruited by the company are on contractual basis and their contract period was 
extended time to time as per requirement of the company. 


7. The contention of the management in their written statement is that, Siuli Chatterjee was appointed as Assistant, 
Executive on contractual basis w.e.f. .06.2020 for a period of three months and her appointment letter bearing No. 
SRBWIPL/KULTI/HR/20-2l was issued on 09.06.2020. Initially the petitioner was appointed in the Stores 
Department under the General Manager, MM, where her performance was not satisfactory and several complaints 
were received by the office regarding her poor performance which has been recorded in her Service Record. The 
petitioner did not have any intention to improve her efficiency. It was reported by the Departmental Head that she was 
not found suitable for work at the Store. 


8. According to the management the petitioner was re-designated as an Executive to deal with clients. The 
petitioner submitted an application on 22.08.2020, requesting her transfer from Store to any office job, admitting her 
failure in performing job at the Store. The competent authority considered her appeal and transferred her to the office 
of the CEO at the same level by letter dated 22.08.2020. After completion of three months of contractual period and 
upon Annual Performance Appraisal Report (APAR) and the proposal dated 29.08.2020, the contract period of the 
petitioner was extended up to 28.02.2022 at the same level with incremental pay. 


9. A Charge Sheet dated 05.0.2020 was issued to the petitioner for involving herself in collection of contribution 
for local puja committee at Kulti and after enquiry by the nominated committee, the petitioner was found guilty for 
violating company’s service conduct rule and her position was reduced from El to NE4 with a reduction of pay of Rs. 
5,000/- for her balance period of contract vide letter SRBWIPL/KULTI/HR/20-2/0! dated 4.0.2020 and she was 
transferred to the Quality Assurance Department as a Senior Assistant. The Manager, QA also chargesheeted her for 
not wearing Safety Shoes in the Shop floor and violating safety regulations. The petitioner submitted her explanation 
through email. The performance of the petitioner in the Quality Assurance Department was not found satisfactory and 
the same was recorded in the Service Record. The Deputy General Manager, QA issued a letter dated 2.0.2020 to 
Siuli Chatterjee regarding her poor performance. According to the management the Gate Pass of the petitioner was 
revoked but she entered into the factory premises in unauthorized manner and signed the Attendance Register for 
which a Charge Sheet dated 03.I.2020 was issued against her by the Deputy General Manager, QA and as there was 
no suitable explanation submitted by the petitioner, the management had no option but to terminate the petitioner 
from her service for gross violation of safety, discipline and unsatisfactory performance in different departments. 
Accordingly, a termination letter dated 09.!.2020 was issued by the competent authority. The employer adopted 


[भाग I—avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4349 


appropriate procedure before issuing termination letter dated 09..2020. It is asserted that the opposite party/ 
employer is unable to reinstate the petitioner. Furthermore, the petitioner being employed on contractual basis and 
performed poorly, is liable to be terminated prior to completion of her tenure. According to the management the 
petitioner has no cause of action for initiating the Industrial Dispute and the same is liable to be rejected in limine. 


0. The appropriate government in exercise of the jurisdiction vested in it under Section 0 of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 referred this Industrial Dispute to this Tribunal for adjudication as to the legality and justification 
of termination of Siuli Chatterjee from service by issuance of letter dated 09..2020 by the management of 
SRBWIPL. 


ll. Assailing the impugned order of termination, the aggrieved employee examined herself as Workman Witness — 
l and filed an affidavit-in-chief. She has reiterated her statements made in the written statement and produced the 
following documents in support of her case : 


(i) Copy of the appointment letter of Siuli Chatterjee dated 09.06.2020 is produced as Exhibit W-I. 


(ii) Copy of the complaint dated 3.2.2020 submitted by Siuli Chatterjee before the Managing Director, as 
Exhibit W-2. 


(ii) Copy of the Enquiry Report of the PosH Committee dated 29.04.2022, as Exhibit W-3. 


(iv) Copy of the letter 07.09.2020 posting Siuli Chatterjee as an Executive-Secretary to the CEO, as Exhibit 
W-4. 


(v) Copy of the letter dated 05.0.2020, accusing Siuli Chatterjee of collecting puja subscription, as Exhibit 
W-S. 


(vi) Copy of the reply of Siuli Chatterjee dated 06.0.2020 to the letter dated 05.0.2020, as Exhibit W-6. 


(vii) Copy of the letter dated 03..2020 regarding disciplinary action for unauthorized entry in the factory 
premises without valid Gate Pass, as Exhibit W-7. 


(viii) Copy of the letter of termination dated 09.]|.2020, as Exhibit W-8. 

(ix) | Copy of the application of Siuli Chatterjee, addressed to the Dy. CLC(C), Asansol, as Exhibit W-9. 
(x) Copy of the findings of the Conciliation Officer dated 0.04.2023, as Exhibit W-0. 

(xi) | Copy of the screenshots of WhatsApp Status of K. Chandrasekar, as Exhibit W-|] series. 


2. In her examination-in-chief WW-| claimed to be a permanent employee of SRBWIPL, where she was initially 
appointed as an Assistant Executive (Storekeeping) at Kulti on .06.2020. She was subsequently posted as a Senior 
Assistant in the Quality Assurance Department. Thereafter she was posted as Secretary to the CEO on 07.09.2020 for 
a period of one month. The witness deposed that K. Chandrasekar, CEO, sexually harassed her in various manner and 
tried to get intimate with her in his office and at his residence. As she did not yield to his demands, K. Chandrasekar, 
CEO called her in his cabin and informed that she could not serve the purpose of his secretary and terminate her from 
her service. The witness further stated that Mr. Ujjal Mukherjee, General Manager (P&M) of the establishment issued 
a letter to her on 05.0.2020, accusing her of collecting puja subscription by misusing her position in the company 
and sought for an explanation by 07.0.2020, the copy of letter has been produced as Exhibit W-5. The aggrieved 
employee submitted her reply dated 06.0.2020 along with two documents. In her affidavit-in-chief she stated that she 
wrote to the Secretary of Post Office Para Sarbojonin Durgapuja Committee, Kulti and wanted to know the reason 
why her name was incorporated in the Subscription Voucher, though she was not a member of the committee. On 
05.0.2020 Ms. Indrani Gupta, a member of the committee replied through a letter that due to misunderstanding her 
name was incorporated in the Subscription Voucher of the committee and in this matter a police complaint was 
lodged on 08.0.2020. She further stated in her affidavit-in-chief that in spite explanation submitted by her along with 
documents from the puja committee, the management reduced her rank and pay in service from El to NE4. On 
07.0.2020 once again Mr. Sayantan Banerjee, Manager issued a letter against her, levelling allegation that she 
violated the safety norms by not wearing Safety Shoes on the Shop floor during inspection. The employee replied to 
the letter on 08.0.2020, disclosing that shoes of her size were neither available at company’s store nor in the open 
market, but the reply did not satisfy and the CEO who pressurize the Manager, QA to harass her repeatedly. 


3. On 03.l.2020 the Deputy General Manager, QA issued a letter informing the charged employee to submit an 
explanation as to why disciplinary action would not be initiated against her, as she entered the factory premises on 
02..2020 in unauthorized manner, without any valid Gate Pass and thereby violated the discipline of the company. 
In that letter explanation, in writing, was sought for within three days from the receipt of the letter as to why 
disciplinary action would not be taken against her for violating security rules. In her averment as WW-I, the charged 
employee stated that the management did not issue any Charge Sheet nor any Notice of enquiry and without 
appointing any Enquiry Officer and without holding any enquiry proceeding, the management has whimsically issued 
a letter of termination on 09.!.2020, which has been produced as Exhibit W-8. The evidence of the aggrieved 


4350 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


employee reveals that after her termination she submitted a complaint before the Managing Director, SRBWIPL dated 
3.2.2020, seeking reinstatement on the ground that she had been subjected to sexual harassment by K. 
Chandrasekar, CEO and that she was not provided any opportunity to represent herself in the enquiry proceeding, 
which was held in violation of natural justice. An enquiry was held by the Chairperson and Members of the PoSH 
Committee found that the allegation against K. Chandrasekar was correct. In her evidence the dismissed employee has 
prayed for setting aside the order of termination from service and for her reinstatement in service as Senior Assistant, 
QA with full back wages from 09.I.2020 and for compensation for physical, mental and sexual harassment mated to 
her in her place of work. 


4. In course of cross-examination of Workman Witness — | management did not venture to controvert the 
statements made by Siuli Chatterjee against K. Chandrasekar, CEO. She also reaffirmed that no copy of the Enquiry 
Proceeding or findings of the Enquiry Officer was supplied to her and no 2" Show Cause Notice was issued by the 
Disciplinary Authority before issuing letter of termination. Furthermore, the letter of termination was not issued by 
the competent authority of the management. 


5. Mr. Sushanta Bhattacharya, authorized representative of the management of SRBWIPL filed affidavit-in-chief 
in support of the management’s case and has been examined as Management Witness — |. The affidavit-in-chief 
appears to be a replica of the written statement, filed by the management. Management witness produced the 
following documents in support of their case : 


(3) Copy of the letter dated 03..2020 regarding disciplinary action for unauthorized entry in the factory 
premises without having valid Gate Pass is produced as Exhibit M-. 


(li) Copy of the letter of termination dated 09..2020, as Exhibit M-2. 

(iii) Copy of the Note Sheet dated 09..2020, as Exhibit M-3. 

(iv) Copy of the Show Cause Notice issued to Siuli Chatterjee, as Exhibit M-4. 

(v) Copy of another Show Cause Notice dated 05.0.2020 issued to Siuli Chatterjee, as Exhibit M-S. 


6. का his examination-in-chief the witness stated that he is the General Manager, Incharge at SRBWIPL and has 
been authorized to adduce evidence on behalf of the company. The witness stated that Siuli Chatterjee was appointed 
as Assistant Executive on |!.06.2020 and was posted at different units but unable to perform to the satisfaction of the 
management. From the post of Executive-Secretary to the CEO she was posted as Senior Assistant on |4.0.2020, 
which is an inferior post, due to her deficiency in work. The management witness further deposed that at the time she 
was posted as Senior Assistant, QA department, she was dismissed from her contractual service after an enquiry 
proceeding. The witness produced a copy of letter dated 03..2020 which disclosed the charge against the employee 
but in the same breath the witness deposed that no Enquiry Officer was appointed by the CEO or anyone else and no 
enquiry proceeding was held. A copy of letter dated 09..2020, relating to termination of service of Siuli Chatterjee 
has been produced as Exhibit M-2. 


7. In his cross-examination the management witness deposed that the Service and Conduct Rule, 20l9 of 
SRBWIPL applied to the contractual employees in their establishment but the witness failed to produce the said 
Service Rule, applicable to SRBWIPL. Cross-examination of MW-| further reveals that from the post of Assistant 
Executive, Siuli Chatterjee was re-designated as Executive on 25.07.2020 and thereafter on 07.09.2020 she was 
posted as Executive-Secretary to the CEO. The witness admitted that on promotion of the employee his / her pay is 
increased and in the instant case on being posted as Executive-Secretary to the CEO her pay was Rs. 20,425/- per 
month. It transpires from the cross-examination of MW-| that letter dated 03..2020 (Exhibit ४-]) is the document 
disclosing the charge against the employee and the expression “Charge Sheet” has not been explicitly stated. It was 
suggested to the management witness that no specific charge was described in the Letter / Charge Sheet dated 
03..2020 and it also does not disclose the rules and provisions of the service condition which had been violated by 
the candidate and does not disclose the indiscipline conduct. The witness denied such suggestions. The testimony of 
MW-|I however clearly admits that no one was appointed as the Enquiry Officer to hold enquiry in respect of charge 
levelled against the delinquent. The witness has categorically stated that they have no information if the charge of 
sexual harassment was proved against the CEO or that he was demoted from the post of CEO on the recommendation 
of POSH committee. The management witness denied the suggestion that Siuli Chatterjee was terminated from her 
service illegally to satisfy K. Chandrasekar, CEO and denied that she is entitled to be reinstated in the service. 


8. The moot question for consideration by this Tribunal is whether the action of the management of SRBWIPL in 
terminating the service of Siuli Chatterjee by letter dated 09..2020 is legal and justified. If not, to what relief she is 
entitled to. 


9. Mr. Debashis Mondal, learned advocate for the dismissed employee advancing his argument submitted that 
Siuli Chatterjee was a contractual employee who was appointed as an Assistant Executive by letter dated 09.06.2020, 
produced as Exhibit W-|. Initially the period of her employment was for three months as per the terms and conditions 
laid down in the letter of appointment issued by the competent authority. The condition of service also provided that 
the contractual period of service could be terminated or renewed further as may be decided by the CEO of the 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 435] 


company. Learned advocate referred to a letter dated 07.09.2020 issued by the CEO, whereby after completion of 
three months of probation period the management of SRBWIPL appointed her as Executive-Secretary to CEO on 
contractual basis from |.09.2020 to 28.02.2022 and she was required to fill up her Performance Appraisal Form by 
987 February of every year and put up the same before the competent authority. In case of poor performance, the 
management of the employer company reserved the right to terminate her service prior to completion of the tenure. 
Learned advocate referring to the evidence of Siuli Chatterjee (WW-l) argued that while being posted as Executive- 
Secretary to CEO from .09.2020, during a period of one month, she was accosted and subjected to sexual 
harassment by K. Chandrasekar, CEO but she could not raise any complaint before the company under the 
apprehension of losing her job. The witness in her affidavit-in-chief stated that she was under immense pressure of 
termination from service by the CEO for not satisfying his wishes. She experienced physical and mental torture and 
sexual harassment in the hands of CEO. On raising protest against the conduct of CEO towards her, she was degraded 
from a higher post to lower post on concocted and baseless allegations. Serious allegations have been made by Siuli 
Chatterjee in her affidavit-in-chief that the CEO tried to develop extramarital relationship with her but when the same 
could not be fulfilled, Mr. Soumita Chatterjee, her husband who was working under a contractor at SRBWIPL was 
terminated from his service. The CEO called Siuli Chatterjee to his residence on the pretext of learning Bengali 
language from her and tried to make physical contact. It is argued that when object of the CEO was not fulfilled a 
letter dated 05.0.2020 was issued by the General Manager (P&M) of the employer company (Exhibit W-5), at the 
instance of the CEO, alleging violation of service rules due to her involvement in collection of Puja subscription by 
misusing her position in the company. Learned advocate for the employee submitted that on receiving the letter Siuli 
Chatterjee replied to the same, raising objection against the false allegation. She also sought for an explanation from 
the Secretary of the Post Office Para Sarbojonin Durgapuja Committee, Kulti, as to why her name has been 
incorporated in the Subscription Vouchers, though she was not a member of the committee. Learned advocate referred 
to Exhibit W-6, the reply submitted by Siuli Chatterjee dated 06.0.2020, whereby she stated that she was not 
engaged with any puja committee nor did she collect any subscription and that the Post Office Para Sarbojonin 
Durgapuja Committee, Kulti had incorporated her name in the subscription voucher, without any prior permission and 
the same would be evident from the letters issued by Ms. Indrani Gupta, member of the committee and Secretary of 
Post Office Para Sarbojonin Durgapuja Committee, Kulti that the name of Siuli Chatterjee was erroneously mentioned 
due to some misunderstanding. It is submitted that even after such explanation submitted by her, the management of 
the company at the instance of the CEO reduced her rank from El to NE4 accompanied by reduction of her pay and 
posted her as Senior Assistant in the Quality Assurance Department by letter dated 4.0.2020 without any fault on 
the part of the employee. 


20. Mr. Mondal argued that the management of the employer company did not stop there but in a vindictive manner 
issued a letter dated 07.0.2020 to Siuli Chatterjee, which has been marked as Annexure L to the affidavit-in-chief of 
management witness, seeking an explanation as to why action would not be taken against her for violating safety rules 
by not wearing safety shoes at the Shop floor. According to the lady employee, she submitted her explanation on 
08.0.2020 stating that Safety Shoes of her size was not available in the Company Store as well as in the open marked 
but the management did not consider her plea. The final blow was dealt by the management by issuing a letter dated 
03..2020, disclosing that a disciplinary action was being taken against her for her unauthorized entry in the factory 
premises without any valid Gate Pass. Learned advocate for the petitioner drew my notice to the letter dated 
03..2020, produced as Exhibit W-7, which was issued by the Deputy General Manager, QA, stating therein that she 
had entered into the factory premises on 02.!.2020 and signed her attendance in unauthorized manner and due to her 
failure to submit a Police Verification Certificate in time she had to wait till the Deputy General Manager, QA 
returned after attending an urgent meeting in Kolkata and thereafter process issuance of a valid Gate Pass. On an 
allegation of entering the factory premises without a valid Gate Pass on 02..2020 Siuli Chatterjee was asked to 
submit an explanation, in writing, within three days as to why disciplinary action would not be taken against her for 
violating the security rules. Learned advocate argued that an employee of the company whose service validity had 
been extended till 28.02.2022 could not be debarred from entering into the premises of the factory for discharging her 
duty. It is only with a convoluted motive and to harass her, the management of the employer company raised a non- 
issue that she had entered into the factory premises on 02.!.2020 to sign her attendance without having a valid Gate 
Pass. It is vehemently contended that the employer company did not consider the explanation submitted by Siuli 
Chatterjee on 03..2020 through email to the CEO and the General Manager as to why she entered into the office of 
the factory without any valid Gate Pass, and without providing her any opportunity to reply to the Charge has 
arbitrarily, whimsically and in an illegal manner terminated her from her service by issuing a termination letter dated 
09..2020 (Exhibit W-8) without having conducted any Departmental Enquiry in accordance with the service rules 
applicable to the employer company and employees. Learned advocate strenuously argued that the charge levelled 
against the employee by letter dated 03.l!.2020 without issuance of any formal Charge Sheet or appointment of an 
Enquiry Officer or holding of enquiry proceeding or establishing the charge by examining management representative 
in support of the charge or affording reasonable opportunity to the charged employee of hearing and without issuance 
of any 27 Show Cause Notice, issued the order of dismissal by an office who is not the competent authority. It is 
argued that the order of dismissal is arbitrary and illegal and the same requires to be set aside. Learned advocate in 
support of his argument placed reliance on a decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Union of 


4352 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


India and Others vs Mohd. Ramzan Khan [AIR (99) SC 47], wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India 
mandated that a 2"’ Show Cause Notice along with Enquiry Proceeding and Findings of the Enquiry Officer should be 
served upon the delinquent for representing his case before the final decision is taken. 


2l. Mr. Ayan Ranjan Mukherjee, learned advocate for the management of the company took me through the 
evidence of management witness and argued that the allegation levelled by Siuli Chatterjee against K. Chandrasekar, 
CEO of the employer company is unfounded as she never lodged any complaint before any authority of the employer 
company nor before the police, in respect of her alleged sexual harassment by the CEO. It is only after the order of 
dismissal was passed on 09.!.2020 she has come out with a story to escape the rigour of the punishment and to seek 
reprieve from the order of termination. Learned advocate fairly admitted that no formal charge was framed against the 
employee nor any Enquiry Officer was appointed. It is also admitted that no enquiry proceeding was held and the 
management did not issue any 2"’ Show Cause Notice before issuance of the order of dismissal. Learned advocate 
referred to a Note Sheet initiated by the Deputy General Manager, QA (Exhibit M-3) dated 9..2020 stating that the 
“proceeding of the charges against Mrs. Siuli Chatterjee is forwarded for taking appropriate decision” by the 
competent authority. It is argued that the CEO has approved the termination of Siuli Chatterjee on security and safety 
reasons. According to the learned advocate for the management the delinquent in paragraph || of her affidavit-in- 
chief has admitted that she had entered into the office of the factory without any valid Gate Pass, thereby nothing 
remains to be proved against her and the order of termination from service is just and appropriate and there is no 
reason for interfering with the same. 


22. Considered the arguments advanced by the learned advocates of both parties in the light of evidence and 
materials on record. There is no dispute that Siuli Chatterjee was appointed as an Assistant Executive at SRBWIPL by 
the competent authority w.e.f. |.06.2020 on a contractual basis, initially for a period of three months at a monthly 
emolument of Rs. 5,000/- (Rupees fifteen thousand only). Exhibit W-4 reveals that after completion of three months, 
the period of her service was extended up to 28.02.2022 on contractual basis and she was designated as Executive- 
Secretary to CEO and her gross monthly salary was Rs. 20,425/- (Rupees twenty thousand four hundred and twenty- 
five only). The said document established the employer-employee relationship between Siuli Chatterjee and 
SRBWIPL. 


23. The crux of the issued in this case is that within a span of five months of service a charge was levelled against 
the employee by issuing letter dated 03..2020 (Exhibit W-7 / M-) that a disciplinary action had been drawn up 
against her for entering the factory premises on 02..2020 without any valid Gate Pass and permission of higher 
authority. In the letter dated 03..2020 (Exhibit M-l) she was asked to submit her explanation, in writing, within 
three days, as to why disciplinary action would not be taken against her for violating security rules of the employer 
company. It is true that no copy of email or any reply to the notice has been filed on behalf of Siuli Chatterjee at the 
time of adjudication of this Industrial Dispute. In the written statement and affidavit-in-chief she has stated that on 
03..2020 she had sent an email to the CEO and the General Manager, submitting her explanation as to why she 
entered into the office of the factory without any valid Gate Pass. This statement has not been controverted in the 
course of cross-examination of Siuli Chatterjee (WW-|). It is an admitted fact and also transpires from the evidence 
of the management witness that no enquiry proceeding was held. Mr. Sushanta Bhattacharya, General Manager (IC) 
(MW-l) of SRBWIPL in his cross-examination stated that no one was appointed as Enquiry Officer to hold enquiry in 
respect of the charge levelled against the employee. However, he has denied that Siuli Chatterjee was dismissed in an 
illegal manner without holding any enquiry proceeding against her. The materials on record is rife to suggest that no 
formal Charge Sheet was issued against the delinquent employee. The allegation made in letter dated 03.!.2020 
disclosed the intention of the management to initiate a disciplinary action against the concerned employee for her 
unauthorized entry in the factory premises on 02..2020. The letter does not disclose the relevant provisions of 
Service and Conduct Rule, 20I9 of SRBWIPL, applicable to the contractual employees working in the establishment. 
The letter dated 03..2020 does not disclose for a while as to whether the said charge was brought against Siuli 
Chatterjee with the approval of the competent authority of the company. If the contents of the allegation in the letter is 
considered, it would appear that the management of the company having extended the period of employment of Siuli 
Chatterjee up to 28.02.2022 was bent upon to stop the employee from entering the premises of the factory to attend 
her work. If the employee failed to enter the premises to attend her duty, the management conversely could have 
charged her for her unauthorized absence and would treated her in the same manner. The management is duty bound 
to provide a valid Gate Pass to approved employees in time. Management failing such responsibility cannot blame 
their employees for entering the place of work. It is an axiomatic truth that a person having a valid appointment in an 
establishment has an implied licence to enter the premises and the employee cannot be treated as a trespasser. 
Issuance of a Gate pass is only an arrangement made for enabling the employee to enter the premises. The 
management therefore, did not act in a bona fide manner by not issuing a Gate pass to the employee after appointing 
her for employment. It is established from the materials on record and from their own admission that the management 
did not hold any enquiry proceeding before the issuance of the letter of termination dated 09..2020 by Mr. U. 
Mukherjee, General Manager (P&M), without stating as to what constituted the charge framed by the Deputy General 
Manager, QA. It is not the case of the management that the Deputy General Manager, QA who issued the letter dated 
03..2020, containing the purported charge had himself acted as the Enquiry Officer. It is crystal clear that the 
management issued the letter of dismissal without holding the enquiry proceeding whatsoever. It is obvious that 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4353 


no copy of Enquiry Proceeding or Report was served upon the charged employee before taking the final decision. On 
this point the law has been clearly laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Union of India 
and Others vs Mohd. Ramzan Khan [AIR (99l) SUILI CHATTERJEE 47[], as follows: 


“ When the Inquiry Officer is not the Disciplinary Authority, the delinquent employee has a right to receive 
a copy of the inquiry officer’s report before the Disciplinary Authority arrives at its conclusion with regard 
to the charges levelled against him. A denial of the inquiry officer’s report before the Disciplinary 
Authority takes its decision on the charges, is denial of opportunity to the employee to prove his innocence 
and is a breach of principles of natural justice.” 


From the facts and circumstances of this case I find and hold that no enquiry was held before dismissing Siuli 
Chatterjee form her service. Such act is arbitrary and violative of the principles of natural justice. It is a settled law 
that in a disciplinary action or regular trial, the burden of proof to establish the charge is upon the management of the 
employer and not on the accused. The burden must be discharged by proper evidence adduced by the representative of 
employer. In the instant case the management did not appoint any Enquiry Officer, no Notice of enquiry was issued 
to the employee, no evidence was led against the charge employee and the concerned employee was not given the 
opportunity to lead any evidence in support of her defence. I find there is a gross violation of the principles of natural 
justice and the management has acted in an arbitrary and unlawful manner by issuing letter of termination on 
09..2020, which is found not sustainable under the facts and circumstances and law of natural justice. 


24. It would be apposite to consider the reason why the management went ahead to take an abrupt decision of 
terminating a lawfully appointed employee without establishing the charge against her. The rival contention of the 
charged employee is that after she was posted as an Executive-Secretary to CEO from 07.09.2020 she was subjected 
to sexual harassment by Mr. K. Chandrasekar, CEO, who strove to develop extramarital relationship with her and 
created pressure upon her psychologically and also threaten to terminate her from service if she disclosed the same to 
others. Out of fear of losing her job she did not lodge any complaint, but ultimately Siuli Chatterjee raised a complain 
dated 3.2.2020 addressed to the Managing Director, SRBWIPL. It is gathered from her evidence that an enquiry 
proceeding was held by the Chairperson and Members of the PoSH Committee and the report in eight pages has been 
filed before the Tribunal as Exhibit W-3. It transpires from the Enquiry Report (Exhibit W-3) that K. Chandrasekar, 
CEO (respondent) had indulged in act of sexual harassment at workplace and thereby violated Rule 9.l of RITES 
(CDA Rules), 980 and there were administrative lapses at various stages in the official dealings done by the 
respondent. In their report the committee also observe that the charges of Mental Harassment of the complainant in 
various forms and on various occasion was very clear. The committee recommended taking strict action against the 
respondent for his misconduct of sexual harassment, in accordance of Rule 9.l of RITES (CDA Rules), 980 by 
imposing minor penalty on the respondent and to pay monetary compensation, equivalent to six months’ salary to the 
complainant. 


25. Having considered the facts and circumstances discussed above I find and hold that the order issued by the 
General Manager (P&M), in his letter dated 09..2020, terminating the service of Siuli Chatterjee on and from 
09..2020 is not sustainable under the law and the same is hereby set aside. The management witness has not been 
able to produce the Rules governing the condition of employment of the contractual employees and whether they are 
to continue in service until they attend their age of superannuation. In such view of the matter, without any adverse 
findings against the concerned employee she is entitled to continue in service even though the period of service was 
up to 28.02.2022 as per Exhibit W-4. Since there has been no worthwhile reason for termination of service of Siuli 
Chatterjee, the management of SRBWIPL is directed to reinstate her in service within one month from the date of 
communication of this Award in the same post which she was occupying prior to her termination, on usual terms and 
conditions of service appliable to all other employees similarly placed. The period of her absence shall be treated as 
dies non. The aggrieved employee has been deprived of her earning and livelihood in a wrongful manner and as she 
had fallen a prey to the administrative hierarchy of the company. In my considered view this is a fit case to allow her 
full back wages and continuity in service. the Industrial Dispute is accordingly allowed on contest against the 
management of SRBWIPL. 


Hence, 
ORDERED 


that the Industrial Dispute is allowed against the management of SRBWIPL on contest. The management of the 
employer company is directed to reinstate Siuli Chatterjee in her service within one month from the date of 
communication of the Award and pay her full back wages from 09.!.2020 till the date of her reinstatement. The 
Period of her absence shall be treated as dies non. Let an award be drawn up in light of my above findings. Let copies 
of the Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India, New Delhi for 
information and Notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 


4354 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 880.—2irarhre विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
मेसर्स इंडियन ऑयल कॉर्पोरेशन लिमिटेड; मेसर्स प्रकाश इंटरप्राइस के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और इंडियन ऑयल 
ठिका श्रमिक यूनियन के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता, 
पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न. (8/2022) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट 
कॉपी के साथ 27.09.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. एल-30044/03/2022-आईआर(एम)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


S.O. 880.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 8/2022) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to M/s Indian Oil Corporation Limited; M/s Prakash Enterprise and Indian Oil Theka Shramik Union which 
was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 27.09.2024. 


[F. No. L-300I/03/2022-IR(M)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present : Justice K. D. Bhutia 
REF NO. 8 OF 2022 
Parties : Employers in relation to the management of 
M/s. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., 
And 
M/s. Prakash Enterprise 
Versus 
The Indian Oil Thika Shramik Union 
Appearance : 
On behalf of M/s. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd : Mr. Sushil Karmakar, Ld. Advocate 
On behalf of M/s. Prakash Enterprise : Absent 
On behalf of the Workmen : Mr. Suvadip Bhattacharjee, Ld. Advocate. 


7" September, 2024 
AWARD 


By order Noi.,L-300/03/2022-IR(M) dated 7-02-2022, the Central Government, Ministry of Labour, has 
referred the following issue for adjudication by this Tribunal :- 


“Whether the termination of services of Sri Arup Sardar and six others (list enclosed), engaged by M/s. Prakash 
Enterprise engaged in the establishment Chittaranjan Depot under the management of IOCL on the direction of the 
principal employer to close the depot without complying with the provision of section 25 —F of I.D. Act is legal 
and/or justified? If not, what relief the workmen are entitled to?” 


Ld. Counsel for the management of M/s. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. is present. The union is also represented by its 
Ld. Counsel. 


None appears from the side of contractor employer M/s. Prakash Enterprise. 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4355 


The union files an affidavit sworn by Mr. Achyut Kumar Chakraborty, Vice President of the union stating that 
another Reference Case no. 09/2022 between the same parties is pending and as such he wants to withdraw the 
present reference case. Copy duly served and let it be taken on record. 


The petition is taken up for hearing. Ld. Counsel for management submits the affidavit filed this day does not 
contain any whisper that issue involved in reference case no.09/2022 is similar to the issue involved in the present 
reference. However, he submits that he has no objection if the present reference is disposed of by passing a ‘no 
dispute award’. 


The record of reference case no.09/2022 is called for and from where it appears the parties to dispute are same 
i.e. management of M/s. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. as principal employer, M/s. Prakash Enterprise as contractor employer 
and the General Secretary, Indian Oil Thika Shramik Union. The issue involved in the said case read as follows: - 


“Whether the retrenchment of Sri Arup Sardar and six others (list enclosed), engaged at Chittaranjan Depot of 
IOCL through contractor M/s. Prakash Enterprise, on closure of said Depot without complying with the provision of 
section 25 —F of I.D. Act is legal and justified? If not, what relief the workmen are entitled to?’ 


In the present reference the issue read as follows :- 


“Whether the termination of services of Sri Arup Sardar and six others (list enclosed), engaged by M/s. Prakash 
Enterprise engaged in the establishment Chittaranjan Depot under the management of IOCL on the direction of the 
principal employer to close the depot without complying with the provision of section 25 —F of I.D. Act is legal 
and/or justified? If not, what relief the workmen are entitled to?’ 


Thus, it appears issues involved in both the references are same and parties are also same. Accordingly, the 
prayer of the union for withdrawal of the case by passing a ‘no dispute award’ is hereby allowed. 


The Reference Case no. |8/2022 is hereby disposed of by passing a ‘no dispute award’. 
Justice K. D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 884.—airarhre विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
मेसर्स यू. टेक सर्विस; इंडियन ऑयल कॉर्पोरेशन लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री मानस रंजन सगाडीअ के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, भुबनेश्वर, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 
72/2048) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
27.09.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. WA-3002/20/208-arsaz(TH)] 
दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


S.O. 88.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 72/208) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court, Bhubaneswar as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to M/s U. Tech Services; Indian Oil Corporation Limited and Shri Manas Ranjan Sagadia which was 
received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 27.09.2024. 


[F. No. L-3002/20/208-IR(M)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT BHUBANESWAR 
Present: 


Sri Dinesh Kumar Singh, 
Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-cum-Labour Court, 
Bhubaneswar. 


4356 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 72/208 


Date of Passing Order — 23 August, 2024 23" August, 2024 
Between :- 
l. M/s. U. Tech Service, 
C-9, Lingaraj Vihar, Pokhariput, 
Bhubaneswar (Odisha) — 75! 020 
2. The Engineer-in-Chief (A & W), 
Medical Transit Camp, Paradip Refinery, 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., Swayang Tower, 
Plot No. M-73, Unit-4, Madhusudhan Nagar, 
Bhubaneswar (Orissa). 


[४ Party-Managements. 


(And) 
Shri Manas Ranjan Sagadia, 
S/o. Shri Sarbeswar Sagadia, 
At. Rusipada, Post — Baniasahi 
District — Puri, Odisha. 
274 Party-Workman. 
Appearances: 
None. ae For the ।* Party-Managements. 
None. aa For the 2™ Party-Workman. 
ORDER 


In the present case, a reference was received from the Section Officer to the Government of India, Ministry of 
Labour & Employment, New Delhi vide order No. L-3002/20/208 — IR(M), dated 26..20l8 under clause (d) of 
sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 for adjudication of a dispute, 
under the following schedule: - 


“Whether the removal from service of Shri Manas Ranjan Sagadia, Room boy w.e.f. 30.06.20l7 by 
M/s. Utech Service, a contractor under IOCL, Paradip Refinery, Bhubaneswaris legal and/or 
justified? If not, what relief the workman is entitled to?” 


2. In the reference order, the Under Secretary to Government of India, Ministry of Labour & Employment, New 
Delhi commanded the parties raising the dispute to file statement of claim, complete with relevant documents, list of 
reliance and witnesses with this Tribunal within 5 days of receipt of the reference order and to forward a copy of 
such statement of claim to each one of the opposite parties involved in the dispute. 


3. Despite directions so given, no statement of claim is received from the 27 party-Workman. 


4. On receipt of the above reference, notice was sent to the 2" Party-Workman on 05.02.20l9 and on dated 
05.09.2023 for appearance and for filing of statement of claim. Neither the postal article sent to the 27 Party- 
Workman, referred to above, was received back nor was it observed by the Tribunal that postal services remained 
unserved in the period, referred to above. Therefore, every presumption lies in favour of the fact that the above 
notices were served upon the 2" Party-Workman. Despite service of the notice, the 27 Party-Workman opted to 
abstain away from the proceedings. No claim statement was filed on its behalf. Thus, it is clear that the 27 Party- 
Workman is not interested in adjudication of the reference on merits. 


5. Since the 2" Party-Workman has neither filed statement of claim nor has led any evidence so as to prove its 
cause against the Managements, it is presumed that there is no claim of workman against the Managements. 


6. In view of such, no claim Order is passed by this Tribunal. 


7. Let this order be sent to the appropriate Government, as required under Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947, for publication. 


Dictated & Corrected by me. 
DINESH KUMAR SINGH, Presiding Officer 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4357 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4882.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का i4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
मेसर्स यू. टेक सर्विस; इंडियन ऑयल कॉर्पोरेशन लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री रवीन्द्र कुमार स्वैन के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, भुबनेश्वर, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न. 
73/2048) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
27.09.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. Wt-3002/8/208-arsarz(TH)] 
दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


S.O. 882.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 73/208) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court, Bhubaneswar as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to M/s U. Tech Services; Indian Oil Corporation Limited and Shri Rabindra Kumar Swain which was 
received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 27.09.2024. 


[F. No. L-3002/8/208-IR(M)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT BHUBANESWAR 
Present: 


Sri Dinesh Kumar Singh, 
Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-cum-Labour Court, 


Bhubaneswar. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 73/208 
Date of Passing Order — 23 August, 2024 23" August, 2024 
Between :- 


l. M/s. U. Tech Service, 
C-9, Lingaraj Vihar, Pokhariput, 
Bhubaneswar (Odisha) — 75 020 

2. The Engineer-in-Chief (A & W), 
Medical Transit Camp, Paradip Refinery, 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., Swayang Tower, 
Plot No. M-73, Unit-4, Madhusudhan Nagar, 
Bhubaneswar (Orissa). 


[४ Party-Managements. 


(And) 
Shri, Rabindra Kumar Swain, 
At. Chitalpur, Post - Mukundadaspur, 
Via — Pipili, District — Puri, Odisha. 
274 Party-Workman. 
Appearances: 
None. ee For the ।* Party-Managements. 


None. 8 For the 2™ Party-Workman. 


4358 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ORDER 


In the present case, a reference was received from the Section Officer to the Government of India, Ministry of 
Labour & Employment, New Delhi vide order No. L-3002/l8/208 — IR(M), dated 26..20l8 under clause (d) of 
sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 for adjudication of a dispute, 
under the following schedule:- 


“Whether removal from service of Shri Rabindra Kumar Swain, House Keeping boy w.e.f. 30.06.20l7 by 
M/s. Utech Service, a contractor under IOCL, Paradip Refinery, Bhubaneswar is legal and/or justified? 
If not, what relief the workman is entitled to?” 


2. In the reference order, the Under Secretary to Government of India, Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
New Delhi commanded the parties raising the dispute to file statement of claim, complete with relevant documents, 
list of reliance and witnesses with this Tribunal within l5 days of receipt of the reference order and to forward a copy 
of such statement of claim to each one of the opposite parties involved in the dispute. 


3. Despite directions so given, no statement of claim is received from the 27 party-Workman. 


4. On receipt of the above reference, notice was sent to the 2" Party-Workman on 05.02.20l9 and on dated 
05.09.2023 for appearance and for filing of statement of claim. Neither the postal article sent to the 2" Party- 
Workman, referred to above, was received back nor was it observed by the Tribunal that postal services remained 
unserved in the period, referred to above. Therefore, every presumption lies in favour of the fact that the above 
notices were served upon the 2" Party-Workman. Despite service of the notice, the 27 Party-Workman opted to 
abstain away from the proceedings. No claim statement was filed on its behalf. Thus, it is clear that the ae Party- 
Workman is not interested in adjudication of the reference on merits. 


5. Since the 2" Party-Workman has neither filed statement of claim nor has led any evidence so as to prove its 
cause against the Managements, it is presumed that there is no claim of workman against the Managements. 


6. In view of such, no claim Order is passed by this Tribunal. 


7. Let this order be sent to the appropriate Government, as required under Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947, for publication. 


Dictated & Corrected by me. 
DINESH KUMAR SINGH, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4883.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 74) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
मेसर्स यू. टेक सर्विस; इंडियन ऑयल कॉर्पोरेशन लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री राम चंद्र बराल के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, भुबनेश्वर, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स 7. 74/208) को 
जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 27.09.2024 को 
प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. TA-3002/9/2048-arsarz(TH)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 
S.O. 883.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 74/208) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court, Bhubaneswar as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to M/s U. Tech Services; Indian Oil Corporation Limited and Shri Rama Chandra Baral which was 
received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 27.09.2024. 


[F. No. L-3002/9/208-IR(M)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 


[भाग I—avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4359 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT BHUBANESWAR 
Present: 


Sri Dinesh Kumar Singh, 
Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-cum-Labour Court, 


Bhubaneswar. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 74/208 
Date of Passing Order — 23" August, 2024 
Between :- 


l. M/s. U. Tech Service, 
C-9, Lingaraj Vihar, Pokhariput, 
Bhubaneswar (Odisha) — 75! 020 

2. The Engineer-in-Chief (A & W), 
Medical Transit Camp, Paradip Refinery, 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., Swayang Tower, 
Plot No. M-73, Unit-4, Madhusudhan Nagar, 
Bhubaneswar (Orissa). 


]# Party-Managements. 


(And) 
Shri Rama Chandra Baral, 
S/o. Shri, Kailash Chandra Baral, 
At. Barimunda, Post — BadaNinigaron, 
District — Puri, Odisha. 
27 Party-Workman. 
Appearances: 
None. sh For the ।7 Party-Managements. 
None. se For the 2™ Party-Workman. 
ORDER 


In the present case, a reference was received from the Section Officer to the Government of India, Ministry of 
Labour & Employment, New Delhi vide order No. L-3002/9/208 — IR(M), dated 26..208 under clause (d) of 
sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 for adjudication of a dispute, 
under the following schedule:- 


“Whether removal from service of Shri Rama Chandra Baral, Waiter w.e.f. 30.06.20l7 by M/s. Utech 
Service, a contractor under IOCL, Paradip Refinery, Bhubaneswar is legal and/or justified? If not, what 
relief the workman is entitled to?” 


2. In the reference order, the Under Secretary to Government of India, Ministry of Labour & Employment, New 
Delhi commanded the parties raising the dispute to file statement of claim, complete with relevant documents, list of 
reliance and witnesses with this Tribunal within 5 days of receipt of the reference order and to forward a copy of 
such statement of claim to each one of the opposite parties involved in the dispute. 


3. Despite directions so given, no statement of claim is received from the 27 party-Workman. 


4. On receipt of the above reference, notice was sent to the 277 Party-Workman on 05.02.20I9 and on dated 
05.09.2023 for appearance and for filing of statement of claim. Neither the postal article sent to the 27 Party- 
Workman, referred to above, was received back nor was it observed by the Tribunal that postal services remained 
unserved in the period, referred to above. Therefore, every presumption lies in favour of the fact that the above 
notices were served upon the 2™ Party-Workman. Despite service of the notice, the 27 Party-Workman opted to 
abstain away from the proceedings. No claim statement was filed on its behalf. Thus, it is clear that the 27 Party- 
Workman is not interested in adjudication of the reference on merits. 


5. Since the 2™ Party-Workman has neither filed statement of claim nor has led any evidence so as to prove its 
cause against the Managements, it is presumed that there is no claim of workman against the Managements. 


6. In view of such, no claim Order is passed by this Tribunal. 


4360 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


7. Let this order be sent to the appropriate Government, as required under Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947, for publication. 


Dictated & Corrected by me. 
DINESH KUMAR SINGH, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4884.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
महाप्रबंधक, हिंदुस्तान एयरोनॉटिक्स लिमिटेड, बालानगर, हैदराबाद, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री के. नरेन्द्र, 
कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह-श्रम न्‍्यायालय- हैदराबाद पंचाट(संदर्भ 
संख्या 55/2009) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है,प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
27/09/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. एल - 42025-07-2024-472-आईआर (डीयू)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


5.0. 884.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. ID. No. 55/2009) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court— Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The General Manager, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Balanagr, Hyderabad, and Shri K. 
Narender, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
27/09/2024. 


[F. No. L-42025-07-2024-72-IR (DU)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 
Present: - 
Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 3* day of July, 2024 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No.55/2009 
Between: 


Sri K. Narender, 

S/o K. Brahmaiah, 

H.No.6-3, 

Raju Colony, Near Gandhi Statue, 
Balanagar, Hyderabad. 


......Petitioner 
AND 
General Manager, 
M/s. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, 
Hyderabad Division (Avionies), 
Balanagar, Hyderabad. 
.... Respondent 


Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : M/s. 3.0. Ravindra Reddy, P. Srinivasulu & Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocates 


[भाग —ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 436] 


For the Respondent: M/s. K. Srinivasa Murthy & V. Uma Devi, Advocates 
AWARD 


Sri K. Narender, who worked as Office Boy (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this petition 
under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents M/s. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited 
seeking for reinstatement into service duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, back 
wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deems fit. 


2. The brief facts as averred in the claim statement filed by the Petitioner are as follows:- 


It is submitted that the Petitioner was appointed as office boy on casual basis on 5.4.2004 in the Customers Service 
Department of the Respondent company. He worked continuously up to 24.5.2008 and he was terminated from 
service with effect from 25.5.2008 without issuing any written order or assigning any reason. It is submitted that the 
petitioner has tried to approach the Respondent but in vain. Then the Petitioner sent Representation dated 7.4.2009 
under Registered Post acknowledgement due. Though the said representation was served on 20.4.2009 in the 
Respondent company, there was no reply from the Respondent. It is submitted that as there was no reply from the 
respondent, Petitioner is constrained to approach this Court. Petitioner’s termination is illegal, arbitrary, unjustified 
and in violation of section 25 F,G & H of the Industrial Disputes Act and also in violation of Section 25 N of the ID 
Act, as the Petitioner was not given one month notice, or notice pay and no retrenchment compensation was paid to 
him. It is submitted that the Petitioner is unemployed and he is unable to secure any alternative employment inspite of 
his best efforts. His last drawn salary was Rs.3200/- per month. Hence, Petitioner prays for reinstatement into 
service with back pages and all other attendant benefits. 


3. Respondent filed counter denying the averments of the Petitioner_as under:- 


The Respondent filed counter denying the averments of the petition with the 


It is submitted that Petitioner was never in the employment of the Respondent company. None of the provisions under 
the sections of ID Act are applicable to the case of the Petitioner as he was neither directly employed by the 
Respondent company nor he was retrenched by the Respondent company. It is submitted that the Petitioner was 
engaged by a contractor Sri A. Maisaiah and the Petitioner was deployed by Sri A. Maisaiah, Contractor in the 
contractual work awarded to him. The said contractor was an independent employer carrying out the jobs awarded 
under the contract and upon the termination of the said contract he was not given any further contract. The Petitioner 
must seek remedy against the said contractor who has employed him for a limited period of time under the Contract 
Labour (R&A) Act, 970. It is submitted that the Respondent does not have any service particulars of the Petitioner 
and other details relating to his deployment by the said contractor in any other jobs. The Petitioner was never 
employed by the Respondent company either as a casual or in any other capacity. But he was working under Sri A. 
Maisaiah, Contractor during the period of contract awarded to him and after expiration of the said contract, there was 
no relationship whatsoever between the Petitioner and the Respondent. Hence, prayed to dismiss the claim petition. 


4.___ On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties following issues arise for determination in the present 
matter:- 


I. Whether there exists relationship of employer and employee between the parties? 
Il. | Whether the services of the workman _ has been terminated illegally or unjustifiably by the management? 


Ill. To what relief if any, the Petitioner is entitled for? 

Findings:- 

5. In order to discharge the onus and prove the fact of relationship of employer and employee between the parties, 
the workmen has examined himself as WW and filed his evidence by way of affidavit wherein he has reiterated the 


plea taken in the petition. He has also filed documents in evidence, Ex.WI is the representation and Ex.W2 is the 
attendance certificate of the Workman. 


6. In rebuttal, Respondent management filed the chief affidavit of the Witness MWland in documentary 
evidence, he has filed the four documents. >>. ५] is the notice to Sri A. Maisaiah regarding award of job contract 
dated 27.7.2006, Ex.M2 is the tender notice dated 6.4.2006, Ex.M3 is agreement between Sri A. Maisaiah and HAL 
dated 28.8.2006 and Ex.M4 is the extension of job contract to Sri A. Maisaiah dated 29.2.2008. 


7. Heard the argument of Learned Counsels for parties and the Petitioner has also filed written submissions. 


8. Point No.I:-Onus to prove the relationship of employer and employee between the parties rests upon the 
shoulder of the Workman. It is settled law that, “ burden of proving the employer and employee relationship 
primarily rests upon the person who asserts its existence. In a situation where a person asserts to be an employee of 
the management, of which the management denied, the primary onus rests upon the person so asserting to give 
positive evidence in his favour. The initial burden of proof to discharge rests upon the Workman”. 


4362 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


In the case of Automobile Association Upper India vs. P.O., Labour Court and another reported in 30(2006) 
DLT 60, Hon’ble High Court of Delhi have held, 


“ Engagement and appointment of the Workman in service can be established either by direct evidence 
like existence and production of appointment letter or written agreement, or by circumstantial evidence of 
incidental or ancillary records in nature of attendance register, salary register, leave records, deposit of 
PF contribution, ESI, etc., or even by examination of Co-worker who may depose before the court that the 
Workman was working with the management.” 


Further, Honourable Supreme Court of India in the case of Workman of Nilgiri Coop. Mkt. Society Ltd. vs 
State of Tamil Nadu reported in AIR 2004 SC 639 held that, 


“It is a well settled principle of law that the person who is set up a plea of existence of relationship of 
employer and employee, the burden would be upon him.” 


Further, in the case N.C. John vs Secretary Thodupuha Taluk Shop and Commercial Establishment Workers 
Union and others., 973 LAB.IC. 398, the Kerala High Court held, 


“The burden of proof being on the Workman Jai Prakash of 27 to establish the employer employee 
relationship an adverse inference cannot be drawn against the employer that if he were to produce books of 
accounts they would have proved employer employee relationship.” 


In the case of Kanpur Electricity Supply Co. Ltd., vs Shamim Mirza, 20090] SCC 20, the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court held, 


“It Is trite that the burden to prove that a claimant was in the employment of a particular management, 
primarily lies on the person who claims to be so, but the degree of proof, so required varies from case to 
case. It is neither feasible nor advisable to lay down an abstract rule to determine the employer -employee 
relationship.” 


Further, in the case of Baburam vs. Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Anr., 247(208) Delhi Law Times 596, the High 
Court of Delhi have held, 


“It is well settled principle of law that the person, who sets up a plea of existence of relationship of 
employer and employee, the burden would be upon him.” 


9. Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and High Courts and evidence produced by 
the parties it is to be examined, whether claimant has established the employer and employee relationship between the 
parties. As per claim statement the workman has claimed that he was appointed as an office boy on casual basis on 
5.4.2004 in the Customer Service department of the Respondent company and he worked continuously up to 
24.5.2008 and he was terminated from service with effect from 25.5.2008 without issuing any written order and 
without assigning any reason. Further, workman claimed that his termination is in violation of Section 25 F, G &H 
of Industrial Disputes Act and also in violation of Section 25N of the I.D. Act, !947. Further, workman claimed that 
he was not given one month notice or notice pay. In order to discharge his onus workman has examined himself as a 
WW/ and in his chief affidavit he has reiterated the plea taken in the claim statement. Workman was cross examined 
by the Respondent counsel, wherein he has deposed, “J have not applied for any post in the Respondent company, I 
have approached one Mr. Ganganna for the purpose of job, but I do not know how I came to know about the vacancy. 
No appointment letter was issued to me by the Respondent’s office. No paper was issued to me containing the nature 
of duties. No identity card was issued to me to enter into the premises of the Respondent’s company. I was getting 
payment on monthly basis. I was orally informed that I would be paid Rs.2000/- per month towards wages. I was 
getting payment only on the days of my attendance in the office. No payslip was given to me in token of my payment. I 
was not signing in any register, only the Respondents are taking my attendance. I was getting correct payment 
towards my work. Payment was not made through bank. But it was given to me manually. No signature was obtained 
from me towards proof of payment. About 20 workers, including me, were working under the respondent. I was not 
covered under ESI scheme, so also EPF.” Thus, from the above statement of the witness WWI, it is clear that 
Respondent never issued any appointment letter in his name and _ no pay slip was given to him by the Respondent 
management. Further, WWI in his cross examination states, “J was engaged by one Mr. A. Maisaiah labour 
contractor and through him, I was engaged. I used to get wages through Mr. A. Maisaiah, the contractor. It is true 
that I was covered under EPF by Mr. A. Maisaiah, the contractor and accordingly returns under Section 3 and 6A of 
the Act was filed by the contractor. It is also true to say that I was covered under ESI Act by the contractor and 
registered under Form 7 of ESI Act was maintained by the contractor. It is true that contractor was terminated from 
service by the Respondent’s company and accordingly we have to leave the work along with the contractor. It is true 
that I was working under the contractor and not under the Respondent and there was no employer employee 
relationship between the Respondent and ourselves.” Thus, from the above statement of the WWI, it is quite 
manifest that the workman was not appointed directly by the Respondent and he was engaged by contractor Sri A. 
Maisaiah on daily wages. Further, it is also established from the statement of WW! that contractor was terminated 
from service by Respondent Company and accordingly he has to leave the work along with contractor. Thus, it is 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4363 


unequivocally established that the workman herein was working in the Respondent Management through contractor 
Sri A. Maisaiah and when contractor was terminated from service by Respondent Management automatically the 
services of the workman was terminated as per terms of contract, thus there exists no employer employee relationship 
between workman and Respondent. 


0. The documentary evidence, photocopies of attendance sheets filed by the workman would not go to establish 
that the workman was appointed by the Respondent directly for doing the work in his office. The workman has not 
produced any documentary proof regarding his appointment by the management. The workman herein has utterly 
failed to discharge the burden of proof regarding employer employee relationship between the parties by any cogent 
and relevant evidence. Thus, the claimant failed to produce any proof of payment of salary, appointment letter 
issued by the management and he did not produce also any order of termination issued by the Respondent. Thus, 
workman failed to produce any documentary evidence to prove the relationship of employer and employee between 
the workman and Respondent. 


ll. On the other hand, Respondent in his counter has contended that Petitioner claimed that he was appointed on 
casual basis as an office boy on 5.4.2004 and he has continuously worked upto the alleged termination of service on 
24.5.2008 in the Customer Care Department of the Respondent company is false and denied. Further, Respondent has 
denied that the workman was never worked in the employment of the Respondent company and therefore, provision 
of Section 25 F of the ID Act is not applicable to the case of the Petitioner. Similarly, Section 25 F, G & H, describe 
the procedure for retrenchment and reemployment of the workman and provision of Section 25 N of ID Act and it is 
not applicable to the Petitioner’s case. Further, Respondent contended that Petitioner was engaged by the contractor 
by name Mr. A. Maisaiah who is the contractor, who is a resident of Kukatpally, Hyderabad and the Petitioner was 
deployed by Mr. A. Maisaiah, Contractor in the contractual work awarded to him. The said contractor was an 
independent employer carrying out the jobs awarded under the contract and upon the termination of the said contract. 
The contractor was not given any fresh contract. Further, it is contended that if the Petitioner wants to claim any relief 
for the work rendered by him, under the above named contractor, he must seek remedy against the said contractor 
who has employed him for a limited period of time. The Petitioner cannot therefore have any claim against the 
Respondent company, much less reinstatement in service with back wages and other attendant benefits. Further, it is 
contended that the Contract Labour ( R & A) Act, 970 specifies the provisions with regard to the obtaining of a 
licence by a contractor when he employs 20 or more workmen under a contract in any organization. It is for the 
Petitioner to seek remedies, if any, under the Contract Labour (R&A) Act against the said contractor who was his 
employer. The Respondent does not have the service particulars of the Petitioner and other details relating to his 
deployment by the said contractor in any other jobs. Further, it is contended that Petitioner was never employed by 
Respondent company either as a casual or in any other capacity and he was working under Mr. A. Maisaiah, 
Contractor during the period of contract awarded to him and after expiration of the said contract, there was no 
relationship whatsoever between the Petitioner and the Respondent. Further, the Respondent has also filed the 
documentary evidence. The award of job contract dated 27.7.2006 in response to the tender for providing pantry and 
other services in departments and supply of cleaning materials. This contract was for one year from |.8.2006. Further, 
the agreement dated 25.8.2006 has been filled by Respondent, which goes to show that in pursuance of the award of 
job contract an agreement was entered between the contractor and the Respondent. “Clauses 2,3,4,5 & 6 of the 
agreement clearly mention that company will have privity of contract with the contractor only and will not have any 
connection with the workers engaged by the contractor and the contractor shall be responsible in respect of the 
employment or non-employment of the work force engaged by him at his own level and the Company shall have no 
role to play in the said matter.” In view of the condition mentioned in the agreement dated 25.8.2006 between the 
Contractor and the Respondent, the Respondent has no privity of contract with the Petitioner regarding his employer 
and employee relationship. However, WWI in his cross examination has admitted in so many words that he was 
engaged by one Mr. A. Maisaiah, labour contractor, to work in Respondent office and with the termination of 
contract of service of the contractor, he also left the employment. 


2. Thus, in view of fore gone discussion and in the light of the evidence adduced by both the parties and the law 
laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed in the preceding paragraphs, I am of the considered view that 
there exists no Employer and employee relationship between the workman and the Respondent management. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered accordingly. 


3. Point No.II:- In view of the findings given at Point No.I, as there exists no Employer and employee 
relationship between the Petitioner Workman and Respondent, therefore, the question of illegal termination from 
service as claimed by Petitioner does not arises in the present matter and there is no question of contravention of any 
provision of I.D. Act, 947 by the Respondent Management in terminating the service of Petitioner. 


Thus, Point No.II is answered accordingly. 


4. Point No.II:- In view of the findings given, at Points No.I & II, the Petitioner is not entitled to any relief as 
claimed by him and petition is liable to be dismissed. 


4364 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In the result, it is held that the Petitioner Sri K. Narender is not entitled to any relief and as such, the petition is 
liable to be dismissed. Therefore, the petition stands dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Dictated to Smt. P. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her and corrected by me on this the 
3I" day of July, 2024. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri K.Narender WWI: Sri Rani Raja Gopal 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Ex.WI: Photostat copy of representation to Respondent along with postal receipt and acknowledgement 
dt. 7.4.2009 
Ex.W2: Photostat copy of attendance sheets from |.4.2004 to 3..2008 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photostat copy of notice to A. Maisaiah reg. award of job contract dt.27.7.2006 
Ex.M2: Photostat copy of tender notice dt. 6.4.2006 

Ex.M3: Photostat copy of agreement between A. Maisaiah and HAL dt.28.8.2006 
Ex.M4: Photostat copy of extension of job work contract to A. Maisaiah dt. 29.2.2008 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4885.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
भारतीय जीवन बीमा निगम के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री आशीष शर्मा के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय 
सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, जयपुर, Tare (रिफरेन्स न. 87/205) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में 
दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 27.09.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. Weat-7072/46/205-ars az (TH) 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 27th September, 2024 


S.O. 885.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 8/205) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court, Jaipur as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to 
Bhartiya Jeevan Bima Nigam and Shri Ashish Sharma which was received along with soft copy of the award by 
the Central Government on 27.09.2024. 


[F. No. L-702/6/205-IR(M)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4365 


ANNEXURE 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, जयपुर 
पीठासीन अधिकारी 
राधा मोहन चतुर्वेदी 
सी.जी.आई.टी. प्रकरण सं.-- 84 / 2045 


Reference No. L-702/6/205-IR (M) Dated: 28.09.205 


श्री आशीष शर्मा पुत्र श्री पूरण कुमार शर्मा, निवासी-- 47 जनकपुरी, दाउदपुर, अलवर RIT) | 


बनाम 


4. प्रबंधक, भारतीय जीवन बीमा निगम, शाखा कार्यालय, मोती डुंगरी अलवर, WoT. | 
2. मण्डल प्रबंधक, भारतीय जीवन बीमा निगम, मण्डल कार्यालय प्रथम, जीवन प्रकाष, भवानी सिंह रोड, जयपुर 
राजस्थान | 
dead अप्रार्थीगण / विपक्षी 
उपस्थित:- 
: श्री सुरेन्द्र सिंह नालोट, अभिभाषक - प्रार्थी | 
: श्री जे. के. अग्रवाल, अभिभाषक -विपक्षीगण | 
: अधिनिर्णय : 
दिनांक :25.07.2024 


4... श्रम मंत्रालय भारत सरकार नई दिल्‍ली द्वारा दिनांक 28.09.2045 को औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 
(जिसे आगे मात्र अधिनियम कहा जावेगा) की धारा 40 (3) (डी) व 2A के अन्तर्गत प्रदत्त शक्तियो के अनुसरण 
में निम्नांकित औद्योगिक विवाद न्यायनिर्णयन हेतु इस अधिकरण को संदर्भित किया गया :- 


“Whether the action of the management of Life Insurance Corporation of India, Branch Office Alwar to 
terminate the service of Shri Ashish Sharma, workman, Oral order dated 76.06.2072, If not, what relief 
the workman is entitled for? 
2. दिनांक 06.06.206 को प्रार्थी की ओर से दावे का अभिकथन प्रस्तुत किया गया जिसके संक्षिप्त अभिवचन 
इस प्रकार हैः- 


3. Ue a जल सेवक के पद पर विपक्षी के शाखा कार्यालय मोती डूंगरी, अलवर में दिनांक 23.07.2009 को 
जारी साक्षात्कार पत्र के माध्यम से दिनांक 03.09.2009 को 400/-रू. प्रतिदिन मजदूरी पर 85 दिन के लिए 
प्रारम्भ में नियुक्त किया गया। विपक्षीगण ने 85 दिन के उपरांत मौखिक आदेश से प्रार्थी की सेवा को विस्तृत 
किया, किंतु दिनांक 46.08.2042 को जब प्रार्थी काम पर आया तो विपक्षी द्वारा मौखिक रूप से कार्य पर लेने से 
मना कर दिया गया। विपक्षी ने मात्र एक माह (सितम्बर, 2009) का वेतन भुगतान प्रार्थी को किया। अक्टूबर, 
2009 से अगस्त, 2042 तक का वेतन भुगतान प्रार्थी को नहीं किया। प्रार्थी द्वारा वेतत की मॉग करने पर उसे 
मात्र आश्वासन दिये गये। प्रार्थी ने पिछले एक वर्ष में निरंतर 240 दिन से अधिक कार्य किया है। प्रार्थी को 
दिनांक 46.08.2042 को Maya करने के पूर्व कोई नोटिस अथवा नोटिस अवधि का वेतन नहीं दिया गया। 
सेवामुक्ति का कोई कारण भी नहीं बताया गया। प्रार्थी से कनिष्ठ श्रमिक को विपक्षी ने कार्य पर रखा है और 
wet Gl कोई वरीयता नहीं दी गई। विपक्षी निगम ने अधिनियम की धारा 25 F Gault के प्रावधानों का 
उल्लंघन किया है। अत: सेवामुक्ति को अवैध घोषित कर प्रार्थी को विगत वेतन परिलाभों, सेवा में निरंतरता एवं 
बकाया अवधि का वेतन दिलवाते हुये सेवा में बहाल किया जावे। 


4. दिनांक 05.07.20I6 को विपक्षीगण ने वादोत्तर प्रस्तुत किया जिसके संक्षिप्त कथन इस प्रकार है:- 


4366 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


5. wet ने यह विवाद काफी विलम्ब से प्रस्तुत किया है। प्रार्थी को केवल 85 दिन के लिए नियुक्ति दी गई 
थी, और उसे यह सूचित कर दिया गया था कि 85 दिवस समाप्त होते ही सेवायें समाप्त हो जायेगी। प्रार्थी ने 
नियुक्ति की शर्तों को समझकर दिनांक 03.08.2009 को कार्यभार ग्रहण किया तथा 43.08.2009 तक ही अपनी 
सेवाये दी। उसके पश्चात वह कार्य पर नहीं आया। प्रार्थी को इस अवधि का वेतन भुगतान कर दिया गया। 
अधिनियम की धारा 2 (००) (bb) & प्रावधानों से प्रार्थी की नियुक्ति आच्छांदित है। विपक्षी ने दिनांक 46.08. 
2042 को प्रार्थी की सेवा समाप्त नहीं की, निश्चित अवधि के समाप्त होने पर प्रार्थी की सेवा स्वतः समाप्त हो 
Tg | दिनांक 46.08.2042 के पूर्व के 42 महीनों में प्रार्थी ने 240 दिन कार्य नहीं किया। प्रार्थी का यह कथन 
नितांत मिथ्या एवं अविश्वसनीय है कि वह लगभग तीन वर्ष की अवधि में बिना वेतन प्राप्त किये हुये कार्य करता 
रहा हो। अतः दावा अस्वीकार किया जावे। 


6. welt ने विपक्षी द्वारा दिये गये वादोत्तर का खण्डन करते हुये दिनांक 06.42.2046 को अतिरिक्त कथन भी 
प्रस्तुत किये है। 

7. प्रार्थी ने अपने साक्ष्य में ७५9४-। आशीष शर्मा (स्वयं प्रार्थी) को परीक्षित किया। कोई प्रलेख साक्ष्य में 
प्रदर्शित नहीं किया गया। 

8. विपक्षी की ओर से आर. के. जैन, प्रबंधक को साक्ष्य में परीक्षित किया गया और प्रलेखीय साक्ष्य में प्रदर्श 
-| साक्षात्कार पत्र प्रदर्शित किया गया। 


9, दिनांक 46.07.2024 को मैंने उभयपक्ष के तर्क सुने तथा उपलब्ध साक्ष्य पर मनन किया। 


40. प्रार्थी का यह तर्क है कि प्रदर्श M-l पत्र विपक्षीगण ने साक्षात्कार हेतु दिनांक 23.07.2009 को जारी किया 
था। विपक्षीगण की यह स्वीकृति है कि प्रार्थी को 85 दिन की अवधि के लिये जल सेवक के पद पर नियुक्त 
किया गया था। इस प्रकार प्रार्थी एवं विपक्षी के बीच नियोजक और कर्मकार का संबंध होना किसी प्रकार 
विवादित नहीं है। प्रार्थी की सेवा में मौखिक रूप से 85 दिन की अवधि समाप्त होने पर विपक्षी द्वारा सेवा का 
विस्तार किया गया। fg विपक्षीगण ने प्रार्थी को सितम्बर, 2009 से अगस्त, 2042 तक किये गये कार्य का वेतन 
भुगतान नहीं किया और बारम्बार मौखिक आश्वासन दिये जाते रहे। प्रार्थी ने विपक्षी से सितम्बर, 2009 से अगस्त, 
2042 तक प्रार्थी की उपस्थिति एवं वेतन भुगतान संबंधी अभिलेख प्रस्तुत करवाने का आवेदन किया fog 
विपक्षीगण ने अधिकरण द्वारा आदेश दिये जाने पर भी उक्त अभिलेख प्रस्तुत नहीं किया। यदि विपक्षी यह 
अभिलेख प्रस्तुत करते तो प्रार्थी का दिनांक 45.08.2042 तक विपक्षी के अधीन कार्य करना प्रमाणित हो जाता। 
इसलिए विपक्षी के विरूद्द प्रतिकूल उपधारणा की जावे। उनका यह भी तर्क है कि विपक्षी निगम और विभिन्‍न 
श्रमिक संघो के मध्य केन्द्रीय औद्योगिक अधिकरण द्वारा पारित अवार्ड दिनांक 7.04.986 के अनुसार जिन 
श्रमिकों ने 2 वर्ष की अवधि में 70 दिन कार्य किया हो उन्हें विपक्षी की सेवा में अवशोषित किये जाने का निर्देश 
दिया गया है। चूकि प्रार्थी को अवैध रूप से सेवा मुक्त किया गया है इसलिए प्रार्थी के अंशकालीन कर्मकार होने 
पर भी उसे अधिनियम की धारा 25 ॥ के प्रावधानों का संरक्षण प्राप्त है। उन्होंने अपने तर्क के समर्थन में 
निम्नाकिंत न्यायिक दृष्टांत प्रस्तुत किये। 


4. तमिलनाडू टर्मिनेटिड फुलटाईम टेम्परेरी एल.आई.सी. एम्पलाईज ऐसोसियेशन बनाम एल.आई.सी. ऑफ 
इंडिया सिविल अपील नं. 6950 / 2009 निर्णय तिथि 48.03.2045 (सुप्रीम कोर्ट)। 


2. डिवीजनल मेनेजर न्यू इंडिया इन्ष्योरेंस कम्पनी लिमिटेड बनाम ए. शंकर लिगंम (2008) 0 SCC 698 | 


4. अभिभाषक विपक्षीगण ने प्रार्थी द्वारा प्रस्तुत तर्कों का खंडन करते हुये मुख्य रूप से यह कहा है कि प्रार्थी 
को एक निश्चित अवधि हेतु जल सेवक के पद पर नियुक्त किया गया था तत्पश्चात उसकी सेवा अवधि में न तो 
विस्तार किया गया और न ही प्रार्थी ने ऐसा कोई लिखित साक्ष्य प्रस्तुत किया है। इसलिये 85 दिन की अवधि 
व्यतीत होने पर प्रार्थी की सेवा स्वतः समाप्त हो गयी। सेवा मुक्ति के पूर्ववर्ती एक वर्ष की अवधि में 240 दिन 
कार्य करने का तथ्य प्रमाणित करने का दायित्व प्रार्थी पर ही है, जो उसने निर्वहन नहीं किया। प्रार्थी के 
प्रतिपरीक्षा में किये गये कथनों का उल्लेख करते हुये उन्होंने well के कथनों एवं आचरण को मिथ्या एवं 
अविश्वसनीय कहा है। प्रार्थी ने छल पूर्वक अपनी शैक्षणिक योग्यता छुपाते हुये अस्थाई नियुक्ति प्राप्त की। जब 
उसे यह आशंका हुई कि उसका छल पकडा जा सकता है, तो वह मात्र 40 दिन कार्य करके अनुपस्थित हो 
गया। कोई व्यक्ति लगभग तीन वर्ष की अवधि तक बिना कोई वेतन प्राप्त किये हुये तथा बिना कोई परिवाद 
प्रस्तुत करते हुये कार्य करता रहे यह संभव नहीं है। प्रार्थी ने इस विवाद में कोई प्रलेखीय साक्ष्य प्रस्तुत नहीं की 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4367 


है। प्रार्थी ने जो प्रलेख विपक्षी से प्रस्तुत करवाने चाहे वह विपक्षी के संस्थान में उपलब्ध नहीं थे इसलिए विपक्षी 
के सक्षम अधिकारी श्री मुन्नाराम, मुख्य प्रबंधक ने अधिकरण के आदेश की अनुपालना में दिनांक 23.04.2048 को 
ही शपथ पत्र प्रस्तुत किया है। जिन प्रलेखों का कोई अस्तित्व ही नही हो, उनके प्रस्तुत न करने पर विपक्षी के 
विरूद्दर प्रतिकूल उपधारणा नहीं की जानी चाहिये। अत: दावा निरस्त किया जावे। उन्होंने उन्होंने अपने तर्क के 
समर्थन में निम्नाकित न्यायिक दृष्टांत प्रस्तुत किये | 

4... मै. हरियाणा स्टेट F.C.C.W. स्टोर लि. बनाम रामनिवास व अन्य 2002 (94) FLR 68 (सुप्रीम कोर्ट)। 
2. रेंज फोरेस्ट ऑफीसर बनाम एस. टी. हादीमनी 2002 (93) FLR १89 (सुप्रीम कोर्ट)। 

3- मोहम्मद अली बनाम स्टैट ऑफ हिमाचल प्रदेष AIR 208 (सुप्रीम कोर्ट) 2]94 


4. स्टेट ऑफ उत्तराखण्ड व अन्य बनाम श्रीमती सुरेशवती AIR 202 | (सुप्रीम कोर्ट) 923 | 


5. श्रीमती डूलू डेका बनाम स्टेट ऑफ आसाम AIR 2023 (सुप्रीम कोर्ट) 4650 
6. आम जनता बनाम स्टेट ऑफ राजस्थान AIR 2024 (राज.) 406 


42. उभयपक्ष के तर्को एवं अभिवचनों पर विचार के पश्चात इस विवाद में निम्नांकित विचारणीय बिन्दु उत्पन्न 
हुये:- 


4. क्‍या प्रार्थी को जलसेवक के पद पर विपक्षी द्वारा दिनांक 03.08.2009 को नियुक्त किये जाने के उपरांत 
मौखिक रूप से समय-समय पर सेवा में विस्तार किया गया तथा दिनांक 46.08.2042 को विपक्षीगण ने 
अधिनियम की धारा 25 F के प्रावधानों की अवहेलना करते हुये प्रार्थी को सेवामुक्त कर दिया? 


2. क्या प्रार्थी को सेवामुक्त करने के उपरांत प्रार्थी से कनिष्ठ व्यक्ति को विपक्षीगण ने सेवा में नियुक्त किया 
एवं प्रार्थी को नियुक्ति हेतु वरीयता नहीं दी गई? 


3. Aga: 
43. उपर्युक्त विचारणीय बिन्दुओ पर afte विनिश्चय इस प्रकार है:- 
44. विचारणीय बिन्दु weet 


45. इस संबंध में प्रार्थी आशीष शर्मा ने अपने शपथ पत्र में यह कहा है कि उसे दिनांक 23.07.2009 के 
सक्षात्कार पत्र के माध्यम से साक्षात्कार लेकर दिनांक 03.09.2009 को नियुक्त किया गया। (प्रार्थी ने प्रति परीक्षा 
में संशोधन करते हुये यह कहा है कि 03.08.2009 को सेवा में ज्वाइन किया था) weil कहता है कि वर्ष 2040 में 
435 /-रू. प्रतिदिन, वर्ष 2044 में 445 /-रू. प्रतिदिन, एवं वर्ष 2042 में 474/-रू. प्रतिदिन के रूप में वृद्धि 
करते हुये प्रार्थी को रखा गया। विपक्षी द्वारा 85 दिन के बाद मौखिक आदेश से प्रार्थी की सेवा को निरंतर किया 
गया। सितम्बर, 2009 तक एक माह का वेतन प्रार्थी को दिया गया उसके बाद अक्टूबर, 2009 से अगस्त, 2042 
तक का वेतन भुगतान विपक्षी द्वारा नहीं किया गया। प्रतिपरीक्षा में प्रार्थी ने यह स्वीकार किया है कि उसे कोई 
नियुक्ति पत्र नहीं मिला। fog तर्क के दौरान और विपक्षी की स्वीकृति के अनुरूप यह प्रकट होता है कि प्रार्थी 
को vest M-] साक्षात्कार पत्र के अनुसरण में 85 दिन की अवधि के लिए एक नियुक्ति पत्र जारी किया गया 
था। प्रार्थी यह कहता है कि vest 'श- पत्र के & से 8 और (? से 9 भाग में किया गया वर्णन सही है और 
उसने भी इसे पढ लिया था। उल्लेखनीय है fo vest M-l पत्र के CUD भाग में यह अंकित है कि “यह 
नियुक्ति आप को पूर्णतः अस्थाई रूप से 60/85 दिनों के लिए दी जायेगी” प्रार्थी भी स्वीकार करता है कि 
उसकी नियुक्ति की सीमा 85 दिन होना अंकित है। इसके विपरीत विपक्षी का यह तर्क है कि प्रार्थी ने दिनांक 
03.08.2009 को कार्य पर उपस्थित होने के पश्चात दिनांक 43.08.2009 तक ही कार्य किया, इसके बाद वह कार्य 
करने नहीं आया। इस स्थिति में प्रार्थी पर यह सिद्दीभार आरोपित होता है कि वह दिनांक 43.08.2009 के उपरांत 
46.08.2042 तक विपक्षीगण द्वारा किये गये कथित सेवा विस्तार का तथ्य अपने विष्वसनीय साक्ष्य से प्रमाणित 
ax | प्रार्थी पर ही यह दायित्व आरोपित है कि वह कथित सेवामुक्ति तिथि 46.08.20042 के पूर्ववर्ती एक वर्ष में 
240 दिन कार्य करने का तथ्य प्रमाणित करे। अप्रार्थी की ओर से प्रस्तुत निर्णयों रेंज फोरेस्ट ऑफीसर बनाम एस. 


4368 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


टी. हादीमनी, मोहम्मद अली बनाम eee ऑफ हिमाचल प्रदेश तथा स्टेट ऑफ उत्तराखण्ड व अन्य बनाम श्रीमती 
सुरेशवती के निर्णयों में माननीय सर्वोच्च न्यायालय ने यह विधि प्रतिपादित की है कि सेवा समापन के पूर्ववर्ती 
एक कलेण्डर वर्ष की अवधि में 240 दिन कार्य किये जाने का तथ्य प्रमाणित करने का दायित्व दावाकर्ता पर है। 
दावाकर्ता को यह प्रमाणित करने के लिये कि उसने 240 दिन कार्य किया है, पर्याप्त विष्वसनीय साक्ष्य प्रस्तुत 
करना होगा। मात्र शपथ पत्र प्रस्तुत करना पर्याप्त नहीं है। 


46. माननीय सर्वोच्च न्यायालय ने अपने निर्णय डिवीजनल मेनेजर न्यू इंडिया इन्श्योरेंस कम्पनी लिमिटेड बनाम 
ए. शंकर लिगंम में यह मार्गदर्शन दिया है कि अंशकालीन कर्मकार भी अधिनियम की धारा 2 (s) के अंतर्गत 
कर्मकार है तथा धारा 25 एफ. के प्रावधानों का संरक्षण पाने का अधिकारी है। 


47. wet ने विपक्षी से सितम्बर, 2009 से अगस्त, 2042 तक प्रार्थी की उपस्थिति और वेतन भुगतान संबंधी 
अभिलेख को प्रस्तुत करने हेतु दिनांक 07.02.2047 को एक प्रार्थना पत्र प्रस्तुत किया था। इस अधिकरण ने 
प्रार्थना पत्र स्वीकार करते हुये दिनांक 43.07.2047 को विपक्षी को यह आदेश दिया कि वह वांछित प्रलेख 
अधिकरण के समक्ष प्रस्तुत करे और यदि प्रलेख उनके आधिपत्य में न हो तो सक्षम अधिकारी का शपथ पत्र 
प्रस्तुत करे। इस आदेश के अनुपालन में दिनांक 23.04.2048 को विपक्षी की और से श्री मुन्नाराम, मुख्य प्रबंधक 
ने अपना शपथ पत्र प्रस्तुत करते हुये यह सूचित किया है कि चूंकि जल सेवक केवल गर्मियों में अधिकतम 
60/85 दिनों के लिये रखे जाते है और US SION के अनुसार वेतन भुगतान किया जाता है। प्रार्थी ने केवल 
दिनांक 03.08.2009 से 43.08.2009 तक ही कार्य किया जिसका भुगतान उसे कर दिया गया। अब कोई दस्तावेज 
अप्रार्थी निगम की अलवर शाखा के पास उपलब्ध नहीं है। इस संबंध में यह उल्लेख किया जाना सुसंगत है कि 
प्रार्थी स्वयं अगस्त माह का वेतन प्राप्त होना कहता है, और उसके बाद कोई वेतन नहीं दिया जाना कहता है। 
ऐसी स्थिति में सितम्बर, 2009 से 46.08.2042 तक वेतन भुगतान का कोई अभिलेख विपक्षी द्वारा संधारित किया 
जाना संभव ही नहीं है, क्‍योंकि प्रार्थी को कोई भुगतान ही नहीं हुआ | 

48. प्रार्थी ने यह कहा है कि उसकी सेवा में विस्तार दिनांक 46.08.2042 तक विपक्षीगण ने मौखिक रूप से 
किया। प्रार्थी का यह कथन किसी प्रकार स्वीकार्य नहीं है। क्योकि जब प्रथम नियुक्ति, लिखित आदेश द्वारा 
विपक्षीगण ने 85 दिन के लिये की तो यह स्वभाविक नहीं है कि सेवा में विस्तार मौखिक रूप से किया गया हो। 
प्रार्थी का कथन तब ओर अविश्वसनीय लगता है कि जब वह कहता है कि सितम्बर, 2009 से अगस्त, 2042 तक 
उसे कोई वेतन भुगतान विपक्षीगण ने नहीं किया और वह मौखिक अश्वासन के आधार पर कार्य करता रहा। 
उसने वेतन भुगतान न किये जाने की कोई लिखित शिकायत भी नहीं की। माननीय सर्वोच्च न्यायालय ने श्रीमती 
डूलू डेका बनाम स्टेट ऑफ आसाम के निर्णय में यह कहा है कि यह विश्वसनीय नहीं है कि एक व्यक्ति बिना 
वेतन प्राप्त किये हुये दो दशक तक कार्य करेगा। इसलिए प्रार्थी द्वारा बिना वेतन प्राप्त किये 35 माह तक कार्य 
करना प्रकृति के सामान्य अनुकम मे विश्वसनीय एवं स्वभाविक नहीं लगता। 


49. विपक्षी का यह तर्क इस संबंध में सारवान प्रतीत होता है कि प्रदर्श 'श- पत्र में नियुक्ति हेतु अभ्यर्थी की 
योग्यता 8वीं पास से अधिक न होना वर्णित है और प्रार्थी यह स्वीकार करता है कि वह जब साक्षात्कार के लिये 
गया तब वह 40वीं कक्षा उत्तीर्ण था इसलिये उसके मिथ्या कथन के उजागर होने के भय से वह मात्र 40 दिन 
कार्य करके ही कार्य से अनुपस्थित हो गया। 

20. प्रार्थी ने कथित सेवा मुक्ति तिथि से पूर्ववर्ती एक कलेण्डर वर्ष में 240 दिन कार्य करने संबंधी कोई लिखित 
प्रमाण प्रस्तुत नहीं किया है न ही विपक्षी द्वारा सशपथ असमर्थता व्यक्त करने के उपरांत उसने अपना पक्ष 
प्रमाणित करने हेतु कोई अन्य /द्वितीयक साक्ष्य भी प्रस्तुत नहीं की है। प्रार्थी की सेवा में विस्तार किये जाने का 
तथ्य भी किसी साक्ष्य से समर्थित नहीं है। प्रलेखों का अस्तित्व ही प्रमाणित न होने से विपक्षी के विरूद्द प्रलेखों 
को प्रस्तुत न करने के आधार पर प्रतिकूल उपधघारणा किये जाने का कोई औचित्य नहीं है। इस स्थिति में 
अधिनियम की धारा 25 F के प्रावधानों के अनुपालन की नियोजक से अपेक्षा ही उत्पन्न नहीं होती है। इस 
निर्णय प्राप्त मार्गदर्शन के अनुसार अधिनियम की धारा 2 (00) के अपवाद के रूप में उपधारा (bb) उपबंधित है। 
एक निश्चित अवधि के लिये दी गई नियुक्ति उस अवधि के अवसान पर स्वयं समाप्त हो जाती है तथा ऐसी सेवा 
समाप्ति छंटनी की परिभाषा में नहीं आती | इसलिए प्रार्थी की सेवा समाप्ति को छंटनी नहीं कहा जा सकता। इस 
स्थिति में यह सुसंगत नहीं रहता कि प्रार्थी ने सेवामुक्ति के पूर्व एक वर्ष की अवधि में 240 दिन कार्य किया है 
या नहीं। यद्दपि प्रार्थी अपने साक्ष्य से इस तथ्य को भी प्रमाणित करने में सफल नहीं हुआ है। अतः यह बिन्दु 
प्रार्थी के विरूद्द निर्णीत किया जाता है। 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4369 


24. विचारणीय बिन्दु संख्या-2 

22. प्रार्थी आशीष शर्मा ने अपने शपथ पत्र में यह कहा है कि उससे जूनियर श्रमिक को विपक्षी प्रबंधन ने कार्य 
पर रखा है और कैजुअल श्रमिकों की कोई वरीयता सूची नहीं बनाई। fog weil ने अपने साक्ष्य में उस कनिष्ठ 
व्यक्ति का नाम और नियुक्ति आदेश भी प्रस्तुत नहीं किया है जिससे यह अवधारित हो कि प्रार्थी से कनिष्ठ कोई 
ऐसा कर्मचारी रहा और उसे विपक्षी द्वारा नियुक्ति दे दी गई हो। welt का मात्र 40 दिन विपक्षी के अधीन कार्य 
करना प्रमाणित हुआ है। और उसकी अधिकतम अवधि 85 दिन हो सकती थी, इस स्थिति में निश्चित अवधि की 
संविदा पर नियुक्त कर्मचारी हेतु कोई वरीयता सूची तैयार किया जाना आवश्यक नहीं है। इस तथ्यात्मक परिदृष्य 
में प्रार्थी यह प्रमाणित नहीं कर सका है कि उससे कनिष्ठतर किसी व्यक्ति को विपक्षीगण ने प्रार्थी को सेवामुक्त 
करने के उपरांत नियोजन में रखा हो। अतः यह बिन्दु प्रार्थी के विरूद्द निर्णीत किया जाता है। 


23. अनुतोष: 

24. अभिभाषक प्रार्थी ने माननीय सर्वोच्च न्यायालय द्वारा पारित निर्णय तमिलनाडू cafes फुलटाईम टेम्परेरी 
एल.आई.सी. एम्पलाईज ऐसोसियेशन बनाम एल.आई.सी. ऑफ इंडिया में पारित निर्णय की ओर ध्यान आकर्षित 
करते हुये यह कहा है कि इस निर्णय में माननीय सर्वोच्च न्यायालय ने राष्टीय औद्योगिक अधिकरण द्वारा पारित 
अवार्ड दिनांक 47.04.4984 एवं 26.08.988 के अंतर्गत अंशकालीन कर्मचारियों जिन्होंने 85 दिन कार्य विपक्षी 
निगम के अधीन कार्य किया हो उन्हें नियमित नियोजन eg विचारित करने का निर्देश दिया गया है। इसलिए 
met ot नियमित नियोजन हेतु विचारित किया जाना चाहिये। मैंने इस निवेदन पर विचार किया तो यह पाया 
कि इस विवाद में प्रार्थी द्वारा मात्र 40 दिन विपक्षी के अधीन वर्ष 2009 में कार्य किया जाना प्रमाणित हुआ है, 
और प्रार्थी ने अपने दावे में नियमित नियोजन हेतु विचारित करने का अनुतोष भी नही मांगा है। यहॉ यह भी 
उल्लेख किया जाना आवष्यक है कि समुचित सरकार द्वारा प्रेषित विवाद में प्रार्थी की सेवा में नियमित 
नियोजनकी अधिकारिता का बिन्दु न्‍्यायनिर्णयन हेतु संदर्भित नहीं किया गया है। मात्र दिनांक 46.08.2042 को 
कथित रूप से पारित मौखिक सेवा समाप्ति आदेश की dear का ही परीक्षण किया जाना अपेक्षित है। इसलिए 
तथ्यात्मक भिन्‍नता के कारण इस निर्णय में पारित विधि को मैं ससम्मान veil के पक्ष में सुसंगत नहीं पाता हूँ। 


25. विचारणीय बिन्दु संख्या 4 व 2 पर पारित विनिश्चय के अनुसार weil की सेवा समाप्ति अवैध छंटनी के रूप 
में किया जाना प्रमाणित नहीं हुआ है। क्‍योंकि प्रार्थी को एक निश्चित अवधि तक ही नियोजित किया गया था 
और उस अवधि के समापन पर प्रार्थी की सेवा स्वतः समाप्त हो गयी। इसलिये प्रार्थी विपक्षीगण से अधिनियम के 
प्रावधानों के अंतर्गत कोई अनुतोष प्राप्त करने का अधिकारी नहीं है। 


26. संदर्भित विवाद का निस्तारण इसी प्रकार किया जाता है। 
27- अधिनिर्णय की प्रतिलिपि औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, i947 की धारा i7 () के अनुसरण में प्रकाशनार्थ 
प्रेषित की जावें। 
28- न्यायालय द्वारा अधिनिर्णय आज दिनांक 25.07.2024 को सुनाया गया। 
राधामोहन चतुर्वेदी, पीठासीन अधिकारी 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. (886.—silaitia विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44 ) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
गैरीसन इंजीनियर (उपयोगिता), सैन्य इंजीनियरिंग सेवाएँ पंचकुला (एचआर) के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और 
उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औघधोगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण »श्रम न्यायालय, 
चंडीगढ़-]] के पंचाट (20/20I6) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[फा. सं. एल - 2025/0/2024- आई आर (at-I)-23] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


4370 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 30th September, 2024 


S.O. 886.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.20/20l6) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Chandigarh-IT_as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Garrison Engineer 
(Utility), Militray Engineering Service,Panchkula (HR) and their workmen. 

[F. No. L-2025/0/2024- IR (B-I)-23] 


SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh. 
Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 


ID No.20/20I6 
Registered on:-6.06.206 
Sh. Anil Kumar S/o Sh. Ram Kishan, R/o Khadak Mangoli, Gate No.3, Old Panchkula, District Panchkula(HR). 


4४025 Workman 
Versus 
Garrison Engineer(Utility), Military Engineering Services, Chandimandir, District Panchkula(HR). 
22222 22 Respondent/Management 
AWARD 
Passed on:-06.03.2024 


l. | The workman Anil Kumar has filed the present claim petition under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
947(hereinafter called as ‘Act’) with the averment that he was interviewed and selected and recommended to be 
appointed as Mazdoor by a Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and was appointed as such in April 2002. After 
due Police Verification, he was allowed to join on 7.5.2002. His working hours were from 8 am to 5 pm daily with a 
break of one hour for lunch. He was employed as Plumber w.e.f. ..2009. It was usual practice in G.E.(U), 
Chandimandir that initially civilian employees are appointed on temporary basis, paid less than the prescribed rates, 
performance used to be observed and only then regularized on the job after having observed the performance of 
duties, work, conduct etc. for about one year. He was also assured at the time of his initial appointment/joining that he 
would be regularized as and when vacancies are sanctioned and notified in future on a regular scales of pay. He was 
being paid only Rs.50/- per day which was much less as prescribed under the Minimum Wages Act by the 
Government and whenever he made a demand for minimum wages/more pay he was threatened with termination of 
his employment and even threatened that he would not be regularized. His pay was increased from Rs.500/- in 2002 
to Rs.6000/- per month in 20I5. He was discharging duties sincerely and honestly. The management did not take any 
steps to regularize his service despite of the fact that the regular posts of Mazdoor or Plumber, later on of Mates as 
well as Plumbers were existing and were vacant. The respondent/ management used the policy of hire and fire and as 
on date there are !0-l5 Plumbers but still some vacancies are lying vacant. He made representations to the G.E.(U), 
Chandimandir through J.E. and A.G.E. concerned many times to enhance the wages and regularize his services as per 
the promise given at the time of his joining but every time rather than taking any action on the requests made he met 
with threat of termination of service. All his requests fell on the deaf ears. His services were terminated on 7.8.20I5 
without any notice of termination and without any compensation in lieu thereof. On 7.8.20I5 he received one 
sentence verbal order that his services are terminated and he need not to come on duty w.e.f. 8.8.20I5 by Sh. V.K. 
Sharma, A.G.E. a subordinate of G.E.(U), Chandimandir. He was also not given the salary for the month of August 
205. The respondent-management falls under the definition of Industry and he is the workman under the definition 
of Industrial Disputes Act. There was no compliance of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act neither any notice 
or any pay/wages in lieu thereof was given nor any retrenchment compensation was paid. The juniors were retained in 
service and he was terminated from service which is violation of Section 25-G of the ID Act. He demand 
Rs.2,77,520/- towards back wages along with interest @!2% and reinstatement in service. 


2. | Respondent/management has filed its written statement, alleging therein that there are two types of employees 
i.e. Combatants and Civilians and not Civilian(Contractual). Daily wagers are employed through contractors and they 
are not the employees of the management. It is denied that workman was interviewed and selected and appointed as 
Mazdoor by Selection Committee. The workman was never employed by the management so the question of 
termination of services without any notice and any compensation does not arise. The management does not fall under 
the definition of Industry as the office of the management is under the control and administration of Ministry of 
Defence and the same being under the Central Government of India, the question of falling the management under the 
definition of Industry does not arise. The management has not violated the provisions of Section 25-F of the ID Act. 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 437] 


Since the workman was never worked with the management, the question of payment of money in lieu of three 
months notice does not arise. Therefore, the present claim statement is liable to be dismissed being devoid of merits in 
the interest of justice. 


3. | The workman filed replication to the written statement filed by the management, alleging therein that he was 
employed and worked as Mazdoor/Plumber for the management from 7.5.2002 to 8.8.205 and was paid Rs.50/p per 
day from the day of joining which was revised from time to time and was being paid Rs.6000/- when his services 
were terminated in the month of August, 205. He was not paid for the period from I.8.20I5 to 8.8.20I5. No money 
in lieu of three months notice was paid to him. 


4. It is pertinent to mention here that the management was proceeded ex parte on !6..20I6 and the management 
has filed an application for setting aside the ex parte order dated 6.l.206 to which reply was filed by the workman 
and the ex parte order dated 6..20l6 passed against the management was set aside by my Ld. Predecessor on the 
payment of cost of Rs.300/- on 3.05.207. 


5. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 


6. |The workman has examined himself as 0७] and filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WWI/A along with 
documents i.e. Temporary Pass and work order slip(colly) and has been cross-examined by the learned counsel of 
management. The workman has also examined WW2 Sh. Mohd. Yamin, who filed his affidavit in evidence as 
Ex.WW2/A, WW3 Raman Kumar who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW3/A, WW4 Gulshan Ali who filed his 
affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW4/A and WWS5 Mohd. Aslam who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW5/A and 
were cross-examined by the learned counsel of management. 


7. The management has examined MWI Sh. Ashish Yadav, working as AGE E/M-II in the office of Garrison 
Engineer(Utility) Chandimandir, who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.MWI/A and has been cross-examined by 
the learned AR of workman. 


8. The workman filed written arguments, alleging therein that there are three types of employees i.e. Combatants, 
Civilian(Regular) and Civilian(Contractual) apart from daily wagers employed through contractors. There were about 
250-260 civilian employees(regular as well as contractual) working under GE(U) Chandimandir. He was interviewed, 
selected and recommended to be appointed as Mazdoor by a Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and was 
appointed as such in April 2002 after due police verification and was allowed to join on 7.5.2002 from 8 am to !7 pm 
daily with a break of one hour for lunch. The workman was employed as Plumber w.e.f. |..2009. The workman was 
assured at the time of initial appointment/joining that he would be regularized as and when vacancies are sanctioned 
and notified in future on a regular scales of pay. The workman discharging his duties sincerely and honestly and his 
superiors never had any occasion to point out or having been found wanting. He had to work under strict military 
discipline in that when he used to enter/exit in/out of the Cantonment his Pass/I-card used to be checked and J.E. used 
to take daily attendance with time and date. Earlier Pass/I-Card used to made and issued by AGE and later on it was 
used to be issued by Station Headquarters, Chandimandir. Management was taking work for nine hours a 
day(including one hour break) from workman but was neither paying the minimum wages prescribed and notified 
from time to time by the Govt. nor any weekly holidays, any type of casual leave or earned leave was being given. 
The workman filed his affidavit in evidence and similarly four more witnesses were examined and cross-examined. 
All the witnesses have supported the version that there were three types of employees viz. Combatants, 
Civilian(Regular) and Civilian(Contractual) apart from daily wagers employed through Contractors and there were 
about 250-260 civilian employees working under GE(U) Chandimandir. Lone witness of the management is Assistant 
Garrison Engineer(AGE) who though posted on the incumbent post only December 207 i.e. much after the period of 
workman’s employment with management from 7.5.2002 to 7.8.20I5 but claims to be in full knowledge of the case 
and hence competent to deposit. He denied of having any contractual employee like workman because management 
gives all maintenance works to Contractor and do not deal directly with contractual employees. The names of the 
contractors who were awarded such contract from 2002 to 20I5 not given by the management and their date of 
contract/agreement, tenure of agreement, terms and conditions of agreement liability default or otherwise are not 
given. Assuming for the sake of argument that workman was employee of contractor as to how come same contractor 
continued from more than thirteen years from 7.5.2002 to 8.8.20I5. It is a settled principle of law that if the facts are 
not specifically pleaded nor denied in pleadings are deem to be admitted facts and there is no question of its proof by 
oral or documentary evidence nor any such documentary of otherwise evidence is placed on record. The workman has 
placed on record complaint slips which are more than 30 in number for the period from 2007 to 20l, which belongs 
to management having Docket Machine Numbers duly singed by the incumbent Junior Engineers(E/M) at the relevant 
time. By these signed slips, works/daily duties used to be assigned to the workman giving details of the nature of 
complaint, building number and location, individual tradesman detailed for the job and were required to be deposited 
back in the Service Centre on completion of job. These complaint slips conclusively prove that the workman was the 
employee of the management and the works/duties used to be allotted was supervised and monitored by JR(E/M) of 
the management. The workman has placed reliance to the judgment titled as Ram Singh and others Vs. Union 


Territory Chandigarh_and_others, Civil Appeal ४०.३766८2002, decided ७ 0277.2003, which deals with the 


4372 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


relationship between employer and employee/master and servant and forum for deciding nature of employment of 
workman with establishment and contractors. 


9. The management filed written arguments, alleging therein that there are two types of employees i.e. Combatants 
and Civilians and not Civilian(Contractual). The daily wagers are employed through contractors and thus, they are not 
the employees of the management. The workman was never appointed by the management and thus, no payment has 
ever been made to the defence accounts and the workman should be asked to prove the same with cogent evidence. 
The workman requested for experience certificate with a request that he can work with any other contract/contractor 
and accordingly the experience certificate was issued with specific work that on contractual basis that means they are 
working under contractors and they were paid by the different contractors. The MES was issuing temporary entry 
passes for workers of contractors as well as to the dependents of MES employees. Dut to security, this practice was 
stopped by Station HW and direction was issued that security passes shall be issued by Station HQ and police 
verification was also the requirement of Station HQ. CMP persons started checking all the persons including deployed 
by the contractors on installations. Therefore, to overcome the problem, all the persons were asked to give an 
application so that it can be forwarded to the respective police verification. The present claim petition filed by the 
workman is liable to be dismissed in the interest of justice. 


0. Ihave heard learned counsels for the parties and have gone through the entire evidence placed on file by the 
parties as well as written arguments filed by both the parties. 


ll. It is added here, it is the case of the workman that it was usual practice in respondent-management that initially 
civilian employees are employed on temporary basis and paid less than the prescribed rates and after observing the 
performance, the workman are regularized on job after one year. He was paid Rs.50/- per day. Thus, workman claims 
himself to be appointed on temporary daily wages. The first question is required to be determined is whether the 
claimant is a workman even if he was appointed on temporary daily wages and was drawing Rs.50/- per day. To my 
mind, the claimant is a workman within the definition of Section 2(S). In this regard, reference can be made to the 
decision in the case of Devinder Singh Vs. Municipal Council, Sanaur, AIR 20/7 Supreme Court 2532, wherein the 
Hon’ble Apex Court while interpreting the provisions of Section 2(S) of the Act which deals with the definition of 
“workman” has observed as under :- 


“The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions of 
employment/ contract of service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of payment are not at all relevant 
for deciding whether or not a person is a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act. The 
definition of workman also does not make any distinction between full time and part time employee or a 
person appointed on contract basis. There is nothing in the plain language of Section 2(s) from which it 
can be inferred that only person employed on regular basis or a person employed for doing whole time 
job is a workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract basis on fixed wages or as a 
casual employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman.” 


It is clear from the perusal of aforesaid observations that even if a person is engaged on temporary, part time or 
contract basis or for doing any other kind of work and is duly paid wages for the said work, in that eventuality such a 
person would be covered by the definition of “workman” as provided in Section 2(S) of the Act. Thus, nature of 
appointment or source of appointment is not relevant to be a “workman” within the Industrial Disputes Act, 947. 


2. The real controversy lies between the parties with respect to the relationship of workman with management. 
The issue as to whether the workman was engaged by the employer/management directly or through contractors is the 
bone of contention between the parties. There is no dispute about preposition of law that onus to prove that claimant 
was in the employment of management is always on the workman/claimant and it is for the workman to adduce 
evidence to prove factum of his employment with the management. Such evidence may be in form of receipt of salary 
or wages for 240 days or record of their appointment or engagement for that period to show that he had worked with 
the respondent-management for 240 days or more in a calendar year. In this regard, reference may be made to 
judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of Batala Coop. Sugar Mills Ltd. Vs. Sowaran Singh, (2005) 8 
Supreme Court Cases 467 as well ०४ Director Fisheries terminated Division Vs. Bhikubhai_Meghajibhai 
७272०८20/22/ I SCC 47. 


3. Question remains to be seen whether claimant/workman Anil Kumar has proved that he was directly engaged 
by the management on 7.5.2002 and served till his termination on 7.8.20l5. This fact has to be proved by the 
documentary evidence as well as oral evidence. At the very outset, it may be mentioned that there is no single reliable 
document to prove that workman/claimant was directly employed by the management. In this connection, workman 
Anil Kumar has accepted that neither any appointment letter nor any termination letter was issued by the respondent- 
management. Undoubtedly, witness examined by the respondent-management namely Ashish Yadav, AGE E/M-II, 
Garrison Engineer(Utility) Chandimandir has categorically stated in his evidence that the claimant/workman was not 
employed by the management as such, neither notice nor retrenchment compensation was given by management. 


[भाग —ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4373 


4. The Hon’ble Supreme Court after analysing the catena of cases has laid down in Balwant Raj Saluja Vs. Air 
India Limited in Civil Appeal ४०. 70266 dated 25.06, 20/4, two well recognised tests to find out whether the labours 
are the contract employees of the principal employer as follows:- 


l) Whether the principal employer pays the salary instead of contractor and 
2) Whether the principal employer controls and supervise the work of the employees? 


The facts regarding the payment of salary by the management or contractor has not been specifically stated in 
the claim petition of the workman. In fact, claim petition is totally silent regarding the payment of wages, salary, letter 
of appointment or anything likewise. Similarly, workman has not mentioned anything regarding the mode of payment 
of wages, salaries etc. in his affidavit. Thus, this basic features for holding the relationship of employer and employee 
is totally lacking not in the pleading but also in the evidence submitted by the workman. 


5. WWI Anil Kumar has stated in his cross-examination that he was paid salary by the JE of the Department in 
cash and signatures were obtained in a register. Salary slip was not issued to the workman. It appears that workman 
has taken the above plea just to cover up his case that he was employed by the respondent-management. Actually the 
workman was not employed by the respondent-management as it is his case that he was interviewed, selected and 
recommended as Mazdoor by a Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and joined as such on 7.5.2002. His police 
verification was also done. The said statement of him also seemed to be afterthought because had he been 
interviewed, selected and recommended to be appointed as Mazdoor. He could have summoned the documents from 
the respondent-management by filing an application but he has not summoned the documents which clearly shows 
that he was not getting any wages from the respondent-management nor he was appointed by the respondent- 
management. 


6. Secondly, so far as the question of controls and supervision is concerned. Workman has categorically stated that 
his work was controlled and supervised by the officials of the management. To this effect, he has placed on record the 
temporary entry pass and complaint slips. Except this, nothing is brought on record to prove that it is management 
who were supervising and controlling the work of claimant/workman. The apex court while explaining the factor of 
supervision and control in the case of International Airport Authority of India vs. International Air Cargo Workers 


Union [209 (/३) SCC374] has held as follows:- 


“If the contract is for supply of labour, necessarily, the labour supplied by the contractor will work 
under the directions, supervision and control of the principal employer but that would not make the 
worker a direct employee of the principal employer, if the salary is paid by contractor, if the right to 
regulate employment is with the contractor, and the ultimate supervision and control lies with the 
contractor. 


The principal employer only controls and directs the work to be done by a contract labour, when such 
labour is assigned/allotted/sent to him. But it is the contractor as employer, who chooses whether the 
worker is to be assigned/allotted to the principal employer or used otherwise. In short, worker being the 
employee of the contractor, the ultimate supervision and control lies with the contractor as he decides 
whether the employee will work and how long he will work and subject to what conditions. Only when 
the contractor assigns/sends the worker to work under the principal employer, the worker works under 
the supervision and control of the principal employer but that is secondary control. The primary control 
is with the contractor.” 


7. Thus, the principal enunciated by the Hon’ble Supreme Court clearly establishes that mere supervision of work 
is not sufficient to prove the relationship of employer and employee till it is proved that there was a complete control 
and supervision. The management control includes the authority of dismissal, taking of disciplinary action and 
continuity of service etc. Claim petition filed by the claimant/workman is mum on this score and workman has not 
mentioned any specific averment in his affidavit regarding the appointment, authority of dismissal or taking of 
disciplinary action by the management. There is nothing on record to prove that it is the management who grant the 
leave or has authority to take any disciplinary action. In my considered opinion, mere saying of supervision regarding 
the execution of the work as alleged by the witness may not be called effective and absolute control. Such control is 
being emphasized to control the work of the management for a specific work in efficient manner done by the 
management in the establishment. So far as the photocopies of complaint slips and entry pass placed on record by the 
workman are concerned, they have also not been proved by calling the concerned official from the respondent- 
management. Moreover, from these slips and entry pass, it cannot be said that workman was working under the 
control and supervision of the respondent-management. So far as case law of Ram Singh and others(supra) referred 
by the learned AR for the workman is concerned, it stated that control by employer is only one factor to determine 
relation between employer and employees along with many other interrelated factors. 


8. Undoubtedly, in Tribunal cases, has to be decided on the basis of the preponderance of probability and not the 
proof beyond reasonable doubt. So far as this case is concerned, there is no documentary evidence on record to prove 
the factum of direct employment of workman with the management. In any way nothing is on record with respect of 


4374 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


the payment of salary, attendance register or work done by the claimant/workman during the course of alleged 
employment with the management. There is nothing mentioned in the claim petition as well as affidavit of the 
workman that who was the person-concerned by which he was directly engaged in the respondent-management of 
Garrison Engineer, Chandimandir. I am of the considered opinion that mere saying that he was employed by the 
Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and was appointed as Mazdoor which is clearly not proved by the workman. 
Thus, it may be observed that there is nothing conclusive either oral or documentary to prove that it was principal- 
employer Garrison Engineer, Chandimandir who controls and supervise the work of the workman. Workman Anil 
Kumar has examined four witnesses WW2 Mohd. Yamin, WW3 Raman Kumar, WW4 Gulshan Ali and WW5 Mohd. 
Aslam, their testimonies are of similar nature as that of workman. They all had also stated that salary was paid to 
them also by the J.E. of the department in cash. They had also admitted that there was no advertisement at the time of 
their joining. They had not submitted any form or application for the job. There was no call letter for joining the 
service. They are also daily wager like the workman and as such, their statements are also of no use to prove the case 
of workman. 


9. So far as the question pertaining to the non-compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the ID Act is 
concerned. It is not disputed that management has neither issued any show cause notice nor given any compensation 
in lieu of notice as is envisaged under Section 25-F of the ID Act. Learned counsel of the management contended that 
workman in fact was not the employee of the establishment as such, neither he is terminated by the management nor 
such notice and compliance of Section 25-F of the Act is required by the establishment. In this connection, learned 
counsel of the management has placed reliance in the case of Municipal Corporation, Faridabad Vs. Siri Niwas, 
Appeal(Civil) १५०. 7657 of 2002, decided on 06.09.2004, Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. Vs. State of 
Rajasthan & Anr. Civil Appeal No.5969 od 2004, decided on 73.09 2004 as well as State of Rajasthan, Manager 
RBI Bangalore Vs. S. Mani & Ors. Civil Appeal १०.6306-6376 of 2003 decided on ॥4.03. 2005. Learned counsel of 
the workman contended that workman is rendering his services with the management for so many years and he had 
completed 240 days in the year 7.8.20I5 before termination by the management. As per pleading of the workman he 
was terminated from 7.8.20l5 without compliance of Section 25-F of the ID Act. It is pertinent to mention that 
pleadings required specific averments with respect to the facts alleged in it. It is not specifically pleaded that 
workman was retrenched/terminated by the management in preceding year i.e. on 7.8.205 even he had rendered 240 
days of service in the management. Thus, there is no specific pleading with respect to the working of 240 days in 
preceding year of the alleged termination. In the affidavit even there is no mention that the workman has worked for 
240 days in the preceding year i.e. on 7.8.205. Thus, this is a general assertion for rendering services with the 
management rather specific averments with respect to the 240 days in the preceding year before the termination. Thus, 
claim petition as well as affidavit filed by the workman is not very specific with respect to 240 days working in the 
establishment. In the light of the specific denial by the management for rendering services with the management, 
burden lies on the workman to prove this fact. The workman has failed to prove it. Thus, there is no necessity of 
issuing any show cause notice to the workman. 


20. The claimant/workman has also claimed in his claim petition as well as in his affidavit and even in his cross- 
examination that Junior Engineer had given oral assurance for regularization in the department. In this regard, it is 
pertinent to mention here that he cannot have been regularized in the department as in those cases where the case fall 
under the definition of industrial dispute as mentioned under Section 2(k) of the ID Act only then regularization can 
be made. Section 2(k) of the ID Act defines “industrial dispute”, which reads as under: 


“2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- 
XXX X 


(k) “industrial dispute” means any dispute or difference between employers and employers, or 
between employers and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the 
employment or non-employment or the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour, of 
any person;” 


And ID Act was amended adding Section 2A making individual dispute of a workman as an industrial dispute, 
if the dispute is related to dismissal, discharge, retrenchment or termination of individual workmen. Thus, Section 2A 
carves an exception to the definition of individual dispute as given in Section 2(k) of the ID Act. Thus, in order to 
give jurisdiction to the appropriate government to refer the dispute to the Tribunal/Labour Court, it was essential for 
the workman to show that his individual dispute for regularization was sponsored or espoused by the union of the 
workmen. The five Bench of the Apex Court in the case of Workmen of Dharampal Premchand (Saughandhi) Vs. 


Dharampal Premchand (Saughandhi), Civil Appeal ५०.532//963, decided on 76.03. /965, also support the above 


view. 


2l. The Hon’ble Karnatana High Court in the case titled as Prakash and Ors. Vs. Superintending 
Engineer(Electrical), O and _M_ Circle, Belgaum_and_ Ors., Writ Petition /५०६७६.477242-75207999, decided छा 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4375 


3.03.2000, has taken a view that the individual workman cannot raise a dispute with regard to absorption and 
regularization. 


22. The Delhi High Court in the case of Management of Hotel Samrat and Ors. Vs. Government of NCT and 


Ors., Writ Petition(C) No.6247 & 6682/2002, decided on 0४.७7. 2002, has taken a similar view that in order to be an 
industrial dispute, it has to satisfy the definition of Section 2(k) of the ID Act. 


23. In view of the above discussion, this Tribunal is of the firm view that there is no merit in the case and the same 
is liable to be dismissed. 


24. Let copy of the award be sent to the Central Government for publication as required under Section 7(]) of the 
Act. 


Date : 6.3.2024 
KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4887.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (947 का 44 ) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
गैरीसन इंजीनियर (उपयोगिता), सैन्य इंजीनियरिंग सेवाएँ ,पंचकुला (एचआर) के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो 
के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औघोगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, are] के पंचाट 
(2/206) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[फा. सं. एल -2025/0/2024- आई आर (4i-I)-24] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 30th September, 2024 


S.O. 887.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.2l/20l6) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Chandigarh-IT_as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Garrison Engineer 


(Utility), Militray Engineering Service,Panchkula (HR) and their workmen. 
[F. No. L-2025/0/2024- IR (B-I)-24] 


SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh. 
Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 


ID No.2/206 

Registered on:-6.06.206 

Sh. Raman Kumar S/o Sh. Tarsem Chand, R/o H.No.l37, Ganesh Vihar, Village Dhakoli, Tehshil Derabassi, SAS 
Nagar Mohali(Pb). 


Versus 
Garrison Engineer(Utility), Military Engineering Services, Chandimandir, District Panchkula(HR). 
maces: Respondent/Management 
AWARD 
Passed on:-06.03.2024 


l. | The workman Raman Kumar has filed the present claim petition under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947(hereinafter called as “Act’) with the averment that he was interviewed and selected and recommended to be 
appointed as Pump Operator by a Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and was appointed as such in August 
999. After due Police Verification, he was allowed to join on |.9.999. His working hours were from 8 am to 5 pm 
daily with a break of one hour for lunch. It was usual practice in G.E.(U), Chandimandir that initially civilian 
employees are appointed on temporary basis, paid less that the prescribed rates, performance used to be observed and 
only then regularized on the job after having observed the performance of duties, work, conduct etc. for 
about one year. He was also assured at the time of his initial appointment/joining that he would be regularized as and 


4376 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


when vacancies are sanctioned and notified in future on a regular scales of pay. He was being paid only Rs.50/- per 
day which was much less as prescribed under the Minimum Wages Act by the Government and whenever he made a 
demand for minimum wages/more pay he was threatened with termination of his employment and even threatened 
that he would not be regularized. His pay was increased from Rs.l500/- in 999 to Rs.8000/- per month in 20I5. He 
was discharging his duties sincerely and honestly. The management did not take any steps to regularize his service 
despite of the fact that the regular posts of Pump Operators were existing and were vacant. The respondent/ 
management used the policy of hire and fire and as on date there are !0-!2 Pump Houses and there are about 30-36 
Pump Operators but still some vacancies are lying vacant. He made representations to the G.E.(U), Chandimandir 
through J.E. and A.G.E. concerned many times to enhance the wages and regularize his services as per the promise 
given at the time of his joining but every time rather than taking any action on the requests made he met with threat of 
termination of service. All his requests fell on the deaf ears. His services were terminated on 7.8.205 without any 
notice of termination and without any compensation in lieu thereof. On 7.8.20I5 he received one sentence verbal 
order that his services are terminated and he need not to come on duty w.e.f. 8.8.20I5 by Sh. V.K. Sharma, A.G.E. a 
subordinate of G.E.(U), Chandimandir. He was also not given the salary for the month of August 20l5. The 
respondent-management falls under the definition of Industry and he is the workman under the definition of Industrial 
Disputes Act. There was no compliance of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act neither any notice or any 
pay/wages in lieu thereof was given nor any retrenchment compensation was paid. The juniors were retained in 
service and he was terminated from service which is violation of Section 25-G of the ID Act. He demand 
Rs.6,30,720/- towards back wages along with interest @!2% and reinstatement in service. 


2.  Respondent/management has filed its written statement, alleging therein that there are two types of employees 
i.e. Combatants and Civilians and not Civilian(Contractual). Daily wagers are employed through contractors and they 
are not the employees of the management. It is denied that workman was interviewed and selected and appointed as 
Mazdoor by Selection Committee. The workman was never employed by the management so the question of 
termination of services without any notice and any compensation does not arise. The management does not fall under 
the definition of Industry as the office of the management is under the control and administration of Ministry of 
Defence and the same being under the Central Government of India, the question of falling the management under the 
definition of Industry does not arise. The management has not violated the provisions of Section 25-F of the ID Act. 
Since the workman was never worked with the management, the question of payment of money in lieu of three 
months notice does not arise. Therefore, the present claim statement is liable to be dismissed being devoid of merits in 
the interest of justice. 


3. | The workman filed replication to the written statement filed by the management, alleging therein that he was 
employed and worked as Pump Operator for the management from |.9.999 to 8.8.20I5 and was paid Rs.50/- per day 
from the day of joining which was revised from time to time and was being paid Rs.8000/- when his services were 
terminated in the month of August, 20l5. He was not paid for the period from .8.20I5 to 8.8.20I5. No money in lieu 
of three months notice was paid to him. 


4. It is pertinent to mention here that the management was proceeded ex parte on 6..206 and the management 
has filed an application for setting aside the ex parte order dated 6.!.206 to which reply was filed by the workman 
and the ex parte order dated 6..20l6 passed against the management was set aside by my Ld. Predecessor on the 
payment of cost of Rs.300/- on 3.05.207. 


5. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 


6. The workman has examined himself as १०७] and filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WWI/A and has been 
cross-examined by the learned counsel of management. The workman has also examined WW2 Sh. Mohd. Yamin, 
who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW2/A, WW3 Anil Kumar who filed his affidavit in evidence as 
Ex.WW3/A, WW4 Gulshan Ali who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW4/A and WWS5 Mohd. Aslam who filed 
his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW5/A and were cross-examined by the learned counsel of management. 


7. The management has examined MWI Sh. Ashish Yadav, working as AGE E/M-II in the office of Garrison 
Engineer(Utility) Chandimandir, who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.MWI/A and has been cross-examined by 
the learned AR of workman. 


8. The workman filed written arguments, alleging therein that there are three types of employees i.e. Combatants, 
Civilian(Regular) and Civilian(Contractual) apart from daily wagers employed through contractors. There were about 
250-260 civilian employees(regular as well as contractual) working under GE(U) Chandimandir. He was interviewed, 
selected and recommended to be appointed as Pump Operator by a Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and was 
appointed as such in August 999 after due police verification and was allowed to join on |.9.999 from 8 am to 7 
pm daily with a break of one hour for lunch. The workman was assured at the time of initial appointment/joining that 
he would be regularized as and when vacancies are sanctioned and notified in future on a regular scales of pay. The 
workman discharging his duties sincerely and honestly and his superiors never had any occasion to point out or 
having been found wanting. He had to work under strict military discipline in that when he used to enter/exit in/out of 
the Cantonment his Pass/I-card used to be checked and J.E. used to take daily attendance with time and date. Earlier 
Pass/I-Card used to made and issued by AGE and later on it was used to be issued by Station Headquarters, 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4377 


Chandimandir. Management was taking work for nine hours a day(including one hour break) from workman but was 
neither paying the minimum wages prescribed and notified from time to time by the Govt. nor any weekly holidays, 
any type of casual leave or earned leave was being given. The workman filed his affidavit in evidence and similarly 
four more witnesses were examined and cross-examined. All the witnesses have supported the version that there were 
three types of employees viz. Combatants, Civilian(Regular) and Civilian(Contractual) apart from daily wagers 
employed through Contractors and there were about 250-260 civilian employees working under GE(U) 
Chandimandir. Lone witness of the management is Assistant Garrison Engineer(AGE) who though posted on the 
incumbent post only December 207 i.e. much after the period of workman’s employment with management from 
.9.999 to 7.8.20I5 but claims to be in full knowledge of the case and hence competent to deposit. He denied of 
having any contractual employee like workman because management gives all maintenance works to Contractor and 
do not deal directly with contractual employees. The names of the contractors who were awarded such contract from 
999 to 205 not given by the management and their date of contract/agreement, tenure of agreement, terms and 
conditions of agreement liability default or otherwise are not given. Assuming for the sake of argument that workman 
was employee of contractor as to how come same contractor continued from |.9.999 to 8.8.20I5. It is a settled 
principle of law that if the facts are not specifically pleaded nor denied in pleadings are deem to be admitted facts and 
there is no question of its proof by oral or documentary evidence nor any such documentary of otherwise evidence is 
placed on record. The workman has placed on the record complaint slips which are more than 30 in number for the 
period from 2007 to 20ll, which belongs to the respondent-management having Docket Machine Numbers duly 
singed by the incumbent Junior Engineers(E/M) at the relevant time. By these signed slips, works/daily duties used to 
be assigned to the workman giving the details of the nature of complaint, building number and location, individual 
tradesman detailed for the job and were required to be deposited back in the Service Centre on completion of job. 
These complaint slips conclusively prove that the workman was the employee of the management and the 
works/duties used to be allotted was supervised and monitored by JR(E/M) of the management. The workman has 
placed reliance to the judgment titled as Ram Singh and others Vs. Union Territory Chandigarh and others, Civil 
Appeal ५०.३3766/2002, decided का 02.77.2003, which deals with the relationship between employer and 
employee/master and servant and forum for deciding nature of employment of workman with establishment and 
contractors. 


9. The management filed written arguments, alleging therein that there are two types of employees i.e. Combatants 
and Civilians and not Civilian(Contractual). The daily wagers are employed through contractors and thus, they are not 
the employees of the management. The workman was never appointed by the management and thus, no payment has 
ever been made to the defence accounts and the workman should be asked to prove the same with cogent evidence. 
The workman requested for experience certificate with a request that he can work with any other contract/contractor 
and accordingly the experience certificate was issued with specific work that on contractual basis that means they are 
working under contractors and they were paid by the different contractors. The MES was issuing temporary entry 
passes for workers of contractors as well as to the dependents of MES employees. But to security, this practice was 
stopped by Station HW and direction was issued that security passes shall be issued by Station HQ and police 
verification was also the requirement of Station HQ. CMP persons started checking all the persons including deployed 
by the contractors on installations. Therefore, to overcome the problem, all the persons were asked to give an 
application so that it can be forwarded to the respective police verification. The present claim petition filed by the 
workman is liable to be dismissed in the interest of justice. 


0. Ihave heard learned counsels for the parties and have gone through the entire evidence placed on file by the 
parties as well as written arguments. 


ll. It is added here, it is the case of the workman that it was usual practice in respondent-management that initially 
civilian employees are employed on temporary basis and paid less than the prescribed rates and after observing the 
performance, the workman are regularized on job after one year. He was paid Rs.50/- per day. Thus, the workman 
claims himself to be appointed on temporary daily wages. The first question is required to be determined is whether 
the claimant is a workman even if he was appointed on temporary daily wages and was drawing Rs.50/- per day. To 
my mind, the claimant is a workman within the definition of Section 2(S). In this regard, reference can be made to the 
decision in the case of Devinder Singh Vs. Municipal Council, Sanaur, AIR 20/7 Supreme Court 2532, wherein the 
Hon’ble Apex Court while interpreting the provisions of Section 2(S) of the Act which deals with the definition of 
“workman” has observed as under :- 


“The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions of employment/ 
contract of service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of payment are not at all relevant for deciding 
whether or not a person is a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act. The definition of 
workman also does not make any distinction between full time and part time employee or a person 
appointed on contract basis. There is nothing in the plain language of Section 2(s) from which it can be 
inferred that only person employed on regular basis or a person employed for doing whole time job is a 
workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract basis on fixed wages or as a casual 
employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman.” 


4378 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


It is clear from the perusal of aforesaid observations that even if a person is engaged on temporary, part time or 
contract basis or for doing any other kind of work and is duly paid wages for the said work, in that eventuality such a 
person would be covered by the definition of “workman” as provided in Section 2(S) of the Act. Thus, nature of 
appointment or source of appointment is not relevant to be a “workman” within the Industrial Disputes Act, |947. 


2. The real controversy lies between the parties with respect to the relationship of workman with management. 
The issue as to whether the workman was engaged by the employer/management directly or through contractors is the 
bone of contention between the parties. There is no dispute about preposition of law that onus to prove that claimant 
was in the employment of management is always on the workman/claimant and it is for the workman to adduce 
evidence to prove factum of his employment with the management. Such evidence may be in form of receipt of salary 
or wages for 240 days or record of their appointment or engagement for that period to show that he had worked with 
the respondent-management for 240 days or more in a calendar year. In this regard, reference may be made to 
judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of Batala Coop. Sugar Mills Ltd. Vs. Sowaran Singh, (2005) 8 
Supreme Court Cases 467 as आशा! ०४ Director Fisheries terminated Division Vs. Bhikubhai_Meghajibhai 
७27८०८20/20/ I SCC 47. 


3. Question remains to be seen whether claimant/workman Raman Kumar has proved that he was directly engaged 
by the management on |.9.999 and served till his termination on 7.8.20l5. This fact has to be proved by the 
documentary evidence as well as oral evidence. At the very outset, it may be mentioned that there is no single reliable 
document to prove that workman/claimant was directly employed by the management. In this connection, workman 
Raman Kumar has accepted that neither any appointment letter nor any termination letter was issued by the 
respondent-management. Undoubtedly, witness examined by the respondent-management namely Ashish Yadav, 
AGE E/M-HU, Garrison Engineer(Utility) Chandimandir has categorically stated in his evidence that the 
claimant/workman was not employed by the management as such, neither notice nor retrenchment compensation was 
given by management. 


4. The Hon’ble Supreme Court after analysing the catena of cases has laid down in Balwant Raj Saluja Vs. Air 
India Limited in Civil Appeal १०, 7/0266 dated 25.06. 20/4, two well recognised tests to find out whether the labours 
are the contract employees of the principal employer as follows:- 


|) Whether the principal employer pays the salary instead of contractor and 
2) Whether the principal employer controls and supervise the work of the employees? 


The facts regarding the payment of salary by the management or contractor has not been specifically stated in 
the claim petition of the workman. In fact, claim petition is totally silent regarding the payment of wages, salary, letter 
of appointment or anything likewise. Similarly, workman has not mentioned anything regarding the mode of payment 
of wages, salaries etc. in his affidavit. Thus, this basic features for holding the relationship of employer and employee 
is totally lacking not in the pleading but also in the evidence submitted by the workman. 


5. WWI Raman Kumar has stated in his cross-examination that he was paid salary by the JE of the Department in 
cash and signatures were obtained in a register. Salary slip was not issued to the workman. It appears that workman 
has taken the above plea just to cover up his case that he was employed by the respondent-management. Actually the 
workman was not employed by the respondent-management as it is his case that he was interviewed, selected and 
recommended as Pump Operator by a Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and joined as such on .9.999. His 
police verification was also done. The said statement of him also seemed to be afterthought because had he been 
interviewed, selected and recommended to be appointed as Pump Operator. He could have summoned the documents 
from the respondent-management by filing an application but he has not summoned the documents which clearly 
shows that he was not getting any wages from the respondent-management nor he was appointed by the respondent- 
management. 


6. Secondly, so far as the question of controls and supervision is concerned. Workman has categorically stated that 
his work was controlled and supervised by the officials of the management. To this effect, he has placed on record the 
temporary entry pass and complaint slips. Except this, nothing is brought on record to prove that it is management 
who were supervising and controlling the work of claimant/workman. The apex court while explaining the factor of 
supervision and control in the case of International Airport Authority of India vs. International Air Cargo Workers 


Union [209 (/३) SCC374] has held as follows:- 


“If the contract is for supply of labour, necessarily, the labour supplied by the contractor will work 
under the directions, supervision and control of the principal employer but that would not make the 
worker a direct employee of the principal employer, if the salary is paid by contractor, if the right to 
regulate employment is with the contractor, and the ultimate supervision and control lies with the 
contractor. 


The principal employer only controls and directs the work to be done by a contract labour, when such 
labour is assigned/allotted/sent to him. But it is the contractor as employer, who chooses whether the 
worker is to be assigned/allotted to the principal employer or used otherwise. In short, worker being the 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4379 


employee of the contractor, the ultimate supervision and control lies with the contractor as he decides 
whether the employee will work and how long he will work and subject to what conditions. Only when 
the contractor assigns/sends the worker to work under the principal employer, the worker works under 
the supervision and control of the principal employer but that is secondary control. The primary control 
is with the contractor.” 


7. Thus, the principal enunciated by the Hon’ble Supreme Court clearly establishes that mere supervision of work 
is not sufficient to prove the relationship of employer and employee till it is proved that there was a complete control 
and supervision. The management control includes the authority of dismissal, taking of disciplinary action and 
continuity of service etc. Claim petition filed by the claimant/workman is mum on this score and workman has not 
mentioned any specific averment in his affidavit regarding the appointment, authority of dismissal or taking of 
disciplinary action by the management. There is nothing on record to prove that it is the management who grant the 
leave or has authority to take any disciplinary action. In my considered opinion, mere saying of supervision regarding 
the execution of the work as alleged by the witness may not be called effective and absolute control. Such control is 
being emphasized to control the work of the management for a specific work in efficient manner done by the 
management in the establishment. Therefore, it cannot be said that workman was working under the control and 
supervision of the respondent-management. So far as the case law of Ram Singh and other(supra) referred by the 
learned AR for the workman is concerned, it stated that control by employer is only one factor to determine relation 
between employers and employees along with many other interrelated factors. 


8. Undoubtedly, in Tribunal cases, has to be decided on the basis of the preponderance of probability and not the 
proof beyond reasonable doubt. So far as this case is concerned, there is no documentary evidence on record to 
prove the factum of direct employment of workman with the management. In any way nothing is on record with 
respect of the payment of salary, attendance register or work done by the claimant/workman during the course of 
alleged employment with the management. There is nothing mentioned in the claim petition as well as affidavit of 
the workman that who was the person-concerned by which he was directly engaged in the respondent-management 
of Garrison Engineer, Chandimandir. I am of the considered opinion that mere saying that he was employed by the 
Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and was appointed as Pump Operator which is clearly not proved by the 
workman. Thus, it may be observed that there is nothing conclusive either oral or documentary to prove that it was 
principal-employer Garrison Engineer, Chandimandir who controls and supervise the work of the workman. 
Workman Raman Kumar has examined four witnesses WW2 Mohd. Yamin, WW3 Anil Kumar, WW4 Gulshan Ali 
and WWS Mohd. Aslam, their testimonies are of similar nature as that of workman. They all had also stated that 
salary was paid to them also by the J.E. of the department in cash. They had also admitted that there was no 
advertisement at the time of their joining. They had not submitted any form or application for the job. There was no 
call letter for joining the service. They are also daily wager like the workman and as such, their statements are also 
of no use to prove the case of workman. 


9. So far as the question pertaining to the non-compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the ID Act is 
concerned. It is not disputed that management has neither issued any show cause notice nor given any compensation 
in lieu of notice as is envisaged under Section 25-F of the ID Act. Learned counsel of the management contended that 
workman in fact was not the employee of the establishment as such, neither he is terminated by the management nor 
such notice and compliance of Section 25-F of the Act is required by the establishment. In this connection, learned 
counsel of the management has placed reliance in the case of Municipal Corporation, Faridabad Vs. Siri_ Niwas, 
Appeal(Civil) १५०. 7657 of 2002, decided on 06.09.2004, Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. Vs. State of 


Rajasthan & Anr. Civil Appeal No.5969 od 2004, decided on 73. 09, 2004 as well as State of Rajasthan, Manager 
RBI Bangalore Vs. S. Mani_& Ors. Civil Appeal ५०. 6306-6376 of 2003 decided on 74.03. 2005. Learned counsel of 


the workman contended that workman is rendering his services with the management for so many years and he had 
completed 240 days in the year 7.8.20I5 before termination by the management. As per pleading of the workman he 
was terminated from 7.8.20l5 without compliance of Section 25-F of the ID Act. It is pertinent to mention that 
pleadings required specific averments with respect to the facts alleged in it. It is not specifically pleaded that 
workman was retrenched/terminated by the management in preceding year 6. on 7.8.20l5 even he had rendered 240 
days of service in the management. Thus, there is no specific pleading with respect to the working of 240 days in 
preceding year of the alleged termination. In the affidavit even there is no mention that the workman has worked for 
240 days in the preceding year i.e. on 7.8.20l5. Thus, this is a general assertion for rendering services with the 
management rather specific averments with respect to the 240 days in the preceding year before the termination. Thus, 
claim petition as well as affidavit filed by the workman is not very specific with respect to 240 days working in the 
establishment. In the light of the specific denial by the management for rendering services with the management, 
burden lies on the workman to prove this fact. The workman has failed to prove it. Thus, there is no necessity of 
issuing any show cause notice to the workman. 


20. The claimant/workman has also claimed in his claim petition as well as in his affidavit and even in his cross- 
examination that Junior Engineer had given oral assurance for regularization in the department. In this regard, it is 
pertinent to mention here that he cannot have been regularized in the department as in those cases where the case fall 


4380 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


under the definition of industrial dispute as mentioned under Section 2(k) of the ID Act only then regularization can 
be made. Section 2(k) of the ID Act defines “industrial dispute”, which reads as under: 


“2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- 
XXX XxX 


(k) “industrial dispute” means any dispute or difference between employers and employers, or 
between employers and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the 
employment or non-employment or the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour, of 
any person;” 


And ID Act was amended adding Section 2A making individual dispute of a workman as an industrial dispute, 
if the dispute is related to dismissal, discharge, retrenchment or termination of individual workmen. Thus, Section 2A 
carves an exception to the definition of individual dispute as given in Section 2(k) of the ID Act. Thus, in order to 
give jurisdiction to the appropriate government to refer the dispute to the Tribunal/Labour Court, it was essential for 
the workman to show that his individual dispute for regularization was sponsored or espoused by the union of the 
workmen. The five Bench of the Apex Court in the case of Workmen of Dharampal Premchand (Saughandhi) Vs. 
Dharampal Premchand (Saughandhi), Civil Appeal ५०.३३2/7963, decided ७ 76.03./965, has also support the 
above view. 

2l. The Hon’ble Karnatana High Court in the case titled as Prakash and Ors. Vs. Superintending 
Engineer(Electrical), O and _M_ Circle, Belgaum_and_Ors., Writ Petition ४०६4 72472-7527999, decided छा 


3I.03.2000, has taken a view that the individual workman cannot raise a dispute with regard to absorption and 
regularization. 


22. The Delhi High Court in the case of Management of Hotel Samrat and Ors. Vs. Government of NCT and 
Ors., Writ Petition(C) No.6247 & 6682/2002, decided on 04. 07.2002, has taken a similar view that in order to be an 
industrial dispute, it has to satisfy the definition of Section 2(k) of the ID Act. 

23. In view of the above discussion, this Tribunal is of the firm view that there is no merit in the case and the same 
is liable to be dismissed. 


24. Let copy of the award be sent to the Central Government for publication as required under Section |7(l) of the 
Act. 


25. Date : 6.3.2024 
KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 सितम्बर, 2024 
का.आ. 7888.—sieiftre विवाद अधिनियम i947 (947 का 44 ) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
गैरीसन इंजीनियर (उपयोगिता), सैन्य इंजीनियरिंग सेवाएँ पंचकुला (एचआर) के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो 
के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, चंडीगढ़- के पंचाट 
(22/206) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[फा. सं. एल -2025/0/2024- आई आर (4-Il)-25] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 30th September, 2024 
S.O. 888.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 22/20l6) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Chandigarh-HT_as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of _Garrison Engineer ( 
Utility), Militray Engineering Service,Panchkula (HR) and their workmen. 


[F. No. L-2025/0/2024- IR (B-)-25] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-I, Chandigarh. 
Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 
ID No.22/20I6 
Registered on:-6.06.206 


Sh. Gulshan Ali S/o Sh. Safdar Khan, R/o Village Dhera Guru, Post Office Chikan, Tehsil Kalka, 
District Panchkula (HR). 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 438] 


Versus 
Garrison Engineer (Utility), Military Engineering Services, Chandimandir, District Panchkula (HR). 
tates Respondent/Management 
AWARD 
Passed on:-06.03.2024 


l. The workman Gulshan Ali has filed the present claim petition under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947(hereinafter called as “Act’) with the averment that he was interviewed and selected and recommended to be 
appointed as Mazdoor by a Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and was appointed as such in June 2005. After 
due Police Verification, he was allowed to join on 5.6.2005. His working hours were from 8 am to 5 pm daily with a 
break of one hour for lunch. It was usual practice in G.E.(U), Chandimandir that initially civilian employees are 
appointed on temporary basis, paid less that the prescribed rates, performance used to be observed and only then 
regularized on the job after having observed the performance of duties, work, conduct etc. for about one year. He was 
also assured at the time of his initial appointment/joining that he would be regularized as and when vacancies are 
sanctioned and notified in future on a regular scales of pay. He was being paid only Rs.50/- per day which was much 
less as prescribed under the Minimum Wages Act by the Government and whenever he made a demand for minimum 
wages/more pay he was threatened with termination of his employment and even threatened that he would not be 
regularized. His pay was increased from Rs.!500/- in 2002 to Rs.6000/- per month in 205. He was discharging his 
duties sincerely and honestly. The management did not take any steps to regularize his service despite of the fact that 
the regular posts of Mazdoor, later on of Mates were existing and were vacant. The respondent/ management used the 
policy of hire and fire and as on date there are 0-!5 Plumbers but still some vacancies are lying vacant. He made 
representations to the G.E.(U), Chandimandir through J.E. and A.G.E. concerned many times to enhance the wages 
and regularize his services as per the promise given at the time of his joining but every time rather than taking any 
action on the requests made he met with threat of termination of service. All his requests fell on the deaf ears. His 
services were terminated on 7.8.205 without any notice of termination and without any compensation in lieu thereof. 
On 7.8.20I5 he received one sentence verbal order that his services are terminated and he need not to come on duty 
w.e.f. 8.8.20I5 by Sh. V.K. Sharma, A.G.E. a subordinate of G.E.(U), Chandimandir. He was also not given the 
salary for the month of August 205. The respondent-management falls under the definition of Industry and he is the 
workman under the definition of Industrial Disputes Act. There was no compliance of Section 25-F of the Industrial 
Disputes Act neither any notice or any pay/wages in lieu thereof was given nor any retrenchment compensation was 
paid. The juniors were retained in service and he was terminated from service which is violation of Section 25-G of 
the ID Act. He demand Rs.2,58,320/- towards back wages along with interest @!2% and reinstatement in service. 


2. Respondent/management has filed its written statement, alleging therein that there are two types of 
employees i.e. Combatants and Civilians and not Civilian(Contractual). Daily wagers are employed through 
contractors and they are not the employees of the management. It is denied that workman was interviewed and 
selected and appointed as Mazdoor by Selection Committee. The workman was never employed by the management 
so the question of termination of services without any notice and any compensation does not arise. The management 
does not fall under the definition of Industry as the office of the management is under the control and administration 
of Ministry of Defence and the same being under the Central Government of India, the question of falling the 
management under the definition of Industry does not arise. The management has not violated the provisions of 
Section 25-F of the ID Act. Since the workman was never worked with the management, the question of payment of 
money in lieu of three months notice does not arise. Therefore, the present claim statement is liable to be dismissed 
being devoid of merits in the interest of justice. 


3. The workman filed replication to the written statement filed by the management, alleging therein that he was 
employed and worked as Mazdoor for the management from 5.06.2005 to 8.8.20l5 and was paid Rs.50/p per day 
from the day of joining which was revised from time to time and was being paid Rs.6000/- when his services were 
terminated in the month of August, 20l5. He was not paid for the period from .8.20I5 to 8.8.20I5. No money in lieu 
of three months notice was paid to him. 


4. It is pertinent to mention here that the management was proceeded ex parte on 6.!.20l6 and the 
management has filed an application for setting aside the ex parte order dated 6..206 to which reply was filed by 
the workman and the ex parte order dated 6..20l6 passed against the management was set aside by my Ld. 
Predecessor on the payment of cost of Rs.300/- on 3.05.207. 


5. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 


6. The workman has examined himself as WW and filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WWI/A and has been 
cross-examined by the learned counsel of management. The workman has also examined WW2 Sh. Mohd. Aslam, 
who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW2/A, WW3 Raman Kumar who filed his affidavit in evidence as 


4362 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Ex.WW3/A, WW4 Sh. Mohd. Yamin who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW4/A and WWS Sh. Anil Kumar 
who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WWS5/A and were cross-examined by the learned counsel of management. 


dee The management has examined ७७४] Sh. Ashish Yadav, working as AGE E/M-II in the office of Garrison 
Engineer(Utility) Chandimandir, who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.MWI/A and has been cross-examined by 
the learned AR of workman. 


8. The workman filed written arguments, alleging therein that there are three types of employees Le. 
Combatants, Civilian(Regular) and Civilian(Contractual) apart from daily wagers employed through contractors. 
There were about 250-260 civilian employees(regular as well as contractual) working under GE(U) Chandimandir. He 
was interviewed, selected and recommended to be appointed as Mazdoor by a Selection Committee constituted by 
G.E. and was appointed as such in June 2005 after due police verification and was allowed to join on 5.6.2005 from 
8 am to |7 pm daily with a break of one hour for lunch. The workman was employed as Plumber/Pipe Fitter w.e.f. 
..2009. The workman was assured at the time of initial appointment/joining that he would be regularized as and 
when vacancies are sanctioned and notified in future on a regular scales of pay. The workman discharging his duties 
sincerely and honestly and his superiors never had any occasion to point out or having been found wanting. He had to 
work under strict military discipline in that when he used to enter/exit in/out of the Cantonment his Pass/I-card used 
to be checked and J.E. used to take daily attendance with time and date. Earlier Pass/I-Card used to made and issued 
by AGE and later on it was used to be issued by Station Headquarters, Chandimandir. Management was taking work 
for nine hours a day(including one hour break) from workman but was neither paying the minimum wages prescribed 
and notified from time to time by the Govt. nor any weekly holidays, any type of casual leave or earned leave was 
being given. The workman filed his affidavit in evidence and similarly four more witnesses were examined and cross- 
examined. All the witnesses have supported the version that there were three types of employees viz. Combatants, 
Civilian(Regular) and Civilian(Contractual) apart from daily wagers employed through Contractors and there were 
about 250-260 civilian employees working under GE(U) Chandimandir. Lone witness of the management is Assistant 
Garrison Engineer(AGE) who though posted on the incumbent post only December 20!7 i.e. much after the period of 
workman’s employment with management from |5.6.2005 to 7.8.20I5 but claims to be in full knowledge of the case 
and hence competent to deposit. He denied of having any contractual employee like workman because management 
gives all maintenance works to Contractor and do not deal directly with contractual employees. The names of the 
contractors who were awarded such contract from 2005 to 20l5 not given by the management and their date of 
contract/agreement, tenure of agreement, terms and conditions of agreement liability default or otherwise are not 
given. Assuming for the sake of argument that workman was employee of contractor as to how come same contractor 
continued from 5.06.2005 to 8.8.205. It is a settled principle of law that if the facts are not specifically pleaded nor 
denied in pleadings are deem to be admitted facts and there is no question of its proof by oral or documentary 
evidence nor any such documentary of otherwise evidence is placed on record. The workman has placed on record 
complaint slips which are more than 30 in number for the period from 2007 to 20ll, which belongs to the 
respondent/management having Docket Machine Numbers duly singed by the incumbent Junior Engineers(E/M) at 
the relevant time. By these signed slips, works/daily duties used to be assigned to the workman giving details of the 
nature of complaint, building number and location, individual tradesman detailed for the job and were required to be 
deposited back in the Service Centre on completion of job. These complaint slips conclusively prove that the 
workman was the employee of the management and the works/duties used to be allotted was supervised and 
monitored by JR(E/M) of the management. The workman has placed reliance to the judgment titled as Ram Singh 
and others Vs. Union Territory Chandigarh and others, Civil Appeal ४०.३766/८2002, decided on 02.77.2003, which 
deals with the relationship between employer and employee/master and servant and forum for deciding nature of 
employment of workman with establishment and contractors. 


9. The management filed written arguments, alleging therein that there are two types of employees i.e. 
Combatants and Civilians and not Civilian(Contractual). The daily wagers are employed through contractors and thus, 
they are not the employees of the management. The workman was never appointed by the management and thus, no 
payment has ever been made to the defence accounts and the workman should be asked to prove the same with cogent 
evidence. The workman requested for experience certificate with a request that he can work with any other 
contract/contractor and accordingly the experience certificate was issued with specific work that on contractual basis 
that means they are working under contractors and they were paid by the different contractors. The MES was issuing 
temporary entry passes for workers of contractors as well as to the dependents of MES employees. Dut to security, 
this practice was stopped by Station HW and direction was issued that security passes shall be issued by Station HQ 
and police verification was also the requirement of Station HQ. CMP persons started checking all the persons 
including deployed by the contractors on installations. Therefore, to overcome the problem, all the persons were 
asked to given an application so that it can be forwarded to the respective police verification. The present claim 
petition filed by the workman is liable to be dismissed in the interest of justice. 


0. I have heard learned counsels for the parties and have gone through the entire evidence placed on file by the 
parties as well as written arguments. 


Il. It is added here, it is the case of the workman that it was usual practice in respondent-management that 
initially civilian employees are employed on temporary basis and paid less than the prescribed rates and after 


[भाग I—avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4383 


observing the performance, the workman are regularized on job after one year. The workman was paid Rs.50/- per 
day. Thus, the workman claims himself to be appointed on temporary daily wages. The first question is required to be 
determined is whether the claimant is a workman even if he was appointed on temporary daily wages and was 
drawing Rs.50/- per day. To my mind, the claimant is a workman within the definition of Section 2(S). In this regard, 
reference can be made to the decision in the case of Devinder Singh Vs. Municipal Council, Sanaur, AIR 2077 
Supreme Court 2532, wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court while interpreting the provisions of Section 2(S) of the Act 
which deals with the definition of “workman” has observed as under :- 


“The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions of employment/ contract of 
service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of payment are not at all relevant for deciding whether or not a 
person is a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act. The definition of workman also does not make 
any distinction between full time and part time employee or a person appointed on contract basis. There is nothing 
in the plain language of Section 2(s) from which it can be inferred that only person employed on regular basis or a 
person employed for doing whole time job is a workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract 
basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman.” 


It is clear from the perusal of aforesaid observations that even if a person is engaged on temporary, part time or 
contract basis or for doing any other kind of work and is duly paid wages for the said work, in that eventuality such a 
person would be covered by the definition of “workman” as provided in Section 2(S) of the Act. Thus, nature of 
appointment or source of appointment is not relevant to be a “workman” within the Industrial Disputes Act, 947. 


2. The real controversy lies between the parties with respect to the relationship of workman with management. 
The issue as to whether the workman was engaged by the employer/management directly or through contractors is the 
bone of contention between the parties. There is no dispute about preposition of law that onus to prove that claimant 
was in the employment of management is always on the workman/claimant and it is for the workman to adduce 
evidence to prove factum of his employment with the management. Such evidence may be in form of receipt of salary 
or wages for 240 days or record of their appointment or engagement for that period to show that he had worked with 
the respondent-management for 240 days or more in a calendar year. In this regard, reference may be made to 
judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of Batala Coop. Sugar Mills Ltd. Vs. Sowaran Singh, (2005) 8 


Supreme Court Cases 4867 as _well_as Director Fisheries terminated Division Vs. Bhikubhai_Meghajibhai 
७476०(20/2) I SCC 47. 


3. | Question remains to be seen whether claimant/workman Gulshan Ali has proved that he was directly engaged 
by the management on 5.6.2005 and served till his termination on 7.8.20l5. This fact has to be proved by the 
documentary evidence as well as oral evidence. At the very outset, it may be mentioned that there is no single reliable 
document to prove that workman/claimant was directly employed by the management. In this connection, workman 
Gulshan Ali has accepted that neither any appointment letter nor any termination letter was issued by the respondent- 
management. Undoubtedly, witness examined by the respondent-management namely Ashish Yadav, AGE E/M-II, 
Garrison Engineer(Utility) Chandimandir has categorically stated in his evidence that the claimant/workman was not 
employed by the management as such, neither notice nor retrenchment compensation was given by management. 


4. The Hon’ble Supreme Court after analysing the catena of cases has laid down in Balwant Raj Saluja Vs. Air 
India Limited in Civil Appeal 0०, 7/0266 dated 25.06. 20/4, two well recognised tests to find out whether the labours 
are the contract employees of the principal employer as follows:- 


) Whether the principal employer pays the salary instead of contractor and 
2) Whether the principal employer controls and supervise the work of the employees? 


The facts regarding the payment of salary by the management or contractor has not been specifically stated 
in the claim petition of the workman. In fact, claim petition is totally silent regarding the payment of wages, salary, 
letter of appointment or anything likewise. Similarly, workman has not mentioned anything regarding the mode of 
payment of wages, salaries etc. in his affidavit. Thus, this basic features for holding the relationship of employer and 
employee is totally lacking not in the pleading but also in the evidence submitted by the workman. 


5.. WWI Gulshan Ali has stated in his cross-examination that he does not have documentary proof to show that 
payment of wages were paid by management. He do not have any proof that any person was regularized. He was 
engaged through contractor. Thus, his stand that he was employed by the respondent-management stands falsified. 
Even from his cross-examination it can be inferred that he was getting wages in cash. Actually the workman was not 
employed by the management as it is his case that he was interviewed, selected and recommended as Mazdoor by a 
Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and joined as such on 5.6.2005. His police verification was also done. The 
said statement of him also seemed to be afterthought because had he been interviewed, selected and recommended to 
be appointed as Mazdoor. He could have summoned the documents from respondent-management by filing an 
application but he has not summoned the documents which clearly shows that he was not getting any wages from 
respondent-management nor he was appointed by the respondent-management. 


4384 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


6. Secondly, so far as the question of controls and supervision is concerned. Workman has categorically stated that 
his work was controlled and supervised by the officials of the management. To this effect, he has placed on record the 
temporary entry pass and complaint slips. Except this, nothing is brought on record to prove that it is management 
who were supervising and controlling the work of claimant/workman. The apex court while explaining the factor of 
supervision and control in the case of International Airport Authority of India vs. International Air Cargo Workers 


Union [209 (/३) SCC374] has held as follows:- 


“If the contract is for supply of labour, necessarily, the labour supplied by the contractor will work under the 
directions, supervision and control of the principal employer but that would not make the worker a direct employee 
of the principal employer, if the salary is paid by contractor, if the right to regulate employment is with the 
contractor, and the ultimate supervision and control lies with the contractor. 


The principal employer only controls and directs the work to be done by a contract labour, when such labour is 
assigned/allotted/sent to him. But it is the contractor as employer, who chooses whether the worker is to be 
assigned/allotted to the principal employer or used otherwise. In short, worker being the employee of the 
contractor, the ultimate supervision and control lies with the contractor as he decides whether the employee will 
work and how long he will work and subject to what conditions. Only when the contractor assigns/sends the 
worker to work under the principal employer, the worker works under the supervision and control of the principal 
employer but that is secondary control. The primary control is with the contractor.” 


7. Thus, the principal enunciated by the Hon’ble Supreme Court clearly establishes that mere supervision of 
work is not sufficient to prove the relationship of employer and employee till it is proved that there was a complete 
control and supervision. The management control includes the authority of dismissal, taking of disciplinary action and 
continuity of service etc. Claim petition filed by the claimant/workman is mum on this score and workman has not 
mentioned any specific averment in his affidavit regarding the appointment, authority of dismissal or taking of 
disciplinary action by the management. There is nothing on record to prove that it is the management who grant the 
leave or has authority to take any disciplinary action. In my considered opinion, mere saying of supervision regarding 
the execution of the work as alleged by the witness may not be called effective and absolute control. Such control is 
being emphasized to control the work of the management for a specific work in efficient manner done by the 
management in the establishment. So far as the photocopies of complaint slips and entry pass placed on record by the 
workman are concerned, they have also not been proved by calling the concerned official from the respondent- 
management. Moreover, from these slips and entry pass, it cannot be said that workman was working under the 
control and supervision of the respondent-management. So far as case law of Ram Singh and others(supra) referred by 
the learned AR for the workman is concerned, it stated that control by employer is only one factor to determine 
relation between employers and employees along with many other interrelated factors. 


8. Undoubtedly, in Tribunal cases, has to be decided on the basis of the preponderance of probability and not 
the proof beyond reasonable doubt. So far as this case is concerned, there is no documentary evidence on record to 
prove the factum of direct employment of workman with the management. In any way nothing is on record with 
respect of the payment of salary, attendance register or work done by the claimant/workman during the course of 
alleged employment with the management. There is nothing mentioned in the claim petition as well as affidavit of the 
workman that who was the person-concerned by which he was directly engaged in the respondent-management of 
Garrison Engineer, Chandimandir. I am of the considered opinion that mere saying that he was employed by the 
Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and was appointed as Mazdoor which is clearly not proved by the workman. 
Thus, it may be observed that there is nothing conclusive either oral or documentary to prove that it was principal- 
employer Garrison Engineer, Chandimandir who controls and supervise the work of the workman. Workman Gulshan 
Ali has examined four witnesses WW2 Mohd. Aslam, WW3 Raman Kumar, WW4 Mohd. Yamin and WWS5 Anil 
Kumar, their testimonies are of similar nature as that of workman. They were engaged through contractor. No 
appointment letter was issued to them. They have no documentary proof to show that they were paid by the 
management. They do not have any termination letter issued by the management. They do not have any proof to show 
that the management has released the vacancy on regular basis. They are also daily wager like the workman and as 
such, their statements are also of no use to prove the case of workman. 


9. So far as the question pertaining to the non-compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the ID Act is 
concerned. It is not disputed that management has neither issued any show cause notice nor given any compensation 
in lieu of notice as is envisaged under Section 25-F of the ID Act. Learned counsel of management contended that 
workman in fact was not the employee of the establishment as such, neither he is terminated by the management nor 
such notice and compliance of Section 25-F of Act is required by the establishment. In this connection, learned 
counsel of management has placed reliance in case of Municipal Corporation, Faridabad 75. Siri_Niwas, 
Appeal(Civil) १५०. 7657 of 2002, decided on 06.09.2004, Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. Vs. State of 
Rajasthan & Anr. Civil Appeal No.5969 od 2004, decided on 73.09 2004 as well as State of Rajasthan, Manager 
RBI Bangalore Vs. S. Mani & Ors. Civil Appeal १०.6306-6376 of 2003 decided on /4.03, 2005. Learned counsel of 
workman contended that workman is rendering his services with management for so many years and he had 
completed 240 days in the year 7.8.20I5 before termination by the management. As per pleading of the workman he 
was terminated from 7.8.20l5 without compliance of Section 25-F of the ID Act. It is pertinent to mention that 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4385 


pleadings required specific averments with respect to the facts alleged in it. It is not specifically pleaded that 
workman was retrenched/terminated by management in preceding year i.e. on 7.8.20l5 even he had rendered 240 
days of service in the management. Thus, there is no specific pleading with respect to the working of 240 days in 
preceding year of the alleged termination. In the affidavit even there is no mention that the workman has worked for 
240 days in the preceding year i.e. on 7.8.205. Thus, this is a general assertion for rendering services with the 
management rather specific averments with respect to the 240 days in the preceding year before the termination. Thus, 
claim petition as well as affidavit filed by the workman is not very specific with respect to 240 days working in the 
establishment. In the light of the specific denial by the management for rendering services with the management, 
burden lies on the workman to prove this fact. The workman has failed to prove it. Thus, there is no necessity of 
issuing any show cause notice to the workman. 


20. The claimant/workman has also claimed in his claim petition as well as in his affidavit and even in his cross- 
examination that Junior Engineer had given oral assurance for regularization in the department. In this regard, it is 
pertinent to mention here that he cannot have been regularized in the department as in those cases where the case fall 
under the definition of industrial dispute as mentioned under Section 2(k) of the ID Act only then regularization can 
be made. Section 2(k) of the ID Act defines “industrial dispute”, which reads as under: 


“2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- 
XXX XxX 


(k) “industrial dispute” means any dispute or difference between employers and employers, or between employers 
and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the employment or non-employment or 
the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour, of any person;” 


And ID Act was amended adding Section 2A making individual dispute of a workman as an industrial 
dispute, if the dispute is related to dismissal, discharge, retrenchment or termination of individual workmen. Thus, 
Section 2A carves an exception to the definition of individual dispute as given in Section 2(k) of the ID Act. Thus, in 
order to give jurisdiction to the appropriate government to refer the dispute to the Tribunal/Labour Court, it was 
essential for the workman to show that his individual dispute for regularization was sponsored or espoused by the 
union of the workmen. The five Bench of the Apex Court in the case of Workmen of Dharampal_Premchand 
(Saughandhi) Vs. Dharampal Premchand (Saughandhi), Civil Appeal १०.532//963, decided on 76. 03. /965, has 


support the above view. 


2I. The Hon’ble Karnatana High Court in the case titled as Prakash_and_ Ors. Vs. Superintending 
Engineer(Electrical), O and _M_ Circle, Belgaum_and_ Ors., Writ Petition ५०६७.४/7242-75207999, decided का 


3I.03.2000, has taken a view that the individual workman cannot raise a dispute with regard to absorption and 
regularization. 


22. The Delhi High Court in the case of Management of Hotel Samrat and Ors. Vs. Government of NCT and 


Ors., Writ Petition(C) No.6247 & 6682/2002, decided on 0४.७7. 2002, has taken a similar view that in order to be an 
industrial dispute, it has to satisfy the definition of Section 2(k) of the ID Act. 


23. In view of the above discussion, this Tribunal is of the firm view that there is no merit in the case and the 
same is liable to be dismissed. 


24. Let copy of the award be sent to the Central Government for publication as required under Section |7(]) of 
the Act. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 7889.—siteifire विवाद अधिनियम i947 (947 का 44 ) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
गैरीसन इंजीनियर (उपयोगिता), सैन्य इंजीनियरिंग सेवाएँ पंचकुला (एचआर) के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो 
के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, चंडीगढ़- के पंचाट 
(23/206) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[फा. FH. Vot-2025/0/2024- आई आर (4-II)-26] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


4386 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 30th September, 2024 


S.O. 889.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.23/20l6) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Chandigarh-]T_ as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of _Garrison Engineer 
(Utility), Militray Engineering Service,Panchkula (HR) and their workmen. 


[F. No. L-2025/0/2024- IR (B-I)-26] 


SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh. 
Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 
ID No.23/20I6 
Registered on:-6.06.206 


Sh. Mohd. Aslam S/o Sh. Sarwar Khan, R/o H.No.543, Village Rampursuri, Mahadev Colony, BCW Surajpur, Tehsil 
Kalka, District Panchkula(HR). 


<aagundes Workman 
Versus 
Garrison Engineer(Utility), Military Engineering Services, Chandimandir, District Panchkula(HR). 
Respondent/Management 
AWARD 
Passed on:-06.03.2024 


l. The workman Mohd. Aslam has filed the present claim petition under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947(hereinafter called as “Act’) with the averment that he was interviewed and selected and recommended to be 
appointed as Mazdoor by a Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and was appointed as such in April 2002. After 
due Police Verification, he was allowed to join on 7.5.2002. His working hours were from 8 am to 5 pm daily with a 
break of one hour for lunch. He was employed as Plumber w.e.f. .!.2009. It was usual practice in G.E.(U), 
Chandimandir that initially civilian employees are appointed on temporary basis, paid less that the prescribed rates, 
performance used to be observed and only then regularized on the job after having observed the performance of 
duties, work, conduct etc. for about one year. He was also assured at the time of his initial appointment/joining that he 
would be regularized as and when vacancies are sanctioned and notified in future on a regular scales of pay. He was 
being paid only Rs.50/- per day which was much less as prescribed under the Minimum Wages Act by the 
Government and whenever he made a demand for minimum wages/more pay he was threatened with termination of 
his employment and even threatened that he would not be regularized. His pay was increased from Rs.500/- in the 
year 2002 to Rs.6000/- per month in 205. He was discharging his duties sincerely and honestly. The management did 
not take any steps to regularize his services despite the fact that the regular posts of Mazdoor or Plumber, later on of 
Mates as well as Plumbers were existing and were vacant. The respondent/ management used the policy of hire and 
fire and as on date there are !0-l5 Plumbers but still some vacancies are lying vacant. He made representations to the 
G.E.(U), Chandimandir through J.E. and A.G.E. concerned many times to enhance the wages and regularize his 
services as per the promise given at the time of his joining but every time rather than taking any action on the requests 
made he met with threat of termination of service. All his requests fell on the deaf ears. His services were terminated 
on 7.8.20I5 without any notice of termination and without any compensation in lieu thereof. On 7.8.20I5 he received 
one sentence verbal order that his services are terminated and he need not to come on duty w.e.f. 8.8.20I5 by Sh. B.K. 
Sharma, A.G.E. a subordinate of G.E.(U), Chandimandir. He was also not given the salary for the month of August 
205. The respondent-management falls under the definition of Industry and he is the workman under the definition 
of Industrial Disputes Act. There was no compliance of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act neither any notice 
or any pay/wages in lieu thereof was given nor any retrenchment compensation was paid. The juniors were retained in 
service and he was terminated from service which is violation of Section 25-G of the ID Act. He demand 
Rs.2,77,520/- towards back wages along with interest @!2% and reinstatement in service. 


2. Respondent/management has filed its written statement, alleging therein that there are two types of 
employees i.e. Combatants and Civilians and not Civilian(Contractual). Daily wagers are employed through 
contractors and they are not the employees of the management. It is denied that workman was interviewed and 
selected and appointed as Mazdoor by Selection Committee. The workman was never employed by the management 
so the question of termination of services without any notice and any compensation does not arise. The management 
does not fall under the definition of Industry as the office of the management is under the control and administration 
of Ministry of Defence and the same being under the Central Government of India, the question of falling the 


[भाग —ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4387 


management under the definition of Industry does not arise. The management has not violated the provisions of 
Section 25-F of the ID Act. Since the workman was never worked with the management, the question of payment of 
money in lieu of three months notice does not arise. Therefore, the present claim statement is liable to be dismissed 
being devoid of merits in the interest of justice. 


3 The workman filed replication to the written statement filed by the management, alleging therein that he was 
employed and worked as Mazdoor/Plumber for the management from 7.5.2002 to 8.8.20I5 and was paid Rs.50/- per 
day from the day of joining which was revised from time to time and was being paid Rs.6000/- when his services 
were terminated in the month of August, 205. He was not paid for the period from I.8.20I5 to 8.8.20I5. No money 
in lieu of three months notice was paid to him. 


4. It is pertinent to mention here that the management was proceeded ex parte on 6..206 and the 
management has filed an application for setting aside the ex parte order dated 6..206 to which reply was filed by 
the workman and the ex parte order dated l6.!.20l6 passed against the management was set aside by my Ld. 
Predecessor on the payment of cost of Rs.300/- on 3.05.207. 


5. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 


6. The workman has examined himself as WW! and filed his affidavit in evidence as +5.४४७॥/७ along with 
documents i.e. Temporary Pass and work order slips(colly) and has been cross-examined by the learned counsel of 
management. The workman has also examined WW2 Raman Kumar, who filed his affidavit in evidence as 
Ex.WW2/A, WW3 Anil Kumar who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW3/A, WW4 Gulshan Ali who filed his 
affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW4/A and WWS5 Mohd. Yamin @ Geja who filed his affidavit in evidence as 
Ex.WWS5S/A and were cross-examined by the learned counsel of management. 


7. The management has examined ७७४] Sh. Ashish Yadav, working as AGE E/M-II in the office of Garrison 
Engineer(Utility) Chandimandir, who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.MWI/A and has been cross-examined by 
the learned AR of workman. 


8. The workman filed written arguments, alleging therein that there are three types of employees i.e. 
Combatants, Civilian(Regular) and Civilian(Contractual) apart from daily wagers employed through contractors. 
There were about 250-260 civilian employees(regular as well as contractual) working under GE(U) Chandimandir. He 
was interviewed, selected and recommended to be appointed as Mazdoor by a Selection Committee constituted by 
G.E. and was appointed as such in April 2002 after due police verification and was allowed to join on 7.5.2002 from 8 
am to |7 pm daily with a break of one hour for lunch. The workman was employed as Plumber w.e.f. ..2009. The 
workman was assured at the time of initial appointment/joining that he would be regularized as and when vacancies 
are sanctioned and notified in future on a regular scales of pay. The workman discharging his duties sincerely and 
honestly and his superiors never had any occasion to point out or having been found wanting. He had to work under 
strict military discipline in that when he used to enter/exit in/out of the Cantonment his Pass/I-card used to be checked 
and J.E. used to take daily attendance with time and date. Earlier Pass/I-Card used to made and issued by AGE and 
later on it was used to be issued by Station Headquarters, Chandimandir. Management was taking work for nine hours 
a day(including one hour break) from workman but was neither paying the minimum wages prescribed and notified 
from time to time by the Govt. nor any weekly holidays, any type of casual leave or earned leave was being given. 
The workman filed his affidavit in evidence and similarly four more witnesses were examined and cross-examined. 
All the witnesses have supported the version that there were three types of employees viz. Combatants, 
Civilian(Regular) and Civilian(Contractual) apart from daily wagers employed through Contractors and there were 
about 250-260 civilian employees working under GE(U) Chandimandir. Lone witness of the management is Assistant 
Garrison Engineer(AGE) who though posted on the incumbent post only December 207 i.e. much after the period of 
workman’s employment with management from 7.5.2002 to 7.8.20I5 but claims to be in full knowledge of the case 
and hence competent to depose. He denied of having any contractual employee like workman because management 
gives all maintenance works to Contractor and do not deal directly with contractual employees. The names of the 
contractors who were awarded such contract from 2002 to 20l5 not given by the management and their date of 
contract/agreement, tenure of agreement, terms and conditions of agreement liability default or otherwise are not 
given. Assuming for the sake of argument that workman was employee of contractor as to how come same contractor 
continued from 7.5.2002 to 8.8.205. It is a settled principle of law that if the facts are not specifically pleaded nor 
denied in the pleadings are deem to be admitted facts and there is no question of its proof by oral or documentary 
evidence nor any such documentary or otherwise evidence is placed on the record. The workman has placed on record 
the complaint slips which are more than 30 in number for the period from 2007 to 20ll, which belongs to the 
respondent-management having Docket Machine Numbers duly singed by the incumbent Junior Engineers(E/M) at 
the relevant time. By these signed slips, works/daily duties used to be assigned to the workman giving details of the 
nature of complaint, building number and location, individual tradesman detailed for the job and were required to be 
deposited back in the Service Centre on completion of job. These complaint slips conclusively prove that the 
workman was the employee of the management and the works/duties used to be allotted was supervised and 
monitored by JR(E/M) of the management. The workman has placed reliance to the judgment titled as Ram Singh 
and others Vs. Union Territory Chandigarh and others, Civil Appeal 0०.3766/2002, decided on 02./7.2003 which 


4368 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


deals with the relationship between employer and employee/master and servant and forum for deciding nature of 
employment of workman with establishment and contractors. 


9. The management filed written arguments, alleging therein that there are two types of employees i.e. 
Combatants and Civilians and not Civilian(Contractual). The daily wagers are employed through contractors and thus, 
they are not the employees of the management. The workman was never appointed by the management and thus, no 
payment has ever been made to the defence accounts and the workman should be asked to prove the same with cogent 
evidence. The workman requested for experience certificate with a request that he can work with any other 
contract/contractor and accordingly the experience certificate was issued with specific work that on contractual basis 
that means they are working under contractors and they were paid by the different contractors. The MES was issuing 
temporary entry passes for workers of contractors as well as to the dependents of MES employees. Dut to security, 
this practice was stopped by Station HW and direction was issued that security passes shall be issued by Station HQ 
and police verification was also the requirement of Station HQ. CMP persons started checking all the persons 
including deployed by the contractors on installations. Therefore, to overcome the problem, all the persons were 
asked to given an application so that it can be forwarded to the respective police verification. The present claim 
petition filed by the workman is liable to be dismissed in the interest of justice. 


0. I have heard learned counsels for the parties and have gone through the entire evidence placed on file by the 
parties as well as written arguments. 


Il. It is added here, it is the case of the workman that it was usual practice in respondent-management that 
initially civilian employees are employed on temporary basis and paid less than the prescribed rates and after 
observing the performance, the workman are regularized on job after one year. The workman was paid Rs.50/- per 
day. Thus, the workman claims himself to be appointed on temporary daily wages. The first question is required to be 
determined is whether the claimant is a workman even if he was appointed on temporary daily wages and was 
drawing Rs.50/- per day. To my mind, the claimant is a workman within the definition of Section 2(S). In this regard, 
reference can be made to the decision in the case of Devinder Singh Vs. Municipal Council, Sanaur, AIR 2077 
Supreme Court 2532, wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court while interpreting the provisions of Section 2(S) of the Act 
which deals with the definition of “workman” has observed as under :- 


“The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions of employment contract of 
service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of payment are not at all relevant for deciding whether or not a 
person is a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act. The definition of workman also does not make 
any distinction between full time and part time employee or a person appointed on contract basis. There is nothing 
in the plain language of Section 2(s) from which it can be inferred that only person employed on regular basis or a 
person employed for doing whole time job is a workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract 
basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman.” 


It is clear from the perusal of aforesaid observations that even if a person is engaged on temporary, part time or 
contract basis or for doing any other kind of work and is duly paid wages for the said work, in that eventuality such a 
person would be covered by the definition of “workman” as provided in Section 2(S) of the Act. Thus, nature of 
appointment or source of appointment is not relevant to be a “workman” within the Industrial Disputes Act, 947. 


2. The real controversy lies between the parties with respect to the relationship of workman with management. 
The issue as to whether the workman was engaged by the employer/management directly or through contractors is the 
bone of contention between the parties. There is no dispute about preposition of law that onus to prove that claimant 
was in the employment of management is always on the workman/claimant and it is for the workman to adduce 
evidence to prove factum of his employment with the management. Such evidence may be in form of receipt of salary 
or wages for 240 days or record of their appointment or engagement for that period to show that he had worked with 
the respondent-management for 240 days or more in a calendar year. In this regard, reference may be made to 
judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of Batala Coop. Sugar Mills Ltd. Vs. Sowaran Singh, (2005) 8 


Supreme Court Cases 4867 as _well_as Director Fisheries terminated Division Vs. Bhikubhai_Meghajibhai 
७476०(20/2)2 I SCC 47. 


3. Question remains to be seen whether claimant/workman Mohd. Aslam has proved that he was directly engaged 
by the management on 7.5.2002 and served till his termination on 7.8.20l5. This fact has to be proved by the 
documentary evidence as well as oral evidence. At the very outset, it may be mentioned that there is no single reliable 
document to prove that workman/claimant was directly employed by the management. In this connection, workman 
Mohd. Aslam has accepted that neither any appointment letter nor any termination letter was issued by the 
respondent-management. Undoubtedly, witness examined by the respondent-management namely Ashish Yadav, 
AGE E/M-I, Garrison Engineer(Utility) Chandimandir has categorically stated in his evidence that the 
claimant/workman was not employed by the management as such, neither notice nor retrenchment compensation was 
given by management. 


[भाग —ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4389 


4. The Hon’ble Supreme Court after analysing the catena of cases has laid down in Balwant Raj Saluja Vs. Air 
India Limited in Civil Appeal १०, 70266 dated 25.06, 20/4, two well recognised tests to find out whether the labours 
are the contract employees of the principal employer as follows:- 


) Whether the principal employer pays the salary instead of contractor and 
2) Whether the principal employer controls and supervise the work of the employees? 


The facts regarding the payment of salary by the management or contractor has not been specifically stated 
in the claim petition of the workman. In fact, claim petition is totally silent regarding the payment of wages, salary, 
letter of appointment or anything likewise. Similarly, workman has not mentioned anything regarding the mode of 
payment of wages, salaries etc. in his affidavit. Thus, this basic features for holding the relationship of employer and 
employee is totally lacking not in the pleading but also in the evidence submitted by the workman. 


5. ७५४] Mohd. Aslam has stated in his cross-examination that he was paid salary by the JE of the Department in 
cash and signatures were obtained in a register. Salary slip was not issued to the workman. It appears that workman 
has taken the above plea just to cover up his case that he was employed by the respondent-management. Actually the 
workman was not employed by the respondent-management as it is his case that he was interviewed, selected and 
recommended as Mazdoor by a Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and joined as such on 7.5.2002. His police 
verification was also done. The said statement of him also seemed to be afterthought because had he been 
interviewed, selected and recommended to be appointed as Mazdoor. He could have summoned the documents from 
the respondent-management by filing an application but he has not summoned the documents which clearly shows 
that he was not getting any wages from the respondent-management nor he was appointed by the respondent- 
management. 


6. Secondly, so far as the question of controls and supervision is concerned. Workman has categorically stated 
that his work was controlled and supervised by the officials of the management. To this effect, he has placed on 
record the temporary entry pass and complaint slips. Except this, nothing is brought on record to prove that it is 
management who were supervising and controlling the work of claimant/workman. The apex court while explaining 
the factor of supervision and control in the case of International Airport Authority of India vs. International Air 


Cargo Workers Union [209 (/३3) SCC374] has held as follows:- 


“If the contract is for supply of labour, necessarily, the labour supplied by the contractor will work under the 
directions, supervision and control of the principal employer but that would not make the worker a direct employee 
of the principal employer, if the salary is paid by contractor, if the right to regulate employment is with the 
contractor, and the ultimate supervision and control lies with the contractor. 


The principal employer only controls and directs the work to be done by a contract labour, when such labour is 
assigned/allotted/sent to him. But it is the contractor as employer, who chooses whether the worker is to be 
assigned/allotted to the principal employer or used otherwise. In short, worker being the employee of the 
contractor, the ultimate supervision and control lies with the contractor as he decides whether the employee will 
work and how long he will work and subject to what conditions. Only when the contractor assigns/sends the 
worker to work under the principal employer, the worker works under the supervision and control of the principal 
employer but that is secondary control. The primary control is with the contractor.” 


7. Thus, the principal enunciated by the Hon’ble Supreme Court clearly establishes that mere supervision of work 
is not sufficient to prove the relationship of employer and employee till it is proved that there was a complete control 
and supervision. The management control includes the authority of dismissal, taking of disciplinary action and 
continuity of service etc. Claim petition filed by the claimant/workman is mum on this score and workman has not 
mentioned any specific averment in his affidavit regarding the appointment, authority of dismissal or taking of 
disciplinary action by the management. There is nothing on record to prove that it is the management who grant the 
leave or has authority to take any disciplinary action. In my considered opinion, mere saying of supervision regarding 
the execution of the work as alleged by the witness may not be called effective and absolute control. Such control is 
being emphasized to control the work of the management for a specific work in efficient manner done by the 
management in the establishment. So far as the photocopies of complaint slips placed on record by the workman are 
concerned, they have also not been proved by calling the concerned official from the respondent-management. 
Moreover, from these slips and entry pass, it cannot be said that workman was working under the control and 
supervision of the respondent-management. So far as the case law Ram Singh and other(supra) referred by the 
learned AR for the workman is concerned, it stated that control by employer is only one factor to determine relation 
between employers and employees along with many other interrelated factors. 


8. Undoubtedly, in Tribunal cases, has to be decided on the basis of the preponderance of probability and not 
the proof beyond reasonable doubt. So far as this case is concerned, there is no documentary evidence on record to 
prove the factum of direct employment of workman with the management. In any way nothing is on record with 
respect of the payment of salary, attendance register or work done by the claimant/workman during the course of 
alleged employment with the management. There is nothing mentioned in the claim petition as well as affidavit of the 


4390 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


workman that who was the person-concerned by which he was directly engaged in the respondent-management of 
Garrison Engineer, Chandimandir. I am of the considered opinion that mere saying that he was employed by the 
Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and was appointed as Mazdoor which is clearly not proved by the workman. 
Thus, it may be observed that there is nothing conclusive either oral or documentary to prove that it was principal- 
employer Garrison Engineer, Chandimandir who controls and supervise the work of the workman. Workman Mohd. 
Aslam has examined four witnesses WW2 Raman Kumar, WW3 Anil Kumar, WW4 Gulshan Ali and WWS5 Mohd. 
Yamin, their testimonies are of similar nature as that of workman. They all had also stated that salary was paid to 
them also by the J.E. of the department in cash. They had also admitted that there was no advertisement at the time of 
their joining. They had not submitted any form or application for the job. There was no call letter for joining the 
service. They are also daily wager like the workman and as such, their statements are also of no use to prove the case 
of workman. 


9. So far as the question pertaining to the non-compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the ID Act is 
concerned. It is not disputed that management has neither issued any show cause notice nor given any compensation 
in lieu of notice as is envisaged under Section 25-F of the ID Act. Learned counsel of the management contended that 
workman in fact was not the employee of the establishment as such, neither he is terminated by the management nor 
such notice and compliance of Section 25-F of the Act is required by the establishment. In this connection, learned 
counsel of the management has placed reliance in the case of Municipal Corporation, Faridabad Vs. Siri_ Niwas, 
Appeal(Civil) १५०. 7657 of 2002, decided on 06.09.2004, Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. Vs. State of 
Rajasthan & Anr. Civil Appeal No.5969 od 2004, decided on 73.09 2004 as well as State of Rajasthan, Manager 
RBI Bangalore Vs. S. Mani & Ors. Civil Appeal १०.6306-6376 of 2003 decided on ॥4.03. 2005. Learned counsel of 
the workman contended that workman is rendering his services with the management for so many years and he had 
completed 240 days in the year 7.8.20I5 before termination by the management. As per pleading of the workman he 
was terminated from 7.8.20l5 without compliance of Section 25-F of the ID Act. It is pertinent to mention that 
pleadings required specific averments with respect to the facts alleged in it. It is not specifically pleaded that 
workman was retrenched/terminated by the management in preceding year i.e. on 7.8.20I5 even he had rendered 240 
days of service in the management. Thus, there is no specific pleading with respect to the working of 240 days in 
preceding year of the alleged termination. In the affidavit even there is no mention that the workman has worked for 
240 days in the preceding year i.e. on 7.8.205. Thus, this is a general assertion for rendering services with the 
management rather specific averments with respect to the 240 days in the preceding year before the termination. Thus, 
claim petition as well as affidavit filed by the workman is not very specific with respect to 240 days working in the 
establishment. In the light of the specific denial by the management for rendering services with the management, 
burden lies on the workman to prove this fact. The workman has failed to prove it. Thus, there is no necessity of 
issuing any show cause notice to the workman. 


20. The claimant/workman has also claimed in his claim petition as well as in his affidavit and even in his cross- 
examination that Junior Engineer had given oral assurance for regularization in the department. In this regard, it is 
pertinent to mention here that he cannot have been regularized in the department as in those cases where the case fall 
under the definition of industrial dispute as mentioned under Section 2(k) of the ID Act only then regularization can 
be made. Section 2(k) of the ID Act defines “industrial dispute”, which reads as under: 


“2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- 
XXX XxX 


(k) “industrial dispute” means any dispute or difference between employers and employers, or between employers 
and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the employment or non-employment or 
the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour, of any person;” 


And ID Act was amended adding Section 2A making individual dispute of a workman as an industrial 
dispute, if the dispute is related to dismissal, discharge, retrenchment or termination of individual workmen. Thus, 
Section 2A carves an exception to the definition of individual dispute as given in Section 2(k) of the ID Act. Thus, in 
order to give jurisdiction to the appropriate government to refer the dispute to the Tribunal/Labour Court, it was 
essential for the workman to show that his individual dispute for regularization was sponsored or espoused by the 
union of the workmen. The five Bench of the Apex Court in the case of Workmen_of Dharampal_Premchand 
(Saughandhi) Vs. Dharampal Premchand (Saughandhi), Civil Appeal ५७०.532//963, decided on 76.03. /965, has 


also support the above view. 


2I. The Hon’ble Karnatana High Court in the case titled as Prakash_and_ Ors. Vs. Superintending 
Engineer(Electrical), O and _M_ Circle, Belgaum_and_ Ors., Writ Petition /५०६७६.477242-75207999, decided का 


3I.03.2000, has taken a view that the individual workman cannot raise a dispute with regard to absorption and 
regularization. 


22. The Delhi High Court in the case of Management of Hotel Samrat and Ors. Vs. Government of NCT and 


Ors., Writ Petition(C) No.6247 & 6682/2002, decided on 04.07.2002, has taken a similar view that in order to be an 
industrial dispute, it has to satisfy the definition of Section 2(k) of the ID Act. 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 439] 


23. In view of the above discussion, this Tribunal is of the firm view that there is no merit in the case and the 
same is liable to be dismissed. 


24. Let copy of the award be sent to the Central Government for publication as required under Section I7(l) of 
the Act. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 7890.— siete विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44 ) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
गैरीसन इंजीनियर (उपयोगिता), सैन्य इंजीनियरिंग सेवाएँ पंचकुला (एचआर) के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो 
के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण श्रम न्यायालय, ATs के पंचाट 
(24/206) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[फा. सं. Tet-2025/0/2024- आई आर (बी-ा)-27] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 30th September, 2024 


S.O. 890.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.24/206) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Chandigarh-II_ as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of _Garrison 
Engineer ( Utility), Militray Engineering Service,Panchkula (HR) and their workmen. 


[F. No. L-2025/0/2024- IR (B-)-27] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 
In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh. 
Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 
ID No.24/206 
Registered on:-6.06.206 


Sh. Mohd. Yamin Geja S/o Sh. Sarwar Khan, R/o H.No.543, Village Rampursuri, Mahadev Colony, BCW Surajpur, 
Tehsil Kalka, District Panchkula(HR). 


हक Workman 
Versus 
Garrison Engineer(Utility), Military Engineering Services, Chandimandir, District Panchkula(HR). 
.Respondent/Management 
Award 
Passed on:-06.03.2024 


l. The workman Mohd. Yamin @Geja has filed the present claim petition under Section 2-A of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947(hereinafter called as ‘Act’) with the averment that he was interviewed and selected and 
recommended to be appointed as Mazdoor by a Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and was appointed as such 
in May 2000. After due Police Verification, he was allowed to join on |.5.2000. His working hours were from 8 am to 
5 pm daily with a break of one hour for lunch. It was usual practice in G.E.(U), Chandimandir that initially civilian 
employees are appointed on temporary basis, paid less that the prescribed rates, performance used to be observed and 
only then regularized on the job after having observed the performance of duties, work, conduct etc. for about one 
year. He was also assured at the time of his initial appointment/joining that he would be regularized as and when 
vacancies are sanctioned and notified in future on a regular scales of pay. He was being paid only Rs.50/- per day 
which was much less as prescribed under the Minimum Wages Act by the Government and whenever he made a 
demand for minimum wages/more pay he was threatened with termination of his employment and even threatened 


4392 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


that he would not be regularized. His pay was increased from Rs.500/- in 2000 to Rs.6000/- per month in 20I5. He 
was discharging his duties sincerely and honestly. The management did not take any steps to regularize his service 
despite of the fact that the regular posts of Mazdoor, later on of Mates as well as Plumbers were existing and were 
vacant. The respondent/ management used the policy of hire and fire and as on date there are 90-95 Mates but still 
some vacancies are lying vacant. He made representations to the G.E.(U), Chandimandir through J.E. and A.G.E. 
concerned many times to enhance the wages and regularize his services as per the promise given at the time of his 
joining but every time rather than taking any action on the requests made he met with threat of termination of service. 
All his requests fell on the deaf ears. His services were terminated on 7.8.205 without any notice of termination and 
without any compensation in lieu thereof. On 7.8.20I5 he received one sentence verbal order that his services are 
terminated and he need not to come on duty w.e.f. 8.8.20I5 by Sh. V.K. Sharma, A.G.E. a subordinate of G.E.(U), 
Chandimandir. He was also not given the salary for the month of August 205. The respondent-management falls 
under the definition of Industry and he is the workman under the definition of Industrial Disputes Act. There was no 
compliance of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act neither any notice or any pay/wages in lieu thereof was 
given nor any retrenchment compensation was paid. The juniors were retained in service and he was terminated from 
service which is violation of Section 25-G of the ID Act. He demand Rs.3,00,55/- towards back wages along with 
interest @|2% and reinstatement in service. 


2. Respondent/management has filed its written statement, alleging therein that there are two types of 
employees i.e. Combatants and Civilians and not Civilian(Contractual). Daily wagers are employed through 
contractors and they are not the employees of the management. It is denied that workman was interviewed and 
selected and appointed as Mazdoor by Selection Committee. The workman was never employed by the management 
so the question of termination of services without any notice and any compensation does not arise. The management 
does not fall under the definition of Industry as the office of the management is under the control and administration 
of Ministry of Defence and the same being under the Central Government of India, the question of falling the 
management under the definition of Industry does not arise. The management has not violated the provisions of 
Section 25-F of the ID Act. Since the workman was never worked with the management, the question of payment of 
money in lieu of three months notice does not arise. Therefore, the present claim statement is liable to be dismissed 
being devoid of merits in the interest of justice. 


3. The workman filed replication, reiterating the same facts as alleged in the claim statement hence need not to 
be repeated again. 


4. It is pertinent to mention here that the management was proceeded ex parte on 6..20l6 and the 
management has filed an application for setting aside the ex parte order dated 6..206 to which reply was filed by 
the workman and the ex parte order dated 6..20l6 passed against the management was set aside by my Ld. 
Predecessor on the payment of cost of Rs.300/- on 3.05.207. 


5. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 


6. The workman has examined himself as ४४७] and filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WWI/A along with 
documents i.e. Temporary Pass and work order slip(colly) and has been cross-examined by the learned counsel of 
management. The workman has also examined WW2 Sh. Anil Kumar, who filed his affidavit in evidence as 
Ex.WW2/A, WW3 Raman Kumar who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW3/A, WW4 Gulshan Ali who filed his 
affidavit in evidence as Ex.WW4/A and WWS Mohd. Aslam who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WWS5/A and 
were cross-examined by the learned counsel of management. 


v2 The management has examined ७७४] Sh. Ashish Yadav, working as AGE E/M-II in the office of Garrison 
Engineer(Utility) Chandimandir, who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.MWI/A and has been cross-examined by 
the learned AR of workman. 


8. The workman filed written arguments, alleging therein that there are three types of employees Le. 
Combatants, Civilian(Regular) and Civilian(Contractual) apart from daily wagers employed through contractors. 
There were about 250-260 civilian employees(regular as well as contractual) working under GE(U) Chandimandir. He 
was interviewed, selected and recommended to be appointed as Mazdoor by a Selection Committee constituted by 
G.E. and was appointed as such in 2000 after due police verification and was allowed to join on .5.2000 from 8 am 
to 7 pm daily with a break of one hour for lunch. The workman was employed as Plumber w.e.f. |.l.2009. The 
workman was assured at the time of initial appointment/joining that he would be regularized as and when vacancies 
are sanctioned and notified in future on a regular scales of pay. The workman discharging his duties sincerely and 
honestly and his superiors never had any occasion to point out or having been found wanting. He had to work under 
strict military discipline in that when he used to enter/exit in/out of the Cantonment his Pass/I-card used to be checked 
and J.E. used to take daily attendance with time and date. Earlier Pass/I-Card used to made and issued by AGE and 
later on it was used to be issued by Station Headquarters, Chandimandir. Management was taking work for nine hours 
a day(including one hour break) from workman but was neither paying the minimum wages prescribed and notified 
from time to time by the Govt. nor any weekly holidays, any type of casual leave or earned leave was being given. 
The workman filed his affidavit in evidence and similarly four more witnesses were examined and cross-examined. 
All the witnesses have supported the version that there were three types of employees viz. Combatants, 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4393 


Civilian(Regular) and Civilian(Contractual) apart from daily wagers employed through Contractors and there were 
about 250-260 civilian employees working under GE(U) Chandimandir. Lone witness of the management is Assistant 
Garrison Engineer(AGE) who though posted on the incumbent post only December 20!7 i.e. much after the period of 
workman’s employment with management from |.5.2000 to 7.8.20l5 but claims to be in full knowledge of the case 
and hence competent to deposit. He denied of having any contractual employee like workman because management 
gives all maintenance works to Contractor and do not deal directly with contractual employees. The names of the 
contractors who were awarded such contract from 2002 to 20l5 not given by the management and their date of 
contract/agreement, tenure of agreement, terms and conditions of agreement liability default or otherwise are not 
given. Assuming for the sake of argument that workman was employee of contractor as to how come same contractor 
continued from more than thirteen years from 7.5.2002 to 8.8.20I5. It is a settled principle of law that if the facts are 
not specifically pleaded nor denied in pleadings are deem to be admitted facts and there is no question of its proof by 
oral or documentary evidence nor any such documentary of otherwise evidence is placed on record. The workman has 
placed on record complaint slips which are more than 30 in number for the period from 2007 to 20l, which belongs 
to management having Docket Machine Numbers duly singed by the incumbent Junior Engineers(E/M) at the relevant 
time. By these signed slips, works/daily duties used to be assigned to the workman giving details of the nature of 
complaint, building number and location, individual tradesman detailed for the job and were required to be deposited 
back in the Service Centre on completion of job. These complaint slips conclusively prove that the workman was the 
employee of the management and the works/duties used to be allotted was supervised and monitored by JR(E/M) of 
the management. The workman has placed reliance to the judgment titled as Ram Singh and others Vs. Union 
Territory Chandigarh and others, Civil Appeal ५०.३३66/2002, which deals with the relationship between employer 
and employee/master and servant and forum for deciding nature of employment of workman with establishment and 
contractors. 


9. The management filed written arguments, alleging therein that there are two types of employees i.e. 
Combatants and Civilians and not Civilian(Contractual). The daily wagers are employed through contractors and thus, 
they are not the employees of the management. The workman was never appointed by the management and thus, no 
payment has ever been made to the defence accounts and the workman should be asked to prove the same with cogent 
evidence. The workman requested for experience certificate with a request that he can work with any other 
contract/contractor and accordingly the experience certificate was issued with specific work that on contractual basis 
that means they are working under contractors and they were paid by the different contractors. The MES was issuing 
temporary entry passes for workers of contractors as well as to the dependents of MES employees. Dut to security, 
this practice was stopped by Station HW and direction was issued that security passes shall be issued by Station HQ 
and police verification was also the requirement of Station HQ. CMP persons started checking all the persons 
including deployed by the contractors on installations. Therefore, to overcome the problem, all the persons were 
asked to give an application so that it can be forwarded to the respective police verification. The present claim petition 
filed by the workman is liable to be dismissed in the interest of justice. 


0. I have heard learned counsels for the parties and have gone through the entire evidence placed on file by the 
parties as well as written arguments. 


Il. It is added here, it is the case of the workman that it was usual practice in respondent-management that 
initially civilian employees are employed on temporary basis and paid less than the prescribed rates and after 
observing the performance, the workman are regularized on job after one year. He workman was paid Rs.50/- per day. 
Thus, the workman claims himself to be appointed on temporary daily wages. The first question is required to be 
determined is whether the claimant is a workman even if he was appointed on temporary daily wages and was 
drawing Rs.50/- per day. To my mind, the claimant is a workman within the definition of Section 2(S). In this regard, 
reference can be made to the decision in the case of Devinder Singh Vs. Municipal Council, Sanaur, AIR 2077 
Supreme Court 2532, wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court while interpreting the provisions of Section 2(S) of the Act 
which deals with the definition of “workman” has observed as under :- 


“The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions of employment contract of 
service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of payment are not at all relevant for deciding whether or not a 
person is a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act. The definition of workman also does not make 
any distinction between full time and part time employee or a person appointed on contract basis. There is nothing 
in the plain language of Section 2(s) from which it can be inferred that only person employed on regular basis or a 
person employed for doing whole time job is a workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract 
basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman.” 


It is clear from the perusal of aforesaid observations that even if a person is engaged on temporary, part time or 
contract basis or for doing any other kind of work and is duly paid wages for the said work, in that eventuality such a 
person would be covered by the definition of “workman” as provided in Section 2(S) of the Act. Thus, nature of 
appointment or source of appointment is not relevant to be a “workman” within the Industrial Disputes Act, |947. 


524 The real controversy lies between the parties with respect to the relationship of workman with management. 
The issue as to whether the workman was engaged by the employer/management directly or through contractors is the 


4394 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


bone of contention between the parties. There is no dispute about preposition of law that onus to prove that claimant 
was in the employment of management is always on the workman/claimant and it is for the workman to adduce 
evidence to prove factum of his employment with the management. Such evidence may be in form of receipt of salary 
or wages for 240 days or record of their appointment or engagement for that period to show that he had worked with 
the respondent-management for 240 days or more in a calendar year. In this regard, reference may be made to 
judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of Batala Coop. Sugar Mills Ltd. Vs. Sowaran Singh, (2005) 8 
Supreme Court Cases 467 as आशा! ०४ Director Fisheries terminated Division Vs. Bhikubhai_Meghajibhai 
७6272०८20/20/ I SCC 47. 


3. | Question remains to be seen whether claimant/workman Mohd. Yamin @Geja has proved that he was directly 
engaged by the management on |.5.2000 and served till his termination on 7.8.205. This fact has to be proved by the 
documentary evidence as well as oral evidence. At the very outset, it may be mentioned that there is no single reliable 
document to prove that workman/claimant was directly employed by the management. In this connection, workman 
Mohd. Yamin @Geja has accepted that neither any appointment letter nor any termination letter was issued by the 
respondent-management. Undoubtedly, witness examined by the respondent-management namely Ashish Yadav, 
AGE E/M-I, Garrison Engineer(Utility) Chandimandir has categorically stated in his evidence that the 
claimant/workman was not employed by the management as such, neither notice nor retrenchment compensation was 
given by management. 


4._ The Hon’ble Supreme Court after analysing the catena of cases has laid down in Balwant Raj Saluja Vs. Air 
India Limited in Civil Appeal 0०, 7/0266 dated 25.06. 20/4, two well recognised tests to find out whether the labours 
are the contract employees of the principal employer as follows:- 


l) Whether the principal employer pays the salary instead of contractor and 
2) Whether the principal employer controls and supervise the work of the employees? 


The facts regarding the payment of salary by the management or contractor has not been specifically stated in 
the claim petition of the workman. In fact, claim petition is totally silent regarding the payment of wages, salary, letter 
of appointment or anything likewise. Similarly, workman has not mentioned anything regarding the mode of payment 
of wages, salaries etc. in his affidavit. Thus, this basic features for holding the relationship of employer and employee 
is totally lacking not in the pleading but also in the evidence submitted by the workman. 


5. WWI Mohd. Yamin @Geja has stated in his cross-examination that he was paid salary by the JE of the 
Department in cash and signatures were obtained in a register. Salary slip was not issued to the workman. It appears 
that workman has taken the above plea just to cover up his case that he was employed by the respondent-management. 
Actually the workman was not employed by the respondent-management as it is his case that he was interviewed, 
selected and recommended as Mazdoor by a Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and joined as such on I.5.2000. 
His police verification was also done. The said statement of him also seemed to be afterthought because had he been 
interviewed, selected and recommended to be appointed as Mazdoor. He could have summoned the documents from 
the respondent-management by filing an application but he has not summoned the documents which clearly shows 
that he was not getting any wages from the respondent-management nor he was appointed by the respondent- 
management. 


6. Secondly, so far as the question of controls and supervision is concerned. Workman has categorically stated 
that his work was controlled and supervised by the officials of the management. To this effect, he has placed on 
record the temporary entry pass and complaint slips. Except this, nothing is brought on record to prove that it is 
management who were supervising and controlling the work of claimant/workman. The apex court while explaining 
the factor of supervision and control in the case of International Airport Authority of India vs. International Air 


Cargo Workers Union [209 (/३) SCC374] has held as follows:- 


“If the contract is for supply of labour, necessarily, the labour supplied by the contractor will work under the 
directions, supervision and control of the principal employer but that would not make the worker a direct employee 
of the principal employer, if the salary is paid by contractor, if the right to regulate employment is with the 
contractor, and the ultimate supervision and control lies with the contractor. 


The principal employer only controls and directs the work to be done by a contract labour, when such labour is 
assigned/allotted/sent to him. But it is the contractor as employer, who chooses whether the worker is to be 
assigned/allotted to the principal employer or used otherwise. In short, worker being the employee of the 
contractor, the ultimate supervision and control lies with the contractor as he decides whether the employee will 
work and how long he will work and subject to what conditions. Only when the contractor assigns/sends the 
worker to work under the principal employer, the worker works under the supervision and control of the principal 
employer but that is secondary control. The primary control is with the contractor.” 


7. Thus, the principal enunciated by the Hon’ble Supreme Court clearly establishes that mere supervision of work 
is not sufficient to prove the relationship of employer and employee till it is proved that there was a complete control 
and supervision. The management control includes the authority of dismissal, taking of disciplinary action and 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4395 


continuity of service etc. Claim petition filed by the claimant/workman is mum on this score and workman has not 
mentioned any specific averment in his affidavit regarding the appointment, authority of dismissal or taking of 
disciplinary action by the management. There is nothing on record to prove that it is the management who grant the 
leave or has authority to take any disciplinary action. In my considered opinion, mere saying of supervision regarding 
the execution of the work as alleged by the witness may not be called effective and absolute control. Such control is 
being emphasized to control the work of the management for a specific work in efficient manner done by the 
management in the establishment. So far as the photocopies of complaint slips and entry pass placed on record by the 
workman are concerned, they have also not been proved by calling the concerned official from the respondent- 
management. Moreover, from these slips and entry pass, it cannot be said that workman was working under the 
control and supervision of the respondent-management. So far as case law of Ram Singh and other(supra) referred 
by the learned AR for the workman is concerned, it stated that control by employers is only one factor to determine 
relation between employers and employees along with many other interrelated factors. 


8. Undoubtedly, in Tribunal cases, has to be decided on the basis of the preponderance of probability and not 
the proof beyond reasonable doubt. So far as this case is concerned, there is no documentary evidence on record to 
prove the factum of direct employment of workman with the management. In any way nothing is on record with 
respect of the payment of salary, attendance register or work done by the claimant/workman during the course of 
alleged employment with the management. There is nothing mentioned in the claim petition as well as affidavit of the 
workman that who was the person-concerned by which he was directly engaged in the respondent-management of 
Garrison Engineer, Chandimandir. I am of the considered opinion that mere saying that he was employed by the 
Selection Committee constituted by G.E. and was appointed as Mazdoor which is clearly not proved by the workman. 
Thus, it may be observed that there is nothing conclusive either oral or documentary to prove that it was principal- 
employer Garrison Engineer, Chandimandir who controls and supervise the work of the workman. Workman Mohd. 
Yamin @Geja has examined four witnesses WW2 Anil Kumar, WW3 Raman Kumar, WW4 Gulshan Ali and WW5 
Mohd. Aslam, their testimonies are of similar nature as that of workman. They all had also stated that salary was paid 
to them also by the J.E. of the department in cash. They had also admitted that there was no advertisement at the time 
of their joining. They had not submitted any form or application for the job. There was no call letter for joining the 
service. They are also daily wager like the workman and as such, their statements are also of no use to prove the case 
of workman. 


9. So far as the question pertaining to the non-compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the ID Act is 
concerned. It is not disputed that management has neither issued any show cause notice nor given any compensation 
in lieu of notice as is envisaged under Section 25-F of the ID Act. Learned counsel of the management contended that 
workman in fact was not the employee of the establishment as such, neither he is terminated by the management nor 
such notice and compliance of Section 25-F of the Act is required by the establishment. In this connection, learned 
counsel of the management has placed reliance in the case of Municipal Corporation, Faridabad Vs. Siri Niwas, 
Appeal(Civil) १५०. 7657 of 2002, decided on 06.09.2004, Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. Vs. State of 
Rajasthan & Anr. Civil Appeal No.5969 od 2004, decided on /3.09 2004 as well as State of Rajasthan, Manager 
RBI Bangalore Vs. S. Mani & Ors. Civil Appeal १०.6306-6376 of 2003 decided on ॥4.03. 2005. Learned counsel of 
the workman contended that workman is rendering his services with the management for so many years and he had 
completed 240 days in the year 7.8.20I5 before termination by the management. As per pleading of the workman he 
was terminated from 7.8.20l5 without compliance of Section 25-F of the ID Act. It is pertinent to mention that 
pleadings required specific averments with respect to the facts alleged in it. It is not specifically pleaded that 
workman was retrenched/terminated by the management in preceding year i.e. on 7.8.205 even he had rendered 240 
days of service in the management. Thus, there is no specific pleading with respect to the working of 240 days in 
preceding year of the alleged termination. In the affidavit even there is no mention that the workman has worked for 
240 days in the preceding year i.e. on 7.8.20l5. Thus, this is a general assertion for rendering services with the 
management rather specific averments with respect to the 240 days in the preceding year before the termination. Thus, 
claim petition as well as affidavit filed by the workman is not very specific with respect to 240 days working in the 
establishment. In the light of the specific denial by the management for rendering services with the management, 
burden lies on the workman to prove this fact. The workman has failed to prove it. Thus, there is no necessity of 
issuing any show cause notice to the workman. 


20. The claimant/workman has also claimed in his claim petition as well as in his affidavit and even in his cross- 
examination that Junior Engineer had given oral assurance for regularization in the department. In this regard, it is 
pertinent to mention here that he cannot have been regularized in the department as in those cases where the case fall 
under the definition of industrial dispute as mentioned under Section 2(k) of the ID Act only then regularization can 
be made. Section 2(k) of the ID Act defines “industrial dispute”, which reads as under: 


“2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- 


XXX X 


4396 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(k) “industrial dispute” means any dispute or difference between employers and employers, or between employers 
and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the employment or non-employment or 
the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour, of any person,” 


And ID Act was amended adding Section 2A making individual dispute of a workman as an industrial 
dispute, if the dispute is related to dismissal, discharge, retrenchment or termination of individual workmen. Thus, 
Section 2A carves an exception to the definition of individual dispute as given in Section 2(k) of the ID Act. Thus, in 
order to give jurisdiction to the appropriate government to refer the dispute to the Tribunal/Labour Court, it was 
essential for the workman to show that his individual dispute for regularization was sponsored or espoused by the 
union of the workmen. The five Bench of the Apex Court in the case of Workmen of Dharampal_Premchand 
(Saughandhi) Vs. Dharampal Premchand (Saughandhi), Civil Appeal ७०.532//963, decided on 76.03. /965, has 


also support the above view. 


2I. The Hon’ble Karnatana High Court in the case titled as Prakash_and_ Ors. Vs. Superintending 
Engineer(Electrical), O and _M_ Circle, Belgaum_and_ Ors., Writ Petition ५०६७६.4772472-75207999, decided छा 


3.03.2000, has taken a view that the individual workman cannot raise a dispute with regard to absorption and 
regularization. 


22. The Delhi High Court in the case of Management of Hotel Samrat and Ors. Vs. Government of NCT and 
Ors., Writ Petition(C) No.6247 & 6682/2002, decided on 04.०7. 2002, has taken a similar view that in order to be an 
industrial dispute, it has to satisfy the definition of Section 2(k) of the ID Act. 


23. In view of the above discussion, this Tribunal is of the firm view that there is no merit in the case and the 
same is liable to be dismissed. 


24. Let copy of the award be sent to the Central Government for publication as required under Section 7(l) of 
the Act. 


Date : 6.3.2024 
KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 4 अक्तूबर, 2024 


का.आ. 89.—airarrhrs विवाद अधिनियम ((947 का 4) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार सन 
सिक्‍यूरिटी सर्विसेज, सर्वे नं.67 परमार नगर, पुणे; महाप्रबंधक, बीएसएनएल, अहमदनगर; उपविभागीय अभियंता, 
बीएसएनएल, कोपरगांव, अहमदनगर, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री भाऊसाहेब रामचंद्र खरात, कामगार, के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2, अहमदनगर,पंचाट(संदर्भ संखया 24/2079) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया 
गया है,प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ O7.40.202447 Wes Sa था | 


[फा. सं. Vot-4002/3/209- आई आर (डीयू)] 
दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the Ist October, 2024 


5.0. 89.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 24/20l9) of The Labour Court-2,Ahmednagar. as shown in the 
Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to Sun security Services, Survey No.67 
Parmar nagar, Pune; The General Manager, BSNL, Ahmednagar; The Sub division Engineer, BSNL, 
Kopargaon, Ahmednagar, and Shri Bhausaheb Ramchandra Kharat, Worker, which was received along with 
soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 0I.0.2024. 


[F. No. L-4002/3/209- IR (DU)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE SECOND LABOUR COURT, AT AHMEDNAGAR. 
(BEFORE ABHIJEET G DESHMUKH, PRESIDING OFFICER) 
Reference (I.D.A.) No. 24/209. 
(CNR-MHLC-6000080209) 
l. M/s. Sun Security Services, 
Survey No. 67, |“ Floor, 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4397 


Parmar Nagar No. 3, 
Pune — 403. 

2: The General Manager, 
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd., 
DTO Compound, Near GPO, 
Ahmednagar — 44002. 


3. Sub Divl. Engineer, 

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd., 

Kopragaon Distt, 

Ahmednagar — 44002. iy First Party. 

VERSUS 
Sh. Bhausaheb Ramchandra Kharat, 
C/o. Nasik Pune Road, Mahatma 
Gandhi Nagar, Tal — Sangamner, 
Distt - Ahmednagar — 44002. aes Second Party. 
APPEARANCE :- Shri. A.V. Patil, Ld. Adv. for First Party. 
Shri. K.Y. Modgekar, Ld. Adv. For Second Party. 
AWARD 


(Delivered on 3/07/2024) 


l. The Section Officer, Government of India, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi has sent this reference under 
clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section 2-A of Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, for adjudication 
of the dispute between the above parties. 


2: Perusal of record and proceedings discloses that this Court has issued notices to both the parties vide Exh. O- 
2 and Exh. O-4. The first party No. | failed to appear before the Court. Hence, matter is proceeded ex-parte against 
first party No. | vide order on Exh. U-] dated 22.0!.2020. The second party and first party Nos. 2 and 3 appeared 
through their respective Advocates, and filed their respective statement of claim and written statement. The second 
party has also filed interim relief application Exh. U-2. The first party Nos. 2 and 3 have filed their detailed say at 
Exh. C-7 to the interim relief application of the second party. Thereafter, the second party has filed notice of 
documents Exh. U-7 on 2.02.2020. The said application was decided on 0.02.202l. Thereafter, the matter was 
posted from time to time till 0.07.2024, for argument on interim relief application and compliance of order passed on 
Exh. U-7. 

3. Perused record and proceedings. Perusal of Roznama discloses that the second party has not taken any steps 
to proceed further with the case since last more than 3 years. This lethargic behavior of the second party clearly shows 
that the second party lost his interest in proceeding with the present Reference. Hence, on 0.07.2024, the matter is 
posted for passing Award. Thereafter, also the second party remained continuously absent and failed to take steps. 


4. Today, the second party is called out repeatedly, but he failed to appear before the Court and to take steps. 
Having regard to these facts and circumstances of the case, this Court is of the considered view that the second party 
failed to appear before this Court even after giving more than sufficient opportunities and he lost his interest in 
proceeding with the present Reference. Hence, the present matter deserves to be disposed of by answering the 
Reference in negative. Hence, the following award is passed. 
AWARD 
l. The reference is answered in negative. 
2. Six copies of this Award be sent to Section Officer, Government of India, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for 
publication and further necessary action. 

3. No order as to costs 
Date : 3.7.2024 

ABHIJEET G. DESHMUKH, Presiding Officer 


4398 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 4 अक्तूबर, 2024 
का.आ. (892.— aires विवाद अधिनियम (7947 का 4) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार सन 
सिक्‍यूरिटी सर्विसेज, सर्वे 4.67 परमार नगर, पुणे; महाप्रबंधक, बीएसएनएल, अहमदनगर; उपविभागीय अभियंता, 
बीएसएनएल, कोपरगांव, अहमदनगर, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री दिलीप रंगनाथ जगताप, कामगार, के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2, अहमदनगर,पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 26/2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया 
गया है,प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 04.40.2024को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[फा. सं. Vet-400I2/5/2029- आई आर (डीयू)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the lst October, 2024 


S.O. 892.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 26/209) of The Labour Court-2,Ahmednagar. as shown in the 
Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to Sun security Services, Survey No.67 
Parmar nagar, Pune; The General Manager, BSNL, Ahmednagar; The Sub division Engineer, BSNL, 
Kopargaon, Ahmednagar, and Shri Dilip Ranganath Jagtap, Worker, which was received along with soft copy 
of the award by the Central Government on 0.0.2024. 


[F. No. L-4002/5/209- IR (DU)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE SECOND LABOUR COURT, AT AHMEDNAGAR. 
(BEFORE ABHIJEET G DESHMUKH, PRESIDING OFFICER) 
Reference (I.D.A.) No. 26/209. 
(CNR-MHLC-6000082209) 
l. M/s. Sun Security Services, 
Survey No. 67, |“ Floor, 
Parmar Nagar No. 3, 
Pune — 403. 
2. The General Manager, 
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd., 
DTO Compound, Near GPO, 
Ahmednagar — 44002. 


3. Sub Divl. Engineer, 
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd., 
Kopragaon Distt, 
Ahmednagar — 44002. ia First Party. 
VERSUS 
Sh. Dilip Ranganath Jagtap, 
C/o. Telegaon Dighe, 
Tal — Sangamner, 
Ahmednagar — 44002. डर Second Party. 
APPEARANCE :- Shri. A.V. Patil, Ld. Adv. for First Party. 


Shri. K.Y. Modgekar, Ld. Adv. For Second Party. 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4399 


AWARD 
(Delivered on 3/07/2024) 


l. The Section Officer, Government of India, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi has sent this reference under 
clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section 2-0 of Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, for adjudication 
of the dispute between the above parties. 


2. Perusal of record and proceedings discloses that this Court has issued notices to both the parties vide Exh. O- 
2 and Exh. O-4. The first party No. | failed to appear before the Court. Hence, matter is proceeded ex-parte against 
first party No. | vide order on Exh. U-| dated 22.0!.2020. The second party and first party Nos. 2 and 3 appeared 
through their respective Advocates, and filed their respective statement of claim and written statement. The second 
party has also filed interim relief application Exh. U-2. The first party Nos. 2 and 3 have filed their detailed say at 
Exh. C-7 to the interim relief application of the second party. Thereafter, the second party has filed notice of 
documents Exh. U-7 on 2.02.2020. The said application was decided on 0!.02.202l. Thereafter, the matter was 
posted from time to time till 0.07.2024, for argument on interim relief application and compliance of order passed on 
Exh. U-7. 


3. Perused record and proceedings. Perusal of Roznama discloses that the second party has not taken any steps 
to proceed further with the case since last more than 3 years. This lethargic behavior of the second party clearly shows 
that the second party lost his interest in proceeding with the present Reference. Hence, on |0.07.2024, the matter is 
posted for passing Award. Thereafter, also the second party remained continuously absent and failed to take steps. 


4. Today, the second party is called out repeatedly, but he failed to appear before the Court and to take steps. 
Having regard to these facts and circumstances of the case, this Court is of the considered view that the second party 
failed to appear before this Court even after giving more than sufficient opportunities and he lost his interest in 
proceeding with the present Reference. Hence, the present matter deserves to be disposed of by answering the 
Reference in negative. Hence, the following award is passed. 


AWARD 
l. The reference is answered in negative. 


2. Six copies of this Award be sent to Section Officer, Government of India, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for 
publication and further necessary action. 


3. No order as to costs. 


Date : 3.7.2024 


ABHIJEET G. DESHMUKH, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 4 अक्तूबर, 2024 


का.आ. (893.— sitar विवाद अधिनियम ((947 का 4) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार सन 
सिक्‍यूरिटी सर्विसेज, सर्वे नं.67 परमार नगर, पुणे; महाप्रबंधक, बीएसएनएल, अहमदनगर; उपविभागीय अभियंता, 
बीएसएनएल, कोपरगांव, अहमदनगर, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री नरोड़े भास्कर केशवराव,कामगार, के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2, अहमदनगर,पंचाट(संदर्भ AeA 28/2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया 
है,प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ O.70.2024eT ars Sa था | 


[फा. सं. Vet-4002/9/2029- आई आर (डीयू)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the lst October, 2024 


S.O. 893.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 28/209) of The Labour Court-2,Ahmednagar. as shown in the 
Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to Sun security Services, Survey No.67 
Parmar nagar, Pune; The General Manager, BSNL, Ahmednagar; The Sub division Engineer, BSNL, 
Kopargaon, Ahmednagar, and Shri Narode Bhaskar Keshvrao, Worker, which was received along with soft 
copy of the award by the Central Government on 0.0.2024. 


[F. No. L-4002/9/209- IR (DU)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 


4400 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 
IN THE SECOND LABOUR COURT, AT AHMEDNAGAR. 
(BEFORE ABHIJEET G. DESHMUKH, PRESIDING OFFICER) 
Reference (I.D.A.) No. 28/209. 
(CNR-MHLC-6000084209) 
l. M/s. Sun Security Services, 
Survey No. 67, |* Floor, 
Parmar Nagar No. 3, 
Pune — 403. 
2. The General Manager, 
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd., 
DTO Compound, Near GPO, 
Ahmednagar — 44002. 


3. Sub Divl. Engineer, 

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd., 

Kopragaon Distt, 

Ahmednagar — 44002. sae First Party. 

VERSUS 
Sh. Narode Bhaskar Keshvrao, 
C/o. Narode Galli, Po. - Kopargaon, 
Tal — Sangamner, Distt. - Ahmednagar, 
Ahmednagar — 44002. ५०५ Second Party. 
APPEARANCE :- Shri. A.V. Patil, Ld. Adv. for First Party. 
Shri. K.Y. Modgekar, Ld. Adv. For Second Party. 
AWARD 


(Delivered on 3/07/2024) 


l. The Section Officer, Government of India, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi has sent this reference under 
clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section 2-A of Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, for adjudication 
of the dispute between the above parties. 


2 Perusal of record and proceedings discloses that this Court has issued notices to both the parties vide Exh. O- 
2 and Exh. O-4. The first party No. | failed to appear before the Court. Hence, matter is proceeded ex-parte against 
first party No. | vide order on Exh. U-] dated 22.0!.2020. The second party and first party Nos. 2 and 3 appeared 
through their respective Advocates, and filed their respective statement of claim and written statement. The second 
party has also filed interim relief application Exh. U-2. The first party Nos. 2 and 3 have filed their detailed say at 
Exh. C-7 to the interim relief application of the second party. Thereafter, the second party has filed notice of 
documents Exh. U-7 on 2.02.2020. The said application was decided on 0.02.202l. Thereafter, the matter was 
posted from time to time till 0.07.2024, for argument on interim relief application and compliance of order passed on 
Exh. U-7. 


3. Perused record and proceedings. Perusal of Roznama discloses that the second party has not taken any steps 
to proceed further with the case since last more than 3 years. This lethargic behavior of the second party clearly shows 
that the second party lost his interest in proceeding with the present Reference. Hence, on 0.07.2024, the matter is 
posted for passing Award. Thereafter, also the second party remained continuously absent and failed to take steps. 


4. Today, the second party is called out repeatedly, but he failed to appear before the Court and to take steps. 
Having regard to these facts and circumstances of the case, this Court is of the considered view that the second party 
failed to appear before this Court even after giving more than sufficient opportunities and he lost his interest in 
proceeding with the present Reference. Hence, the present matter deserves to be disposed of by answering the 


[भाग —ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 440] 


Reference in negative. Hence, the following award is passed. 
AWARD 
The reference is answered in negative. 


23 Six copies of this Award be sent to Section Officer, Government of India, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi 
for publication and further necessary action. 


3. No order as to costs. 
ABHIJEET 6. DESHMUKH, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, अक्तूबर, 2024 
का.आ. 4894.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम 947 (4947 का 44 ) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
यूनियन बैंक ऑफ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औघ्योगि औद्योगिक 
क विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण / श्रम न्यायालय जबलपुर के Gare (62/2023) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[फा. FH. Vot-202/42/202- आई आर (बी-ा)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the Ist October, 2024 


S.O. 894.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 62/2023) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Jabalpur_as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Union Bank of India_and 
their workmen. 


[F. No. L-202/42/202- IR (B-ID] 


SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT, JABALPUR 
NO. CGIT/LC/R/62/2023 
Present: P.K.Srivastava 
H.J.S..( Retd) 
Shri Dwarka Prasad Soni, 
Ward 7 Cod Road Ranjhi, 
Jabalpur, (M.P.) - 482009 


Workman 
Versus 
The Branch Manager, 
Union Bank of India, 
Jabalpur, 506 Branch, High Court Campus, 
Jabalpur, (M.P.) - 482009 
Management 


JUDGEMENT 
(Passed on this 7 day of September-2024.) 


Vide communication reference number J-7(2)/2023-ALC by the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner 
(Central) Jabalpur, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi this reference is sent to the Tribunal under section-0 of Industrial 
Disputes Act, |947 (in short the ‘Act’) The dispute under reference related to :- 


4402 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


“Whether the action of management of Union Bank of India Jabalpur to terminate the service of the workman 
Shri Dwarka Prasad Soni without conducting departmental enquiry and proving the charges framed against the 
workman is valid? If not what relief the workman is entitled for?” 


After registering the case on the basis of the reference received, Notices were sent to the parties and were 
duly served on them. They appeared and filed their respective statements of claim and defense. 


The skeletal facts, which are almost admitted between the parties are that the workman, while working 
as an employee of the Management Bank, was convicted for charge under Section l38 of the Negotiable Instruments 
Act, 88](in sort to be referred as the word 'Act') for issuing of three cheques of one lakh each against the loan taken 
by the workman from the complainant Santosh Kumar Sahu which were dishonored due to lack of sufficient fund. 
The first case was Criminal Case No.27538/06 decided on 7-l-2007 in which he was convicted simple 
imprisonment for three years and fine of Rs.,45,000/-. The second was Criminal Case No.27359/06 wherein he was 
convicted for six month simple imprisonment and fine of Rs.2,90,000/- decided on 7-!-2007. This convictions were 
appealed against and were confirmed by Appellate Court in Criminal Appeal Nos. 557/07 and No.558/08. The 
Management, in the light of provision of Section l(b) of Banking Regulations Act 949 & in terms of provisions 
contained in Para-3(b) Bi-Partite Settlement dated 0-4-2002(in short the settlement), served the workman, a notice 
seeking his explanation within 5 days from the date of receipt of notice. The applicant did not submit any 
explanation and the Disciplinary Authority dismissed the workman from the services of the Bank from the date of his 
conviction i.e. 24-l-2008. The workman challenged his dismissal on the ground that it was harsh and not 
proportionate. The workman raised an industrial dispute against his termination. On failure of conciliation, a reference 
was sent to this Tribunal by the Government of India as per letter dt. 0I/03/20l3 U/s 0 of The Industrial Disputes 
Act, |947 vide notification number L-!202/42/202-IR ( B-I]) which was as under — 


“Whether the action of management of Union Bank of India in dismissing the services of Shri Dwarka 
Prasad Soni Ex-peon w.e.f. date of conviction for offence i.e. 24/0/2008 is legal and justified ? What relief the 
workman is entitled to ?” 


The workman also filed a petition under Section 2A(2&3) of Industrial Dispute (Amended) Act 20l0. Seeking same 
relief. 


Separate cases were registered as R/57/20l3 & RC/0/20I3 on the basis of reference and petition In both the cases 
the facts and evidence. Since fact and disputes in both the were common, hence both the cases were amalgamated 
and after recording evidence, were decided by common judgment on Februaryl0,2020.Following award was passed- 


A. Penalty of dismissal of Shri Dwarka Prasad Soni, Ex-Peon from service w.e.f 24--2008 in terms of 
Para-3(b) of the Bi-Partite Settlement No.6 of 2002 dated 0-4-2002 is held not justified in law. 


B. The Authority is obligated to pass a fresh order considering all the facts aggravating and mitigating 
taking into the nature of transactions, which lead into conviction, previous service record of the 
workman and his length of service recording a finding as to what punishment whether dismissal or 
punishment will be justified in the case in hand. 


Thereafter, the management Bank again passed following order in the light of the directions in the award. 


“श्री डी पी सोनी यूनियन बैंक ऑफ इंडिया की हाई कोर्ट शाखा, जबलपुर में दफ्तरी के पद पर पदस्थ थे और उन्हे तत्कालीन 
अनुशासनिक प्राधिकारी द्वारा आदेश क्रमांक FGMO/HRMD/473 दिनांक 6.0.2008 द्वारा द्विपक्षीय समझाँते दिनांत 
0.04.2002 के पैरा 3(बी) से प्रावधान के तहत "Dismissal" का दण्ड दिया गया था और दिनांक 24 0i.2008 से, बैंक की सेवा से 
बर्खास्त किया गया था। 


तत्पक्षांत श्री सोनी ने औद्योगिक विवाद उठा कर इस दण्ड को चुनौती दी थी और न्यायिक निर्णय के विफत होने पर मामता 
CGIT में समझौते के लिए गया AICGIT, जबलपुर ने अपने अवार्ड दिनांक 3:7.2020 द्वारा बैंक को आदेश दिया है कि बैंक 
मामले के सभी तथ्यों ल्रेन-देन की प्रकृति जिसके द्वारा श्री सोनी को दोषी करार किया गयः था, बैंक में श्री सोनी का पिछला 
रिकॉर्ड व सेवा अवधि को ध्यान में रखते हुये दोबारा अपने निष्कर्ष को रिकॉर्ड करें और यह निर्णय लें dh उक्त मामले में श्री सोनी 
को "Dismissal" या कोई और दण्ड देना चाहिए। 


अतः उपरोक्त को ध्यान में रखते हुये अधोहस्ताक्षरी द्वारा पह निर्णय लिया गया कि श्री सोनी को इस संबंध में अपना पक्ष रखने 
हेतु एक मौका दिया जाए जिससे उन्हें उचित न्याय मित्र सके, तदानुसार श्री डी पी सोनी को मामले पर पुनःविचार करने हेतु क्षेत्र 
महाप्रबन्धक कार्यालय भोपाल में दिनांक 06.0.2020 को व्यक्तिगत सुनवाई के लिए बुलाया गया। 


व्यक्तिगत सुनवाई के दौरान श्री सोनी ने लिखित में एक अभिवेदन प्रस्तुत किया परंतु, उस अभिवेदन में ऐसा कोई भी तथ्य 
एवं/अधवा दस्तावेज प्रस्तुत नहीं किया गया है जिसे पूर्व में कोर्ट या तत्कालीन अनुशासनिक प्राधिकारी के समक्ष प्रस्तुत नहीं 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4403 


किया गया हो। अधोहस्ताक्षरी द्वारा सभी तथ्यों, लेन-देन की प्रकृति जिसके द्वारा श्री सोनी को दोषी करार किया गया था, बैंक 
में श्री सोनी का पिछला रिकॉर्ड व सेवा अवधि का अवलोकन किया है परंतु श्री सोनी के बचाव में कोई भी नया तथ्य सामने नहीं 
आया है। अतः किसी भी नए तथ्य के अभाव में अधोहस्ताक्षरी को तत्कालीन अनुशासनिक प्राधिकारी के निर्णय को बदलने का 
कोई भी कारण नहीं मिला है। अतः तत्कालीन अनुशासनिक प्राधिकारी के आदेश को कापम रखते हुए निम्न आदेश पारित किया 
जा रहा है। 


आदेश 


द्विपक्षीय सम्झाता दिनांक 0.04.2002 के पैरा 3 (वी) के प्रावधान के तहत दिनांक 24.0.2008 से बैंक की सेवा से बर्खास्तगी” 


The workman again raised an industrial dispute against his second termination order ,with reference to 
which, the present reference has been sent by the Dy. Chief Labour Commissioner. 


The case of the workman is mainly that his service record has been unblemished, the Disciplinary 
Authority has passed the second termination order arbitrarily without considering the past unblemished service 
record of the workman and the fact that the concerned convictions were with respect an act relating to private 
transactions. 


Management has defended its action in the light of Para-3(b) of the Bi-Partite Settlement No.6 of 2002 and 
Section l0()(b) of the Banking Regulation Act, 949, with the case that the the second order has been passed taking 
in to consideration all the facts as well the fact that Bank cannot afford to have a convicted person as its staff because 
it will adversely affect the reputation of the Bank resulting into loss of business. 


Both the sides have produced their oral and documentary evidence to be referred to as and when 
required. 


6. I have heard argument of learned Counsel for Workman Mr. Praveen Yadav and for Management Bank Advocate 
Mr. Shailendra Pandey. Parties have filed written arguments as well. I have gone through the record and written 
arguments filed by the Management. 


7. On perusal of the record in the light of the rival arguments makes out following issue to be decided:- 


Whether second order of Management in terminating the services of applicant/workman on the 
ground of his conviction under Section 38 of the 'Act' in two cases is justified in law or not? 


8. The main arguments for learned Counsel for applicant/workman is that the alleged transactions resulted into 
conviction of the workman under Section 38 of the 'Act' is firstly, between two individuals in individual capacity, 
secondly, it has no connection to the official duties of the workman and thirdly the Bank has not been put to any loss 
due to these transactions, furthermore, the charge under Section 38 of the 'Act' is not an act of moral turpitude. The 
learned Counsel has further referred to Para-3(b) of the Bi-Partite Settlement No.6 of 2002 and has submitted that the 
impugned dismissal order does not show that the Disciplinary/Controlling Authority exercised its discretion and 
recorded any findings as to why the workman deserves the maximum punishment of dismissal, hence this order is bad 
in law on this score also. 


Learned Counsel has referred to cases in this respect- 
a) Ibrahim Kannu Vs. State of Kerala 2005 SCC OnLine Ker 494 : 
The referred paragraphs are as follows :-_ 


“7, Division Bench of this court in Saseendran's case (supra) has only stated that the act of issuing a cheque without 
sufficient funds is not generally regarded as morally wrong or corrupt and that the offence under S. 33 will not 
normally involve moral turpitude. Holding so, the court held as follows: 


“We approve the said principle and hold that the question whether an offence would involve moral turpitude 
has to be decided on the facts of each case. All offences do not necessarily involve moral turpitude. S. 38 of the Act 
is no exception to the said principle. On the facts of the case, we find no scope for holding that the offence found 
against the appellant has any reflection of moral turpitude.” 


8. We also notice that while affirming the judgment in OP. 0336 of 2002 the Division Bench in K.S.R.T.C. v. Abdul 
Latheef, 2005 (3) KLT 955 held as follows: 


“Even if there was conviction, under R. |8 of the Rules, it was incumbent on the appointing authority to 
consider the circumstances as to the misconduct which lead to the conviction and to pass appropriate orders. Every 
cases of conviction shall not result in dismissal. 


4404 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


When the requirement in S. 38 of the Negotiable Instruments Act is satisfied, one will be deemed to have 
committed offence. It is only a deeming provision. Offence under 5. 38 of the Act being an offence in the 
commercial practice cannot be taken as one involving moral turpitude, in the absence of any other cogent material to 
discern moral turpitude. No such special-circumstance is pointed out by the appellant. In such circumstances also the 
direction to reinstate the first respondent cannot be said to be unjustified.” 


9. We therefore notice that while affirming the judgment in OP. 0336 of 2002 the Division Bench has also held that 
offence under S. 38 of the Act being an offence in the commercial practice cannot be taken as one involving moral 
turpitude in the absence of any other cogent material to discern moral turpitude. We therefore find that the Division 
Bench has not fully supported the view expressed by the learned single Judge in OP. 0336 of 2002. 


b) K. Thilagavathi Vs Managing Director and others WP_ no. 295/2020 decided on 28/0/2020 by Hon’ble 
Madras High Court. 


The referred paragraphs are as follows :- 


“TL, Learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner would submit that for a simple loan transaction, which 
unfortunately ended in conviction, the petitioner has lost her job and all her service retirement benefits which were 
otherwise due. She would state that after imposition of the impugned penalty, the petitioner had also reached the age 
of superannuation on 3..20l7. On the contention of proportionality, the learned Counsel would rely on a decision 
of Kerala High Court dated 20.0.20l0 in W.P.(C).No.24066/2007. According to the learned Counsel, the Kerala 
High Court has held that conviction involving moral turpitude alone would invite order of dismissal and not 
otherwise. She would particularly rely on the following. 


"From the same it is evident that a dismissal for conviction in a criminal case can be only if that conviction is for an 
offence involving moral turpitude. Therefore without a finding that the conviction of the petitioner was for an 
W.P.(C)N.24066 of 2007 offence involving moral turpitude the petitioner cannot be dismissed from service. 7/l6 
http://www. judis.nic.in W.P.No.295 of 2020 Ext.P4 is the order of the Bank dismissing the petitioner. It does not 
state as to whether the action of the petitioner leading to his conviction under Section 38 of the Negotiable 
Instruments Act involved moral turpitude. It merely say that, since he has been convicted for a criminal offence he 
has been dismissed from service. The reasoning in Exts.P7 and P9 also do not reveal that there is a finding to the 
effect that the petitioner was convicted for an offence involving moral turpitude. 


6. Of course, the learned Counsel for the Bank would refer me to paragraph 24 of Ext.P9 order in an appeal 
wherein several earlier misconducts of the petitioner has been quoted which according to the Counsel would go to 
support the contention of the Bank that his conviction is one involving moral turpitude. I am not satisfied that the past 
conduct of the petitioner would spell out moral turpitude in a subsequent conviction under Section 38 of the 
Negotiable Instruments Act. 


7. In view of the fact that the service rules permit dismissal on conviction for a criminal offence only if that 
offence for which he was convicted involves moral turpitude. The decisions in Saseendran Nair's case and Ibrahim 
Kannu's case (supra) would show that ordinarily an offence under Section 38 of the Negotiable Instruments Act 
would not involve moral turpitude in the absence of any other cogent materials to discern moral 8/6 
http://www.judis.nic.in ४४.०.)२०.2।95 of 2020 turpitude. Therefore, the normal rule is that, the offence under Section 
38 of the Negotiable Instruments Act does not involve moral turpitude. If a person alleges that an offence under 
Section 38 involves moral turpitude, it is for him to prove with cogent materials that the offence involves moral 
turpitude. Therefore in this case it is for the Bank to prove that the petitioner's conviction under Section 38 of the 
Negotiable Instruments Act involves moral turpitude. Apart from the judgment of the criminal court, the Bank has no 
other material in support of their contention that the conviction of the petitioner is for an offence involving moral 
W.P.(c).No.24066 of 2007 turpitude. The fact that the petitioner took a defence in the criminal case which was 
rejected does not ipso facto leads to an inference of moral turpitude insofar as he is not being tried for that defence but 
being tried for an act constituting an offence under Section 38 by issuing a cheque without sufficient funds in his 
account and not paying the amount covered by cheque to the creditor despite receipt of notice as provided under the 
Act. Therefore, the respondents have not been able to show any circumstances which would enable me to draw the 
conclusion that, the petitioner was convicted for an offence involving moral turpitude. Therefore, the impugned orders 
are quashed." 


5. Although the petitioner was convicted for the offence under section 38 of the Negotiable Instruments Act and 
sentenced to undergo six months simple imprisonment with fine, yet it is imperative upon the authority to examine 
whether the conviction of the petitioner was due to 0/l6 http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.No.295 of 2020 grave 
criminal conduct on the part of the petitioner involving moral turpitude, or for a conduct involving commission of an 
offence other than the penal laws, but attracting the mischief of criminal proceedings and its consequence. The facts 
in this case would disclose that it is a simple case of conviction for cheque dishonour arising from a private loan 
transaction between the petitioner and the third party. Therefore, imposition of stringent and harsh penalty of removal 
from service, in the opinion of this Court, is not warranted at all. 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4405 


7. If the punishment of dismissal or removal from service is the automatic penalty to be imposed on every 
convicted employee, it could only result in painting every convicted employee with the same brush, whether the 
employee involved in serious and heinous crime or a simple offence relating to Section 38 (N.I.Act), The discretion 
vests in the authority would be meaningless, if the authority is to discharge such discretion perfunctorily with a rigid 
mind set. According to Regulation 37 of the Tamil Nadu State Housing Board Service Regulations, 969, the 
following major penalties are envisaged. 37. Procedure for awarding penalties:- .... Major penalties:- (i)... |)reduction 
to a low post or to a lower stage in the time scale of pay or 2) compulsory retirement; or 3) removal from service; or 
4)dismissal from service. 


8. In the counter affidavit, the claim of the petitioner that she had rendered blemishless service has not been 
disputed. In the counter, nothing is stated on record pointing out any shortcomings on the part of the petitioner in 
discharge of her duties. While so, it is also the more reason that the authority ought to have taken the conduct which 
led to the 2/6 http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.No.295 of 2020 conviction of the petitioner and ought to have spelt out 
the basis for the decision of imposing the harsh penalty of removal from service. The impugned order did not disclose 
any such application of mind on the part of the authority. 


9. No doubt, the Board had to take action in the face of the conviction recorded against the petitioner by the 
criminal court, but at the same time, the Board has a momentous discretion to take a decision as to the nature of 
penalty to be imposed with reference to the circumstances and facts of each case. This is one such case that the Board 
has approached the matter, without displaying any kind of empathy and benevolent consideration, while deciding to 
impose the harsh penalty of removal from service. Further subsequently, the order of conviction was also set aside on 
20.04.20l8 by proceedings of the High Court Lok Adalat on the basis of compromise entered into between the 
petitioner and the complainant. That being the case, the petitioner is entitled to be treated leniently atleast after 
20.04.208.” 


c) Mangi Lal Vs State of Rajasthan (2023 Rj-Jd_ 20694) on । July 2023 Rajasthan High Court 


The referred paragraphs are as follows :- 


“9, True it is, that the petitioner was convicted under Section 38 of the N.I. Act by judgment and order dated 
.0.206 but this Court is of the firm view that a conviction under Section l38 of the N.I. Act neither constitutes a 
gross misconduct nor does it [2023:RJ-JD:20694] (4 of 0) [CW-l3764/20l8] amount to moral turpitude so as to 
warrant disciplinary proceedings. In the present factual backdrop, neither it has any nexus with the petitioner's 
employment nor the petitioner's negligence or financial constraints can be treated to be unbecoming of a Government 
servant. By no stretch of imagination, the petitioner can be held unsuitable for public employment. 


ll. Though an act of Government servant in failing to arrange funds sufficient to honour the cheque issued by 
him can never be endorsed by this Court, but then, we cannot lose sight of the fact that offence under Section 38 of 
the N.I. Act is essentially commercial in nature. Cheque issued by a person can be dishonoured on account of variety 
of factors/reasons, including insufficiency of funds. It is purely a private dispute - it is a civil wrong and by no stretch 
of imagination, the same can be treated to be a wrong against the society at large. 


2. Above view of this Court derives support from the judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of P. 
Mohanraj & Ors. Vs. Shah Brothers reported in (202) 6 SCC 258, wherein though in a different context, Hon'ble the 
Apex Court expressed its opinion on the nature of proceedings under chapter XVII (S.38 to 42) of the N.I. Act, in 
following words:- 


[2023:RJ-JD:20694] (5 of 0) [CW-3764/208] "45 - Section l38 contains within it the ingredients of the offence 
made out. The deeming provision is important in that the legislature is cognizant of the fact that what is otherwise a 
civil liability is now also deemed to be an offence, since this liability is made punishable by law. It is important to 
note that the transaction spoken of is a commercial transaction between two parties which involves payment of money 
for a debt or liability. The explanation to Section 38 makes it clear that such debt or other liability means a legally 
enforceable debt or other liability. Thus, a debt or other liability barred by the law of limitation would be outside the 
scope of Section 38. 


This, coupled with fine that may extend to twice the amount of the cheque that is payable as compensation to the 
aggrieved party to cover both the amount of the cheque and the interest and costs thereupon, would show that it is 
really a hybrid provision to enforce payment under a bounced cheque if it is otherwise enforceable in civil law. 
Further, though the ingredients of the offence are contained in the first part of Section 38 when the cheque is 
returned by the Bank unpaid for the reasons given in the Section, the proviso gives an opportunity to the drawer of the 
cheque, stating that the drawer must fail to make payment of the amount within I5 days of the receipt of a notice, 
again making it clear that the real object of the provision is not to penalise the wrongdoer for an offence that is 
already made out, but to compensate the victim. 


[2023:RJ-JD:20694] (6 of 0) [CW-3764/208] 53 - It is clear that a Section 38 proceeding can be said to be a 
"civil sheep" in a "criminal wolf's" clothing, as it is the interest of the victim that is sought to be protected, the larger 


4406 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, ]946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


interest of the State being subsumed in the victim alone moving a court in cheque bouncing cases, as has been seen by 
us in the analysis made hereinabove of Chapter XVII of the Negotiable Instruments Act." 


3. In another judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Kaushalya Devi Massand_ Vs. Roop 
Kishore Khore reported in (20ll) 4 SCC 593, while expressing its opinion on the nature of offence under Section 
38 of the N.I. Act, the Court succinctly stated: 


"Para No.|l Having considered the submissions made on behalf of the parties, we are of the view that the gravity of a 
complaint under the Negotiable Instruments Act cannot be equated with an offence under the provisions of the Indian 
Penal Code or other criminal offences. An offence under Section 38 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 88], is 
almost in the nature of a civil wrong which has been given criminal overtones." 


4. In the opinion of this Court invoking provisions of Article 3l of the Constitution of India or Rule 9 of the 
Rules of 958 in the event of conviction under Section 38 of N.I. Act is non application of mind, if not arbitrary 
exercise of powers. Dent on person's reputation or the social stigma attached to a person's life by being dismissed 
from services is much more than what could have been by conviction or imprisonment consequent to dishonour of 
cheque. [2023:RJ-JD:20694] (7 of 0) [CW-3764/208] Such dent is, as a matter of fact, a jolt to the lives of the 
employee and his family. 


7. It is important at this stage to set out Article 3l(2) of the Constitution of India and Rule 9 of the Rules of 
958 which read as follow: 


Article 3I(2) of the Constitution of India:- No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in 
rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose 
upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry 
and it shall not be necessary to give such person any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed: 


Provided further that this clause shall not apply 


(a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his 
conviction on a criminal charge; or 


(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for 
some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or 


(c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the 
State, it is not expedient to hold such inquiry." 


[2023:RJ-JD:20694] (8 of 0) [CW-l3764/20I8] Rule l9 of the Rules of 958:- Special procedure in certain cases.- 
Notwithstanding anything contained in rules l6, !7 and 8, 


(i) where a penalty is imposed on a Government Servant on the ground of conduct which has led to him 
conviction on a criminal charge; or 


(ii) where the Disciplinary Authority is satisfied for reasons to be recorded in writing that it is not reasonably 
practicable to follow the procedure prescribed in the said rules; or 


(iii) Where the Governor is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State, it is not expedient to follow 
such procedure, the disciplinary Authority may consider the circumstances of the case and pass such orders as it 
deems fit. 


Provided that the Commission shall be consulted before passing such orders in any case in which such consultation is 
necessary." 


8. It is to be noted that Article 3!(2)(a) so also Rule 9(i) which is couched in similar words speak of "conduct 
which has led to his conviction on criminal charge." As has been opined above a conviction under Section |38 of the 
N.I. Act is not in stricto-sensu a conviction on criminal charge, given that by virtue of provisions of Section [43 of the 
N.I. Act, an offence under N.I. Act is tried summarily by virtue of what has been provided in Sections 262 to 265 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, under which procedure framing of charge is not mandatory. 


9. Then again, the expression used in Article 3Il(2)(a) and Rule 9(4) is "conduct which has led to." The 
conduct of the employee in the present case cannot be equated to conduct which otherwise leads to conviction on 
criminal charge as in the case of offences under Indian Penal Code or Prevention of Corruption Act. Hon'ble the 
Supreme Court in the case of Shanker Dass Vs. Union of India & Anr., reported in (985) 2 SCC 358, expressed its 
opinion upon power of employers under Article 3l] of the Constitution to dismiss and held thus: 


[2023:RJ-JD:20694] (9 of 0) [CW-l3764/20l8] "Clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 3/(2) of the 
Constitution confers on the Government the power to dismiss a person from service "on the ground of conduct which 
has led to his conviction on a criminal charge". But, that power, like every other power has to be exercised fairly, 


[भाग I—ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4407 


justly and reasonably. The Constitution does not contemplate that a Government Servant who is convicted for parking 
his scooter in a no-parking area should be dismissed from service. He may, perhaps not be entitled to be heard on the 
question of penalty since clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 3l(2) makes the provisions of that. Article 
inapplicable when a penalty is to be imposed on a Government Servant on the ground of conduct which has led to his 
conviction on a criminal charge. But the right to impose a penalty carries with it the duty to act justly. In the instant 
case, the Government chose to dismiss the appellant in a huff without applying its mind to the penalty which could 
appropriately be imposed upon him in so far as his service career was concerned. Considering the facts of the case, 
there can be no two opinions that the penalty of dismissal from service imposed upon the appellant is whimsical." 


20. Rule 9 of the Rules of 958, which is the exception to the general rule and the prescribed procedure to remove 
or dismiss a government servant has been enacted to clothe the Disciplinary Authority with the power to remove or 
dismiss an employee in the situations mentioned in second proviso to clause (2) of Article 3] of the Constitution of 
India, in which an inquiry is not necessary. Clause (i) of Rule 9 of the Rules of 958 which is the applicable 
provision in the case in hands lays much emphasis on the conduct and provides that such conduct should lead to 
conviction on a criminal charge. In the opinion of this Court, the dishonour of cheque does not reflect upon moral 
conduct of an employee. 


22. Toconclude - bearing in mind, the nature of offence involved, which is predominantly civil and the offence not 
being the one against the society or public at large, coupled with the fact that the complainant himself has 
compromised the matter with the petitioner, this Court is of the considered opinion that petitioner's dismissal in the 
present factual backdrop is liable to be quashed and set aside.” 


d) Judgment of Hon'ble High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur in Writ Petition No.3254/206 Manoharlal 
Pandey Vs. Water Resource Department. 


“Il. Even if it is presumed that the petitioner has taken a loan from one Geeta Bai and he has not repaid the same 
and cheque has been dishonored, the gravity of the offence has to be looked into while passing the order under 
Section |9 as the case was initiated on the basis of the complaint. 


2. In the considered opinion of this Court, the impugned order passed by the State Government deserves to be 
quashed and is hereby quashed as the petitioner was not involved in a criminal case relating to moral turpitude. 


3. The respondent/State shall be free to pass an appropriate order afresh. 


4. The respondent/State shall not pass the order of dismissal of the petitioner from services, terminating the 
petitioner from services or compulsory retiring the petitioner from services. 


5. The respondent/State is directed to reinstate the petitioner in service forthwith” 


The Management has submitted that Para- 3(b) of the Bi-Partite Settlement No.6 of 2002 empowers the Management 
to impose the punishment of dismissal to an employee who has been convicted for a criminal charge and further 
submission was that the Bank cannot afford to have a convicted person as its employee on its role as it will affect the 
general reputation of the Bank resulting into loss of business. 


9. Before entering into any discussion Para-3(b) of the Bi-Partite Settlement No.6 of 2002 dated 0-4-2002 reads as 
follows:- 


"If he be convicted, he may be dismissed with effect from the date of his conviction or be given any lesser form 
of punishment as mentioned in Clause 6." 


0. A bear reading of this provision shows that in case of conviction, apart from dismissal from service any lesser 
form of sentence as mentioned in Clause-6 of the Bi-Partite Settlement may also be awarded. Para-6 of the Bi-Partite 
Settlement reads as follows:- 


An employee found guilty of gross misconduct may: 
(a) be dismissed without notice or 


(b) be removed from service with superannuation benefits i.e. pension and/or Provident Fund and Gratuity as 
would be due otherwise under the Rules or Regulations prevailing at the relevant time and without 
disqualification from future employment or 


c) be compulsorily retired with superannuation benefits i.e. pension and/or Provident Fund and Gratuity 
would be due otherwise under the rules or Regulations prevailing at the relevant time and without 
disqualification from future employment or 


(d) be discharged from service with superannuation benefits i.e. pension and/or Provident Fund and Gratuity 
as would be due otherwise under the Rules or Regulations prevailing at the relevant time and without 
disqualification from future employment or 


4408 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(९) be brought down to lower stage in the scale of pay up to a maximum of two stages or 
(f) have his increments/stopped with or without cumulative effect or 

(g) have his special pay withdrawn or 

(h) be warned or censured or have an adverse remark entered against him; 

(i) Or be fined 


ll. Learned Counsel for Management/Bank has referred to Sushil Kumar Singhal Vs. Regional Manager, Punjab 
National Bank(200)8 SCC 573 where in a Bank employee who was entrusted Rs.5000/- from Bank to deposit it 
with the post office as telephone bill which he misappropriated and was convicted with Charge under Section 409 of 
IPC. The Bank dismissed the employee holding the charge an act of-moral turpitude which was upheld by Hon'ble 
Apex Court. In the case referred to above by learned Counsel for workman it has been laid down that the offence 
under Section 38 of the 'Act' that when this transaction was between two individuals in their private capacity not 
connected to their official working, is not an act of moral turpitude. 


2. According to the Bi-Partite Settlement Para-5(s) the conviction of an employee by a Criminal Court of law for an 
offence involving moral turpitude is a gross misconduct for which dismissal may be done as punishment in the light 
of Para-6(a) of the Bi-Partite Settlement. Para-5(s) and Para-6(a) of the Bi-Partite Settlement reads as follows :- 


Para 5(s):- Conviction by a criminal Court of law for an offence involving moral turpitude. 
Para-6(a):- Be dismissed without notice 


3. Since it is not the case of the Bank and dismissal order also does not show that the dismissal order was passed as a 
punishment using powers under Section 5(b), Para5(s) and Para 6(a) hence it will a futile exercise to probe into the 
fact whether the charge leading into conviction was an act of moral turpitude or not. In the case in hand the workmen 
have been dismissed from service using powers under of Para-3(b) of the Bi-Partite Settlement No.6 of 2002. 


4. It is undisputed that the alleged transactions regarding issuance of cheque which was dishonored leading into 
conviction in two cases under Section 38 of the Negotiable Instruments Act were between two private individuals in 
their individual capacity. This is also established that Bank was not put to any financial loss. The impugned second 
order of dismissal, reproduced as above, does not show that the Authority, which passed the said order, considered the 
point as to why a lesser punishment could not be fit in this case. The provision also provides dismissal or lesser form 
of punishment in a situation when power under Para-3(b) of the Bi- Partite Settlement No.6 of 2002 is used by the 
Authority. The second dismissal order mentions that the nature of the transaction resulting into conviction of the 
workman as well as his previous record and facts relating to the case and also the fact that there was no new fact 
emerged after the first termination order.” 


In his statement of claim, the workman has alleged that he had worked with utmost honesty, sincerity and satisfaction 
to his superiors. Also, that his whole service record is clean and unblemished. He was not punished earlier. In its 
written statement of defence, management does not controvert this allegation. The workman has corroborated this 
allegation in his affidavit. There is no material from the side of management to show that the workman was earlier 
punished for any other misconduct nor does the second termination order state this fact. This leads to an inference that 
the service record of the workman has been unblemished. Naturally, the service record of the workman could not be 
an aggravating factor for the punishment rather it was no doubt that it was a mitigating factor. Another factor that the 
workman had put in almost 30 years in service and was on the verge of retirement. Had these factors been judiciously 
considered by the Disciplinary Authority and in true spirit, these facts, coupled with the fact that the charge U/s 38 
of N.I. Act is a private offence, mainly of commercial nature, in passing the second termination order, the order would 
have certainly been different. The settled proposition of law is that when the Authority is vested with discretion it has 
to be exercised judiciously otherwise it shall lead to arbitrariness which has happened in the case in hand. 


5. In the light of above discussion the second order of the Disciplinary Authority in the case in hand as punishment 
cannot be said to be justified in law and it is liable to be set aside. Keeping in view the otherwise clean service record 
and the service tenure as well as the nature of the conviction, punishment of compulsory retirement from service with 
superannuation benefits that is pension and Provident Fund as well Gratuity as provided in Para 6(c) of the Bi-partite 
settlement will meet the interest of Justice. 


6. On the basis of the above discussion, the reference is answered as follows :- 
AWARD 


Holding the second termination order dated .0.202! unjust and against Law, using the powers u/s I A of 
the Industrial Disputes Act 947, the punishment of termination Dated /0/202l awarded to workman 
Dwarka Prasad Soni is converted into punishment of compulsory retirement from service with superannuation 
benefits ie; pension and Provident Fund as well Gratuity as provided in Para 6(c) of the Bi-partite settlement. 
The workman is also held entitled to Rs. 25,000/- as litigation cost. The management is directed to make 


[भाग —ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अक्तूबर 5, 2024/आश्विन 3, 946 4409 


payment in the light of the Award to the workman within 30 days from the publication of the Award failing 
which interest @ 8 % per annum. 


7. Let the copies of the award be sent to the Government of India, Ministry of Labour & Employment as per rules. 
P. K. SRIVASTAVA, Presiding Officer 
DATE: |/09/2024 
नई दिल्‍ली, 20 जून, 2024 


का.आ. 7895.—aiteifre विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार फ़ूड कारपोरेशन ऑफ़ इंडिया लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण -सह - श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता के dare (संदर्भ 
संख्या 04/2044) को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 48,//06/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[फा. 4. Vor-2204/5/20lI- आई आर (ATTH-I)] 


मणिकंदन. एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 20 June, 2024 


5.0. 895.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 04/20l) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, KolKata as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of Food 
Corporation of India Ltd. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 8/06/2024. 


[F. No. L-220/5/20I- IR (CM-ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 


CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNA AT KOLKATA 
Present : Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
REF. No. 4 of 20I] 
Parties : Employees in relation to the management of 
Food Corporation of India, Regional Officer, West Bengal 
AND 
Their Workmen/Union 
Appearance : 
On behalf of the Management: Mr. Uttam Kumar Mondal, 
Advocate. 
On behalf of the Workmen/ Union : Absent 
Dated : 23" November, 2023 


Management of FCI is represented by Ld. Counsel Mr. Uttam Kumar Mondal. None appears from the side of 
the union when the matter is called. 


The record shows the union is very irregular in conducting the present case and since 0l-08-2023 it has 
stopped taking any step and pursuing with the dispute espoused by it. Taking into consideration the conduct of the 
union it can be inferred the union is no more interested to pursue with the dispute espoused by it. 


The Central Govt., Ministry of Labour vide order No. L-220/5/20l0(IR) CM — II dated 05-08-20I] 
referred the following dispute to this Tribunal for adjudication:- 


“Whether the action of the management of Food Corporation of India in respect of its West Bengal Region, 
Kolkata in dismantling the gangs formed vide order dated 20-09-997 and thereby demoting |l workmen (as per list 
enclosed) from the post of Sardar and Mondal to the Handling workers w.e.f. 0-02-998, is legal and justified? To 
what relief the concerned workmen are entitled to?” 


440 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :OCTOBER 5, 2024/ASIVNA 3, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 
In the record apart from the written statements of the union and the management there is neither oral nor 
documentary evidence being produced by the union to substantiate its claim or decide the issue under reference. 


In view of the above no dispute award is passed. Accordingly, Reference Case No. 4 of 20I is disposed of. 


K. D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-!0064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-!0054. 


GORAKHA NATH Po 
YADAVA D: 


