रजिस्ट्री सं" Sto Were 


(एन)04/0007/2003---23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


प्यारत a रॉलपन 
The Gazette of Gudia 


GoM. -ZT. Wet. -37.-922023-250747 
CG-DL-E-922023-250747 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग ता -- खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


ae 29] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, दिसम्बर 8, 2023/ अग्रहायण 27, 945 (शक) 
No. 29] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, DECEMBER ]8, 2023/AGRAHAYANA 27, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके | 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on |8th December, 2023 :— 


Bit No. 94 oF 2023 


A Bill to amend and consolidate the law relating to development, expansion and operation 
of telecommunication services and telecommunication networks; assignment of 
spectrum; and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


. (/) This Act may be called the Telecommunications Act, 2023. Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


(2) It extends to,— 
(i) the whole of India; and 


(ii) to any offence committed or contravention made outside India by any 
person, as provided in this Act. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for 
different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of 
that provision. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appointed day" means such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification appoint under sub-section (3) of section |; 


(b) "assignment" of a radio frequency or radio frequency channel means the 
permission for a radio station to use a radio frequency or radio frequency channel 
under specified conditions; 


(c) "assignee" means a person holding an assignment of a radio frequency 
or radio frequency channel under section 4; 


(d) "authorisation" means a permission, by whatever name called, granted 
under this Act for— 


(i) providing telecommunication services; 


(ii) establishing, operating, maintaining or expanding telecommunication 
networks; or 


(ili) possessing radio equipment; 


(e) "authorised entity" means a person holding an authorisation under 
section 3; 


(f) "critical telecommunication infrastructure" means telecommunication 
networks notified under sub-section (3) of section 22; 


(g) "message" means any sign, signal, writing, text, image, sound, video, 
data stream, intelligence or information sent through telecommunication; 


(h) "National Frequency Allocation Plan" means guidelines issued from 
time to time by the Central Government for the use of the spectrum; 


(i) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and 
the expression "notified" shall be construed accordingly; 


() "person" shall include an individual, any company or association or 
body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, by whatsoever name called or 
referred to; 


(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(J) "radio equipment" means telecommunication equipment used or capable 
of use for telecommunication by means of Hertzian or radio waves; 


(m) "radio waves" means electromagnetic waves of frequencies propagated 
in space without any artificial guide; 


(n) "Schedule" means a schedule to this Act; 
(o) "spectrum" means the range of frequencies of Hertzian or radio waves; 


(7) "telecommunication" means transmission, emission or reception of any 
messages, by wire, radio, optical or other electro-magnetic systems, whether or 
not such messages have been subjected to rearrangement, computation or other 
processes by any means in the course of their transmission, emission or reception; 


(q) "telecommunication equipment" means any equipment, appliance, 
instrument, device, radio station, radio equipment, material, apparatus, or user 
equipment, that may be or is being used for telecommunication, including software 
and intelligence integral to such telecommunication equipment; and excludes 
such equipment as may be notified by the Central Government; 


(r) "telecommunication identifier" means a series of digits, characters and 
symbols, or a combination thereof, used to identify uniquely a user, a 


3 of 885. 
7 of 933. 


3 of I885. 
॥7 of 933. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


telecommunication service, a telecommunication network, elements of a 
telecommunication network, telecommunication equipment, or an authorised entity; 


(s) "telecommunication network" means a system or series of systems of 
telecommunication equipment or infrastructure, including terrestrial or satellite 
networks or submarine networks, or a combination of such networks, used or 
intended to be used for providing telecommunication services, but does not include 
such telecommunication equipment as notified by the Central Government; 


(t) "telecommunication service" means any service for telecommunication; 


(४) "user" means a natural or legal person using or requesting a 
telecommunication service, but does not include person providing such 
telecommunication service or telecommunication network. 


CHAPTER II 
POWERS OF AUTHORISATION AND ASSIGNMENT 
3. (J) Any person intending to— 
(a) provide telecommunication services; 
(b) establish, operate, maintain or expand telecommunication network; or 
(c) possess radio equipment, 


shall obtain an authorisation from the Central Government, subject to such terms and 
conditions, including fees or charges, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Central Government may while making rules under sub-section (/) provide 
for different terms and conditions of authorisation for different types of 
telecommunication services, telecommunication network or radio equipment. 


(3) The Central Government, if it determines that it is necessary in the public 
interest so to do, may provide exemption from the requirement of authorisation under 
sub-section (/), in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) Any exemption granted prior to the appointed day under the Indian Telegraph 
Act, |885 or the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 933 shall continue under this Act, 
unless otherwise notified by the Central Government. 


(5) Any authorised entity may undertake any merger, demerger or acquisition, or 
other forms of restructuring, subject to any law for the time being in force and any 
authorised entity that emerges pursuant to such process, shall comply with the terms 
and conditions, including fees and charges, applicable to the original authorised entity, 
and such other terms and conditions, as may be prescribed. 


(6) A licence, registration, permission, by whatever name called, granted prior to 
the appointed day under the Indian Telegraph Act, !885 or the Indian Wireless Telegraphy 
Act, 933, in respect of provision of telecommunication services or telecommunication 
network— 


(a) where a definite validity period is given, shall be entitled to continue to 
operate under the terms and conditions and for the duration as specified under 
such licence or registration or permission, or to migrate to such terms and 
conditions of the relevant authorisation, as may be prescribed; or 


(b) where a definite validity period is not given, shall be entitled to continue 
to operate on the terms and conditions of such licence or registration or permission 
for a period of five years from the appointed day, or to migrate to such terms and 
conditions of the relevant authorisation, as may be prescribed. 


Authorisation. 


Assignment 
of spectrum. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(7) Any authorised entity which provides such telecommunication services as 
may be notified by the Central Government, shall identify the person to whom it provides 
telecommunication services through use of any verifiable biometric based identification 
as may be prescribed. 


(8) The Central Government may, subject to such terms and conditions, including 
fees or charges as may be prescribed, allot telecommunication identifiers for use by 
authorised entities. 


(9) The Central Government may allow use of telecommunication identifiers allotted 
by international bodies which are recognised by the Central Government from time to 
time. 


4. (/) The Central Government, being the owner of the spectrum on behalf of the 
people, shall assign the spectrum in accordance with this Act, and may notify a National 
Frequency Allocation Plan from time to time. 


(2) Any person intending to use spectrum shall require an assignment from the 
Central Government. 


(3) The Central Government may prescribe such terms and conditions as may be 
applicable, for such assignment of spectrum, including the frequency range, 
methodology for pricing, price, fees and charges, payment mechanism, duration and 
procedure for the same. 


(4) The Central Government shall assign spectrum for telecommunication through 
auction except for entries listed in the First Schedule for which assignment shall be 
done by administrative process. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,— 


(a) "administrative process" means assignment of spectrum without holding 
an auction; 


(b) "auction" means a bid process for assignment of spectrum. 


(5) (a) The Central Government may, by notification, amend the First Schedule for 
assignment of spectrum— 


(i) in order to serve public interest; or 
(ii) in order to perform government function; or 


(iii) in cases where auction of spectrum is not the preferred mode of 
assignment due to technical or economic reasons. 


(b) The notification referred to in clause (a) shall be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 


(6) The Central Government, if it determines that it is necessary in the public 
interest so to do, may exempt,— 


(a) from the requirement of assignment under sub-section (2), in such manner 
as may be prescribed; and 


(b) by notification, specific usages within specified frequencies and 
parameters, from the requirements of sub-section (2). 


(7) Any exemption with respect to use of spectrum granted under the Indian 
Telegraph Act, |885 and the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, |933 prior to the appointed 
day, shall continue under this Act, unless otherwise notified by the Central Government. 


(8) Any spectrum assigned through the administrative process prior to the 
appointed day, shall continue to be valid on the terms and conditions on which it had 
been assigned, for a period of five years from the appointed day, or the date of expiry of 
such assignment, whichever is earlier. 


3 of I885. 
॥7 of 933. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(9) Any spectrum assigned through auction prior to the appointed day, shall 
continue to be valid on the terms and conditions on which it had been assigned. 


5. The Central Government may, to enable more efficient use of spectrum, re-farm 
or harmonise any frequency range assigned under section 4, subject to such terms and 
conditions, as may be prescribed. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) "harmonisation" means rearrangement of a frequency range; 


(b) "re-farming" means repurposing of a frequency range for a different use, 
other than that for which it is used by an existing assignee. 


6. The Central Government may enable the utilisation of the spectrum in a flexible, 
liberalised and technologically neutral manner, subject to such terms and conditions, 
including applicable fees and charges, as may be prescribed. 


7. (7) The Central Government may, to promote optimal use of the available 
spectrum, assign a particular part of a spectrum that has already been assigned to an 
entity, known as the primary assignee, to one or more additional entities, known as the 
secondary assignees, where such secondary assignment does not cause harmful 
interference in the use of the relevant part of the spectrum by the primary assignee, 
subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Central Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, after providing a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard to the assignee concerned, determines that any assigned spectrum has remained 
unutilised for insufficient reasons for such period as may be prescribed, terminate such 
assignment, or a part of such assignment, or prescribe further terms and conditions 
relating to spectrum utilisation. 


8. (/) The Central Government may establish by notification, such monitoring and 
enforcement mechanism as it may deem fit to ensure adherence to terms and conditions 
of spectrum utilisation and enable interference-free use of the assigned spectrum. 


(2) The Central Government may permit the sharing, trading, leasing and surrender 
of assigned spectrum, subject to the terms and conditions, including applicable fees or 
charges, as may be prescribed. 


9. No person shall be entitled to the refund of any fees or charges paid in respect 
of or under an authorisation or assignment granted under this Act, if such authorisation 
or assignment is suspended, curtailed, revoked or varied. 


CHAPTER III 
RIGHT OF WAY FOR TELECOMMUNICATION NETWORK 
0. For the purpose of this Chapter,— 


(a) "facility provider" means the Central Government or any authorised 
entity, including any contractor or sub-contractor or agent working for the Central 
Government or authorised entity, and shall include their successor or assignee; 


(b) "public entity" means,— 
(i) the Central Government; 
(ii) the State Government; 
(iii) local authority; 


(iv) any authority, body, company or institution incorporated or 
established by the Central Government or the State Government, or under 
any statute; or 


Re-farming 
and 
harmonisation. 


Technologically 
neutral use of 
spectrum. 


Optimal 
utilisation of 
spectrum. 


Establishment 
of monitoring 
and 
enforcement 
mechanism. 


No refund of 
fees. 


Definition of 
terms used in 
this Chapter. 


Right of way 
for 
telecommunication 
network in 
public property. 


Right of way 
for 
telecommunication 
network on 
property not 
covered under 
section I]. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(v) any non-government entity vested with the ownership, control or 
management of any public facility or class of public facilities, as may be 
notified by the Central Government; 


(c) "public property" means any property, whether movable or immovable 
including any machinery, which is owned by, or in the possession of, or under the 
control or management of any public entity. 


Il. (7) Any facility provider may submit an application to a public entity under 
whose ownership, control or management, the public property is vested, to seek 
permissions for right of way for telecommunication network under, over, along, across, 
in or upon such public property. 


(2) On receipt of an application from a facility provider under sub-section (/), the 
public entity shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), grant permission for all 
or any of the following acts, namely:— 


(a) survey such property for the purpose of assessing the feasibility for 
establishing telecommunication network; or 


(b) enter the property from time to time to establish, operate, maintain, repair, 
replace, augment, remove or relocate any telecommunication network. 


(3) The public entity shall grant permission under sub-section (2) in an expeditious 
manner and within such timelines as may be prescribed, and subject to such 
administrative expenses and compensation for right of way, which shall not exceed 
such amount as may be prescribed. 


(4) Any rejection of an application under sub-section (/) shall be based on 
reasonable grounds to be recorded in writing. 


(5) The facility provider shall do as little damage as possible to the public property, 
and ensure that the functionality and continuity of operations over such public property 
is not adversely affected, while undertaking any of the activities for which permission 
has been granted under sub-section (2). 


(6) If any damage is caused to the property, the facility provider shall, at the 
option of the public entity, either,— 


(a) restore such property to its state as existed prior to the undertaking of 
such activities; or 


(b) pay compensation for such damage as may be mutually agreed. 


(7) The provisions of this section shall be applicable to any public property 
vested for such projects or class of projects as notified by the Central Government, in 
respect of which, applications under sub-section (/) shall be made to the public entity 
granting the concession, contract or permission for such projects. 


2. (/) Any facility provider may submit an application to the person under whose 
ownership, control or management of property not covered under section |] is vested, 
to seek right of way for telecommunication network under, over, along, across, in or 
upon such property. 


(2) On receipt of an application from a facility provider, the person receiving the 
application may enter into an agreement, specifying consideration as mutually agreed, 
for— 

(a) undertaking surveys as may be required by the facility provider for the 
purpose of assessing the feasibility for establishing telecommunication 
network; or 


(b) establishing, operating, maintaining, repairing, replacing, augmenting, 
removing or relocating any telecommunication network by the facility provider. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(3) The facility provider shall do as little damage as possible to the property when 
undertaking any of the activities for which permission has been granted under 
sub-section (2). 


(4) In case of any damage to the property, the facility provider shall restore such 
property to its state as existed prior to the undertaking of such activities, failing which 
the person granting permission under sub-section (2), shall be entitled to compensation 
as may be mutually agreed, for any such damage. 


(5) The Central Government may by rules provide for the procedure to be followed 
by a facility provider to enter, survey, establish, operate, maintain, repair, replace or 
relocate the telecommunication network, including the notice period, the manner of 
issuance of notice, the framework governing objections by owner or occupier of the 
property, the manner in which such objections would be resolved, and matters relating 
to the compensation payable for any damage. 


(6) If the person under sub-section (2) fails to provide the right of way requested, 
and the Central Government determines that it is necessary so to do in the public 
interest, it may, either by itself or through any other authority designated by the Central 
Government for this purpose, determine that such facility provider shall be permitted 
the right of way to establish, operate, maintain such telecommunication network, subject 
to such terms and conditions, including charges for the right of way, and compensation 
for damage to the property, if any, to be payable to such person as may be prescribed. 


i3. Any person providing right of way under section |] or section I2, shall 
ensure grant of right of way to the facility providers in a non-discriminatory manner 
and, as far as practicable, on a non-exclusive basis. 


4. (/) A facility provider shall not have any right, title or interest in the property 
on which telecommunication network is established, except the right to use the property 
as provided under section |] or section 2. 


(2) The telecommunication network installed on any property, shall not be subject 
to any claims, encumbrances, liquidation or the like, relating to such property. 


(3) The telecommunication network installed on any property, shall not be 
considered as part of such property, including for the purposes of any transaction 
related to that property, or any property tax, levy, cess, fees or duties as may be applicable 
on that property. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, no public entity, except with the permission of an officer authorised by the 
Central Government for this purpose, shall have the authority to take any coercive 
action, such as sealing, preventing access, or forcible shutdown of the 
telecommunication network established by an authorised entity, except where such 
actions may be necessary to deal with any natural disaster or public emergency. 


5. (J) The Central Government may notify infrastructure projects or class of 
infrastructure projects, whether being developed by a public entity by itself, through a 
public private partnership or by any other person, that may require establishment of 
common ducts or conduits or cable corridors, for installation of telecommunication 
network. 


(2) The telecommunication network referred to in sub-section (/) shall be made 
available on open access basis to facility providers, subject to such terms and conditions, 
including fees and charges, as may be prescribed. 


Non- 
discriminatory 
and non- 
exclusive grant 
of right of way. 


Telecommunication 
network distinct 
from property 
on which it is 
installed. 


Power of 
Central 
Government to 
establish 
common ducts 
and cable 
corridors. 


Removal, 
relocation or 
alteration of 
telecommunication 
network. 


Notice to 
facility 
provider. 


Dispute 
resolution 
relating to this 
Chapter. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


6. (/) Where, under section |! or section 2, telecommunication network has 
been placed by the facility provider, under, over, along, across, in or upon any property, 
and any person entitled to do so desires to deal with that property in such a manner so 
as to render it necessary or convenient that the telecommunication network should be 
removed or relocated to another part thereof or to a higher or lower level or altered in 
form, he may require the facility provider to remove, relocate or alter the 
telecommunication network accordingly. 


(2) If compensation has been paid under sub-section (6) of section ll, or 
sub-section (4) of section !2, such person shall, when making the requisition under 
sub-section (/), tender to the facility provider the amount requisite to defray the expense 
of the removal, relocation or alteration on such terms as may be mutually agreed. 


(3) If any dispute arises under this Chapter, the matter shall be determined by the 
authority referred to in sub-section (2) of section 8. 


(4) If the facility provider omits to comply with the requisition, the person making 
such requisition, may apply to the District Magistrate within whose jurisdiction the 
property is situated, to order the relocation or alteration. 


(5) The District Magistrate receiving the application may, at its discretion and for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, approve or reject such relocation or alteration, subject 
to such conditions as it determines fit, including the relocation of the telecommunication 
network to any other part of the property or to a higher or lower level or for the alteration 
of its form, and the order so made shall be final. 


7. (7) Any person desiring to exercise his right to deal with his property in such 
a manner as is likely to cause damage or to interrupt or interfere with the 
telecommunication network established under the provisions of this Act, or to interrupt 
or interfere with telecommunication services, shall give prior notice of such duration 
and in such manner, as may be prescribed, to the facility provider, the Central Government 
or to any authority that may be notified by the Central Government. 


(2) The facility provider shall respond to such notice with details of such 
telecommunication network and precautionary measures to be undertaken, within such 
timelines as may be prescribed. 


(3) Where a person referred to in sub-section (/) gives a notice of his exercise of 
the right relating to his property with the bona fide intention of averting imminent 
danger of personal injury to himself or any other person, such person shall be deemed 
to have complied with the provisions of the said sub-section. 


(4) Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section (/), or 
deals with any property in such a manner as is likely to cause, or causes, damage to any 
telecommunication network, or is likely to interrupt or interfere, or interrupts or interferes 
with telecommunication services, a District Magistrate may, on the application of the 
facility provider, order such person to abstain from dealing with such property in such 
manner for a period not exceeding one month from the date of his order and forthwith to 
take such action with regard to such property as may be in the opinion of the District 
Magistrate necessary to remedy or prevent such damage, interruption or interference 
during such period. 


(5) If any dispute arises relating to damages, the matter shall be determined by the 
authority referred to under sub-section (2) of section 8. 


8. (/) The District Magistrate, or any other authority as notified by the Central 
Government, within whose jurisdiction the property is situated, shall have the exclusive 
powers to resolve any disputes under this Chapter, except for disputes referred to 
under sub-section (2) of this section. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(2) If any dispute arises relating to compensation under sub-section (6) of 
section |l, sub-section (2) and sub-section (4) of section |2, and sub-section (5) of 
section |7, it shall, on an application made for that purpose by either of the disputing 
parties to the District Judge within whose jurisdiction the property is situated, be 
determined by him. 


(3) Every determination of a dispute by a District Magistrate or District Judge 
under this section, shall be final. 


(4) Nothing in sub-section (3) shall affect the right of any person to recover by 
suit the whole or any part of any compensation paid by the facility provider, from the 
person who has received the same. 


CHAPTER IV 


STANDARDS, PUBLIC SAFETY, NATIONAL SECURITY AND PROTECTION OF TELECOMMUNICATION 
NETWORKS 


9. The Central Government may notify standards and conformity assessment 
measures in respect of— 


(a) telecommunication equipment, telecommunication identifiers and 
telecommunication network; 


(b) telecommunication services, in consonance with any regulations notified 
by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India from time to time; 


(c) manufacture, import, distribution and sale of telecommunication 
equipment; 


(d) telecommunication security, including identification, analysis and 
prevention of intrusion in telecommunication services and telecommunication 
networks; 


(e) cyber security for telecommunication services and telecommunication 
networks; and 


(f) encryption and data processing in telecommunication. 


20. (/) On the occurrence of any public emergency, including disaster management, 
or in the interest of public safety, the Central Government or a State Government or any 
officer specially authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government, 
if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, by notification— 


(a) take temporary possession of any telecommunication service or 
telecommunication network from an authorised entity; or 


(b) provide for appropriate mechanism to ensure that messages of a user or 
group of users authorised for response and recovery during public emergency 
are routed on priority. 


(2) On the occurrence of any public emergency or in the interest of public safety, 
the Central Government or a State Government or any officer specially authorised in 
this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government, may, if satisfied that it is 
necessary or expedient to do so, in the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of 
India, defence and security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public 
order, or for preventing incitement to the commission of any offence, subject to such 
procedure and safeguards as may be prescribed, and for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, by order— 


(a) direct that any message or class of messages, to or from any person or 
class of persons, to or from any telecommunication equipment or class of 
telecommunication equipment, or relating to any particular subject, brought for 


Power to 
notify 
standards. 


Provisions for 
public 
emergency or 
public safety. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


transmission by, or transmitted or received by any telecommunication service or 
telecommunication network, shall not be transmitted, or shall be intercepted or 
detained, or shall be disclosed in intelligible format to the officer mentioned in 
such order; or 


(b) direct that any telecommunication service or class of telecommunication 
services to or from any person or class of persons, to or from any 
telecommunication equipment or class of telecommunication equipment, or relating 
to any particular subject, transmitted or received by any telecommunication service 
or telecommunication network, shall be suspended. 


(3) The press messages, intended to be published in India, of correspondents 
accredited to the Central Government or a State Government shall not be intercepted 
or detained, unless their transmission has been prohibited under clause (a) of 
sub-section (2). 


(4) The action specified under sub-section (/), sub-section (2) and 
sub-section (3) shall be for such duration and in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Measures for 2. The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so 

farional to do, in the interest of national security, friendly relations with foreign States, or in the 

Security, ete. event of war, by notification take such measures as are necessary in the circumstances 
of the case, including issuing directions in respect of the following, namely:— 


(a) use of telecommunication equipment, telecommunication services, 
telecommunication network and telecommunication identifiers; 


(b) standards applicable to manufacture, import and distribution of 
telecommunication equipment; 


(c) standards to be adopted by authorised entities or assignees; 


(d) procurement of telecommunication equipment and telecommunication 
services only from trusted sources; 


(९) suspension, removal or prohibition of the use of specified 
telecommunication equipment and telecommunication services from countries or 
person as may be notified; or 


(f) taking over the control and management of, or suspending the operation 
of, or entrusting any authority of the Central Government to manage any or all of 
any telecommunication services, or any telecommunication network or part thereof, 
connected with such telecommunication services. 


Protection of 22. (/) The Central Government may by rules provide for the measures to protect 


telecommunication and ensure cyber security of telecommunication networks and telecommunication 
network and services 


telecommunication 
BEETLES: (2) The measures may include collection, analysis and dissemination of traffic 
data that is generated, transmitted, received or stored in telecommunication networks. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "traffic data" 
means any data generated, transmitted, received or stored in telecommunication networks 
including data relating to the type, routing, duration or time of a telecommunication. 


(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare 
any telecommunication network, or part thereof, as Critical Telecommunication 
Infrastructure, disruption of which shall have debilitating impact on national security, 
economy, public health or safety. 


(4) The Central Government may by rules provide for the standards, security 
practices, upgradation requirements and procedures to be implemented for such Critical 
Telecommunication Infrastructure. 


3 of I885. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ll 


23. If it appears necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, the Central 
Government may direct any authorised entity to transmit in its telecommunication 
services or telecommunication network, specific messages, in such manner as may be 
specified. 


CHAPTER V 


DicitaL 84747 NIDHI 


24. (/) The Universal Service Obligation Fund created under the Indian Telegraph 
Act, 885, shall, from the appointed day, be the "Digital Bharat Nidhi", under the 
control of the Central Government, and shall be used to discharge functions as set forth 
in this Act. 


(2) Any sums of money attributable to the Digital Bharat Nidhi that is paid 
pursuant to an authorisation under section 3, shall be credited to the Digital Bharat Nidhi. 


(3) The balance to the credit of the Digital Bharat Nidhi shall not lapse at the end 
of the financial year. 


(4) All amounts payable under licences granted prior to the appointed day 
towards the Universal Service Obligation, shall be deemed to be the amounts payable 
towards the Digital Bharat Nidhi. 


25. The sums of money received towards the Digital Bharat Nidhi under 
section 24, shall first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, and the Central 
Government may, if Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf so provides, 
credit such proceeds to the Digital Bharat Nidhi from time to time for being utilised 
exclusively to meet any or all of the following objectives, namely:— 


(a) support universal service through promoting access to and delivery of 
telecommunication services in underserved rural, remote and urban areas; 


(b) support research and development of telecommunication services, 
technologies, and products; 


(c) support pilot projects, consultancy assistance and advisory support 
towards provision of service under clause (a) of this section; 


(d) support introduction of telecommunication services, technologies, and 
products. 


26. The Digital Bharat Nidhi shall be administered in a manner, as may be 
prescribed. 


CHAPTER VI 
INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 


27. The Central Government may, for the purposes of encouraging and facilitating 
innovation and technological development in telecommunication, create one or more 
regulatory sandboxes, in such manner, and for such duration, as may be prescribed. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression "regulatory 
sandbox" refers to a live testing environment where new products, services, processes 
and business models which may be deployed, on a limited set of users, for a specified 
period of time, with certain relaxations from the provisions of this Act. 


Power to give 
directions. 


Establishment 
of Digital 
Bharat Nidhi. 


Crediting of 
sum to 
Consolidated 
Fund of India. 


Administration 
of Digital 
Bharat Nidhi. 


Regulatory 
sandbox. 


Measures for 
protection of 
users. 


Duty of users. 


Dispute 
resolution 
mechanism to 
redress user 
grievances. 


Definitions of 
terms used in 
this Chapter. 


Breach of 
terms and 
conditions of 
authorisation 


or assignment. 


[2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


CHAPTER VII 
PROTECTION OF USERS 


28. (/) For the purposes of this section, "specified message" means any message 
offering, advertising or promoting goods, services, interest in property, business 
opportunity, employment opportunity or investment opportunity, whether or not— 


(a) the goods, services, interest, or opportunity are real; or 


(b) it is lawful to acquire such goods, services, property, interest or take up 
the opportunity. 


(2) The Central Government may by rules provide for measures for protection of 
users, in consonance with any regulations notified by the Telecom Regulatory Authority 
of India from time to time, including measures such as— 


(a) the prior consent of users for receiving certain specified messages or 
class of specified messages; 


(b) the preparation and maintenance of one or more registers, to be called as 
"Do Not Disturb" register, to ensure that users do not receive specified messages 
or class of specified messages without prior consent; or 


(c) the mechanism to enable users to report any malware or specified 
messages received in contravention of this section. 


(3) An authorised entity providing telecommunication services shall establish an 
online mechanism to enable users to register any grievance pertaining to the 
telecommunication service, and redressal of such grievances, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


29. No user shall— 


(a) furnish any false particulars, suppress any material information, or 
impersonate another person, while establishing his identity for availing of 
telecommunication services; or 


(b) fail to share information as required under this Act. 


30. (J) The Central Government may establish or approve one or more online 
dispute resolution mechanisms for the resolution of disputes between users and 
authorised entities providing telecommunication services. 


(2) Every authorised entity providing telecommunication services shall participate 
in the dispute resolution mechanism established under sub-section (/), and shall comply 
with such terms and conditions of participation in such mechanism as may be prescribed. 


(3) This section shall not affect the rights of consumers under the Consumer 
Protection Act, 20I9. 
CHAPTER VIII 
ADJUDICATION OF CERTAIN CONTRAVENTIONS 
3l. For the purposes of this Chapter,— 


(a) "Adjudicating Officer" means an officer appointed under section 35; 
and 


(b) "Designated Appeals Committee" means the committee appointed under 
section 36. 


32. (/) In case of breach of any of the terms and conditions of authorisation or 
assignment granted under this Act, the Adjudicating Officer shall, pursuant to an inquiry 
under the provisions of this Chapter— 


(a) pass an order in writing in respect of one or both of the following, 
namely:— 


35 of 209. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(i) direct such authorised entity, or assignee to do or abstain from 
doing any act or thing to prevent such breach or for such compliance; 


(ii) impose civil penalties as specified in the Second Schedule; and 


(b) make recommendations for the consideration of the Central Government 
regarding suspension, revocation, or curtailment of the duration of the 
authorisation or assignment. 


(2) The Central Government may, after due consideration of the recommendations 
of the Adjudicating Officer under clause (b) of sub-section (/), suspend, curtail or 
revoke the authorisation or assignment, as the case may be, which may be reversed if 
the substantial violation is remedied to the satisfaction of the Central Government. 


(3) While imposing penalties specified in the Second Schedule under this 
section and section 33, the Adjudicating Officer shall have due regard to the following 
factors, namely:— 


(a) nature, gravity and duration of the contravention, taking into account 
the scope of the contravention; 


(b) number of persons affected by such contravention, and the level of harm 
suffered by them; 


(c) intentional or negligent character of the contravention; 
(d) repetitive nature of the contravention; 


(e) action taken by the concerned person to mitigate the contravention, 
including by providing a voluntary undertaking under sub-section (/) or 
sub-section (2) of section 34; 


(f) revenue loss caused to the Central Government; 


(g) any aggravating factors relevant to the circumstances of the case, such 
as the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, 
made as a result of the contravention; and 


(h) any mitigating factors relevant to the circumstances of the case, such as 
the timely rectification of the contravention, or steps taken for the avoidance of 
loss as a result of the contravention. 


33. (/) The Adjudicating Officer shall, upon receipt of a complaint in such form, 
manner and accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed, relating to contravention 
of this Act as specified in the Third Schedule, or suo motu, conduct an inquiry under 
the provisions of this Chapter, pass an order in writing specifying the civil penalty up 
to an amount as specified in the Third Schedule, payable by the person committing 
such contravention. 


(2) The provisions of the Third Schedule shall apply to the abetment of, or 
attempt to commit, or conspiracy to commit such contravention, as they apply to such 
contravention. 


34. (J) Any authorised entity or assignee committing the contravention as 
provided under section 32 or under serial No. 4 of the Third Schedule may, prior to any 
notice or initiation of process of determination of such contravention, submit a voluntary 
undertaking to the Adjudicating Officer, disclosing such contravention and measures 
taken or to be taken to mitigate such contravention. 


(2) The acceptance of voluntary undertaking given under sub-section (/), subject 
to the provisions of sub-section (6), shall constitute a bar on proceedings under this 
Chapter. 


Contraventions 
of Act. 


Voluntary 
undertaking 
for 
contraventions. 


Adjudicating 
Officer. 


Designated 
Appeals 
Committee. 


Process to be 
followed by 
Adjudicating 
Officer and 
Designated 
Appeals 
Committee. 


Enforcement. 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(3) Where the Adjudicating Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that a 
contravention as provided under section 32 or under serial No. 4 of the Third Schedule 
may have occurred, then it shall serve a notice to the authorised entity or assignee 
concerned under the relevant section. 


(4) At any time during the process of hearing under sub-section (3), the authorised 
entity or assignee, may, submit a voluntary undertaking specifying the mitigation 
measures it proposes to take in respect of such contravention. 


(5) The acceptance of the voluntary undertaking submitted under sub-section (4), 
subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), shall be construed as a mitigation measure 
and shall be duly considered for the purpose of determination of civil penalties under 
clause (a) of sub-section (/) of section 32, or under serial No. 4 of the Third 
Schedule. 


(6) The voluntary undertaking under sub-section (/) or sub-section (4) of this 
section, may include an undertaking to take a specified action within a specified time; 
an undertaking to refrain from taking a specified action; and an undertaking to publicise 
the voluntary undertaking. 


(7) The Adjudicating Officer may accept the voluntary undertaking under 
sub-section (/) or sub-section (4), or with the agreement of the authorised entity or 
assignee providing the voluntary undertaking, vary the terms included in such voluntary 
undertaking. 


(8) When the authorised entity or assignee providing a voluntary undertaking 
fails to comply with any terms of such undertaking, the Adjudicating Officer may, after 
giving such authorised entity or assignee a reasonable opportunity of being heard, 
proceed with imposition of civil penalties specified under the Second Schedule or the 
Third Schedule, as applicable. 


35. (/) For the purposes of this Chapter, the Central Government shall, by an 
order published in the Official Gazette, appoint any officer of the Central Government 
not below the rank of Joint Secretary as one or more Adjudicating Officers for holding 
an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Adjudicating Officer may, upon the holding of such inquiry, pass such 
order as he deems fit in accordance with the provisions of section 32 or section 33. 


36. (/) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, 
appoint officers of the Central Government not below the rank of Additional Secretary, 
as members of one or more Designated Appeals Committee to which any person aggrieved 
by an order made by the Adjudicating Officer under sub-section (/) of section 32 or 
under section 33, may prefer an appeal. 


(2) Every appeal under sub-section (/) shall be filed within a period of thirty days 
from the date on which the copy of the order made by the Adjudicating Officer is 
received by the aggrieved person, and shall be in such form, manner and be accompanied 
by such fees as may be prescribed. 


37. (7) The functioning of the Adjudicating Officer and the Designated Appeals 
Committee shall, as far as possible, be digital by design and they shall function as 
digital offices and deploy such techno-legal measures as may be prescribed, to enable 
online process for their functioning. 


(2) The Adjudicating Officer and Designated Appeals Committee shall have the 
same powers as a civil court, and all proceedings before it shall be deemed to be judicial 
proceedings within the meaning of sections !93 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code. 


38. Any order made by the Adjudicating Officer or the Designated Appeals 
Committee shall be executable in the same manner as if it were a decree of civil court; 
and such orders shall be deemed to be final decrees under this section on the expiry of 
the period allowed for preferring an appeal against such orders as provided in section 36 
and section 39. 


45 of 860. 


24 of 997. 


45 of 860. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


39. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Designated Appeals Committee 
under section 36, in so far as it pertains to matters under sub-section (/) of section 32, 
or an order of the Central Government under sub-section (2) of section 32, may prefer 
an appeal to the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal constituted under 
section 4 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 997, within a period of 
thirty days from the date on which a copy of the order is received by such authorised 
entity or assignee. 


40. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Designated Appeals Committee 
under section 36, in so far as it pertains to matters under section 33, may prefer an 
appeal to any civil court having jurisdiction over the matter. 


4i. No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the 
Adjudicating Officer, the Designated Appeals Committee, the Central Government or 
the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal are empowered by or under 
this Chapter to determine. 

CHAPTER IX 
OFFENCES 

42. (J) Whoever provides telecommunication services or establishes 
telecommunication network without authorisation under sub-section (/) of section 3, 
or causes damage to critical telecommunication infrastructure shall be punishable with 


imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend 
up to two crore rupees, or with both. 


(2) Whoever directly or indirectly or through personation— 


(a) gains or attempts to gain unauthorised access to a telecommunication 
network or to data of an authorised entity or transfers data of an authorised 
entity; or 


(b) intercepts a message unlawfully, 


shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or 
with fine which may extend up to two crore rupees, or with both. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,— 


(i) the expression "personation" shall have the same meaning as assigned 
to it under section 4!6 of the Indian Penal Code; 


(ii) data of an authorised entity includes call data records, internet protocol 
data records, traffic data, subscriber data records and the like. 


(3) Whoever,— 


(a) possesses or uses without an authorisation, any equipment that blocks 
telecommunication; 


(b) uses telecommunication identifiers not allotted or permitted in accordance 
with sub-sections (6) and (9) of section 3; 


(c) tampers with telecommunication identifiers; 


(d) possesses radio equipment without an authorisation or an exemption 
that can accommodate more than specified number of subscriber identity modules; 


(e) obtains subscriber identity modules or other telecommunication 
identifiers through fraud, cheating or personation; 


(f) wilfully possesses radio equipment knowing that it uses unauthorised or 
tampered telecommunication identifiers, 


Appeals on 
matters 

relating to 
section 32. 


Appeals on 
matters 

relating to 
section 33. 


Jurisdiction of 
civil court 
barred. 


General 
provisions 
relating to 
offences. 


Power to 
search. 


Supply of 
information 
to authorised 
officers. 


Creation of 
security 
interests. 


Certification 
of person for 
operation of 
radio 
equipment on 
a vessel or 
aircraft. 


Certification 
for amateur 
station 
operator. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or 
with fine which may extend up to fifty lakh rupees, or with both. 


(4) Whoever wilfully contravenes any measures specified in the notification on 
national security under section 2! shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend up to two crore rupees, 
or with both and the Central Government may, if it deems fit, also suspend or terminate 
the telecommunication service of such person. 


(5) Whoever causes damage to telecommunication network, other than critical 
telecommunication infrastructure shall be liable for compensation for the damage caused 
and fine which may extend up to fifty lakh rupees. 


(6) Whoever abets any offence, or attempts to commit, or conspires to commit an 
offence under this Act, shall if the act abetted or conspired is committed in consequence 
of such abetment or conspiracy, be punished with the punishment provided for the 
offence. 


(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, 
all offences specified under this section shall be cognizable and non-bailable. 


(8) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial 
Magistrate of first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. 


43. Any officer authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, may search 
any building, vehicle, vessel, aircraft or place in which he has reason to believe that any 
unauthorised telecommunication network or telecommunication equipment or radio 
equipment in respect of which an offence punishable under section 42 has been 
committed, is kept or concealed and take possession thereof. 


44. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, 
where the Central Government is satisfied that any information, document or record in 
possession or control of any authorised entity or assignee relating to any 
telecommunication service, telecommunication network or use of spectrum, availed by 
any entity or consumer or subscriber is necessary to be furnished in relation to any 
pending or apprehended civil or criminal proceedings, an officer, specially authorised 
in writing by the Central Government in this behalf, shall direct such authorised entity 
or assignee to furnish such information, document or record to him and the authorised 
entity or assignee shall comply with the direction of such officer. 


CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 


45. The Central Government may provide for such security interest which an 
authorised entity may provide to lenders financing such entities on such terms and 
conditions of such security interest as may be prescribed. 


46. The Central Government may grant certification to any person to operate a 
radio equipment on such class of vessels registered under the Merchant Shipping 
Act, |958, aircrafts registered under the Aircraft Act, !934 and any other category of 
vessels or vehicles as may be notified by the Central Government, in accordance with 
such terms and conditions, including applicable fees and charges, as may be prescribed. 


47. The Central Government may by rules provide for the manner of certification 
of person to install and operate an amateur station and such rules may specify the 
qualifications and terms and conditions subject to which, a certification for operating 
an amateur station may be granted, including through conduct of examinations for 
granting such certification, the fees and charges to be paid thereof, and other connected 
matters. 


2 of 974. 


44 of 958. 
22 of 934. 


l of 872. 


80 of 976. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [7 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) "amateur services" means radio communication services for the 
purpose of self-training, intercommunication and technical investigations 
carried out by amateurs, that is, by duly authorised person interested in 
radio technique solely with a personal aim and without any pecuniary 
interest; 


(b) "amateur station" means a radio station operated by an amateur 
for amateur services. 


48. No person shall possess or use any equipment that blocks telecommunication 
unless permitted by the Central Government, or any authority authorised for specific 
purpose by the Central Government. 


49. (J) The penalties imposed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter VIII or 
Chapter IX, shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any liability in respect of 
payment of compensation or payment of any fees or charges due by an authorised 
entity or assignee. 


(2) The provisions of this Act are in addition to and without prejudice to any 
other liability which a person may have incurred under any other law for the time being 
in force. 


50. This Act shall apply to any offence committed or contravention made outside 
India by any person if the act or conduct constituting such offence or contravention 
involves a telecommunication service provided in India, or telecommunication equipment 
or telecommunication network located in India. 


5. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government, the State Government, or any other authority under this Act or any person 
acting on their behalf, as the case may be, for anything which is done in good faith, or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder. 


52. (/) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not be construed in 
derogation of the provisions of any other law, and shall be construed as consistent 
with such law, for the time being in force. 


(2) If any conflict arises between a provision of this Act and a provision of any 
other law for the time being in force in the whole of India or restricted to the application 
within the territory of any State, the provision of this Act shall prevail to the extent of 
such conflict. 


53. The implementation of the Act shall be digital by design and the Central 
Government shall take any such measures as necessary to enable the digital 
implementation of the Act. 


54. No employee of an authorised entity shall, in any legal proceeding to which 
such authorised entity is not a party, be compelled to appear as a witness to prove the 
information contained in any electronic records submitted under sub-section (4) of 
section 658 of the Indian Evidence Act, 872, except as required by order of the Court 
or a Judge made for special cause. 


55. The privilege of the Central Government to grant authorisations or assignment 
under this Act in the Continental Shelf and the Exclusive Economic Zone of India and 
the rights of an authorised entity or assignee, as the case may be, shall be subject to the 
Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime 
Zones Act, |976, and applicable international laws as accepted and ratified by India. 


56. (7) The Central Government may, by notification, and subject to the condition 
of previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, to 
carry out the purposes of this Act. 


Prohibition of 
use of 
equipment 
which blocks 
telecommuni- 
cation. 
Penalties not 
to affect other 
liabilities. 


Act to apply 
for offence or 
contravention 
committed 
outside India. 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 


Consistency 
with other 
laws. 


Implementation 
of Act. 


Employee of 
authorised 
entity not to 
be compelled 
to appear as 
witness. 


Rights in 
Continental 
Shelf and 
Exclusive 
Economic 
Zone. 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make rules. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the terms and conditions, including fees or charges for obtaining 
authorisation under sub-section (/) of section 3; 


(9) the manner of exemption for providing authorisation under sub-section (3) 
of section 3; 


(c) the terms and conditions, including fees and charges, applicable to the 
original authorised entity that emerges pursuant to any merger, demerger, 
acquisition, or other forms of restructuring, under sub-section (5) of section 3; 


(d) the terms and conditions for migration under sub-section (6) of 
section 3; 


(e) the verifiable biometric based identification to be used by an authorised 
entity of telecommunication services under sub-section (7) of section 3; 


(f) the terms and conditions, including fees or charges for allotment of 
telecommunication identifiers for use by authorised entities under 
sub-section (8) of section 3; 


(g) the terms and conditions for the assignment of spectrum, including the 
frequency range, methodology for pricing, price, fees and charges, payment 
mechanism, duration and procedure under sub-section (3) of section 4; 


(h) the manner of exemptions for assignment of spectrum under 
sub-section (7) of section 4; 


(i) the terms and conditions for re-farming and harmonisation under section 5; 


(j) the terms and conditions, including applicable fees and charges, and any 
other relevant condition subject to which the utilisation of the spectrum in a 
flexible, liberalised and technologically neutral manner under section 6; 


(kK) the terms and conditions for optimal utilisation of spectrum under 
sub-section (/) of section 7; 


(J) the period of unutilised spectrum for insufficient reasons and further 
terms and conditions relating to spectrum utilisation under sub-section (2) of 
section 7; 


(m) the terms and conditions, including applicable fees or charges for sharing, 
trading, leasing and surrender of assigned spectrum, under sub-section (2) of 
section 8; 


(n) the timeline for granting permission for right of way for 
telecommunication network in public property; and the amount for administrative 
expenses and compensation for right of way under sub-section (3) of section |]; 


(०) the procedure to be followed by a facility provider to enter, survey, 
establish, operate, maintain, repair, replace or relocate the telecommunication 
network, including the notice period, the manner of issuance of notice, the 
framework governing objections by owner or occupier of the property, the manner 
in which such objections would be resolved, and matters relating to the 
compensation payable for any damage under sub-section (5) of section |2; 


(p) the terms and conditions, including charges for right of way, and 
compensation for damage to the property, under sub-section (6) of section 2; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(q) the terms and conditions, including fees and charges subject to which 
the telecommunication network to be made available on open access basis to 
facility providers under sub-section (2) of section |5; 


(r) the procedure and manner for giving prior notice under sub-section (/) 
of section 7; 


(s) the timeline for responding the notice with details of telecommunication 
network and precautionary measures to be undertaken by the facility provider 
under sub-section (2) of section |7; 


(t) the procedure and safeguards for public emergency or public safety 
under sub-section (2) of section 20; 


(u) the duration and manner of taking action for public emergency or public 
safety under sub-section (4) of section 20; 


(v) the measures to protect and ensure cyber security of, telecommunication 
networks and telecommunication services under sub-section (/) of section 22; 


(w) the standards, security practices, upgradation requirements and 
procedures to be implemented for the Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure 
under sub-section (4) of section 22; 


(x) the manner for administration of Digital Bharat Nidhi under section 26; 


(9) the manner and duration for creating Regulatory Sandbox under 
section 27; 


(z) the measures for protection of users under sub-section (2) of 
section 28; 


(za) the manner for registration of any grievance and redressal of such 
grievances pertaining to the telecommunication service under sub-section (3) of 
section 28; 


(zb) the terms and conditions for participating in the dispute resolution 
mechanism under sub-section (2) of section 30; 


(zc) the form, manner and fees to be accompanied with the complaint under 
sub-section (/) of section 33; 

(zd) the manner for holding inquiry by the Adjudicating Officer under 
sub-section (/) of section 35; 

(ze) the form, manner and fees for filing an appeal before the Designated 
Appeals Committee under sub-section (2) of section 36; 


(zf) the techno-legal measures for functioning of the Adjudicating Officer 
and the Designated Appeals Committee under sub-section (/) of section 37; 


(zg) the terms and conditions of security interest under section 45; 


(zh) the terms and conditions, including applicable fees and charges for 
granting certificates under section 46; 


(zi) the manner of certification, qualification, and terms and conditions, 
including fees and charges for the examination for amateur station operator under 
section 47; 


(zj) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of 
which provision is to be made by rules. 


(3) Every rule made under this Act and amendment to the Schedule made under 
section 57 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
to amend 
Schedules. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Amendment 
to Act 24 of 
997. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or amendment to the Schedule or 
both Houses agree that the rule or amendment to the Schedule should not be made, the 
rule or amendment to the Schedule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or amendment to the Schedule. 


57. (7) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Central Government may, by 
notification,— 


(a) amend the First Schedule; 
(b) amend the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule: 


Provided that penalty or civil penalty specified in such Schedules shall be not 
exceeding ten crore rupees. 


(2) Any amendment made under sub-section (/) shall have effect as if enacted in 
this Act and shall come into force on the date of the notification, unless the notification 
otherwise directs. 


58. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may be necessary or 
expedient, for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiration of 
three years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


59. In the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 997,— 
(a) in section 2,— 
(7) in sub-section (/),— 


(A) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


‘(e) "licensee" means an authorised entity providing 
telecommunication services under the Telecommunications 
Act, 2023, or registered for providing cable television network 
under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, |995 or 
any other Act for the time being in force;'; 


(B) for clause (ea), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


‘(ea) "licensor" means the Central Government which 
grants an authorisation for telecommunication services under 
the Telecommunications Act, 2023, or registration under the 
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, !995 or any other 
Act for the time being in force;'; 


(C) after clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


‘Ga) "“telecommunication" shall have the meaning as 
assigned to it in the Telecommunications Act, 2023;'; 


(D) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


'(k) "telecommunication services" means any service for 
telecommunication;'; 


7 of 995. 


7 of 995. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2 


(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words and figures "the Indian Telegraph 


I3 of 885. Act, 885 or the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 933", the words, figures 
I7 of I933. and brackets "the Telecommunications Act, 2023 or the Cable Television 
7 of 995. Networks (Regulation) Act, !995" shall be substituted; 


(b) in section 4, for the proviso, the following provisos shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of 
Government shall not be appointed— 


(a) as a Chairperson unless such person has held the post of 
Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the 
Central Government or the State Government; or 


(b) as a member unless such person has held the post of 
Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent 
post in the Central Government or the State Government: 


Provided further that a person who is, or has been, in a service other 
than that of Government, shall be appointed— 


(a) as a Chairperson if such person has at least thirty years of 
professional experience and has served as a member of the board of 
directors or a chief executive of a company in the areas as specified in 
this section; or 


(b) as a Member if such person has at least twenty-five years of 
professional experience and has served as a member of the board of 
directors or chief executive of a company in the areas as specified in 
this section."; 


(c) in section | | ,--- 


(7) in sub-section (/),— 


3 of 885. (A) for the words and figures "Indian Telegraph Act, |885", the 
words, figures and brackets "Telecommunications Act, 2023 or the 

7 of 995. Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, !995" shall be 
substituted; 


(B) in the fifth proviso, for the portion beginning with the words 
"may, within fifteen days from the date of receipt" and ending with the 
words "take a final decision", the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 

"shall, within thirty days from the date of receipt of such 
reference communicate to the Central Government any further 
recommendations that it may have, after considering the 
reference made by the Central Government and after receipt of 
further recommendation if any, the Central Government shall 
take a final decision."; 


(ii) in sub-section (2),— 


3 of 885. (A) for the words and figures "Indian Telegraph Act, |885", the 
words, figures and brackets "Telecommunications Act, 2023 or the 
7 of I995. Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 995" shall be 


substituted; 


Application of 
certain laws. 


Repeal of 
certain Acts 
and savings. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


(B) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"Provided further that the Authority may direct an 
authorised entity or class of authorised entities providing 
telecommunication services, to abstain from predatory pricing 
that is harmful to competition, long term development and the 
overall health of the telecommunication sector."; 


(d) in section |4, in clause (a),— 
(i) sub-clause (7) shall be omitted; 
(ii) for paragraph (C), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


"(C) any disputes to be adjudicated by the Adjudicating 
Officer or the Designated Appeals Committee under the 
Telecommunications Act, 2023; 


(iii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(d) hear and dispose of appeals under section 39 of the 
Telecommunications Act, 2023. 


Any action instituted under the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
Act, |997 and pending immediately before the appointed day in the Telecom 
Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal, shall continue to be heard and 
disposed of by the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal as 
if this Act had not been passed;"; 


(e) for section 38, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 


"38. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to the provisions 
of the Telecommunications Act, 2023 and, in particular, nothing in this Act 
shall affect any jurisdiction, powers and functions required to be exercised 
or performed by the appropriate authority in relation to any area falling 
within the jurisdiction of such authority."”. 


CHAPTER XI 
REPEAL AND SAVINGS 


60. (/) Subject to the other provisions of this section, the enactments namely, the 
Indian Telegraph Act, 885, the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, !933 and the Telegraph 
Wires (Unlawful Possession) Act, |950, are hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the provisions aforesaid, anything done or 
any action taken including any grant of license, registration or assignment, any order, 
or proceeding, pending or ongoing, under the repealed provisions shall be deemed to 
have been done or taken under this Act, and the provisions of this Act shall have effect 
in relation thereto. 


(3) The provisions of Part-II of the Indian Telegraph Act, 885 shall continue to 
apply to all cases pertaining to laying down of transmission lines under section 64 of 
the Electricity Act, 2003 as if the Indian Telegraph Act, 885 has not been repealed, and 
the provisions of Part-II of the Indian Telegraph Act, 885 shall continue in force with 
reference to section 64 of the Electricity Act, 2003 till such time as section 64 of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 is amended. 


24 of 997. 


3 of I885. 
7 of 933. 
74 of 950. 


3 of I885. 


36 of 2003. 


3 of I885. 
॥7 of 933. 
74 of 950. 


3 of I885. 
7 of 933. 
74 of 950. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


6l. All rules, orders, made or purported to have been made under the Indian 
Telegraph Act, 885 or under the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 933, or under the 
Telegraph Wires (Unlawful Possession) Act, !950, shall, in so far as they relate to 
matters for which provision is made in this Act and are not inconsistent therewith, be 
deemed to have been made under this Act as if this Act had been in force on the date on 
which such rules, orders were made, and shall continue in force unless and until they 
are superseded by any rules made under this Act. 


62. Allacts of executive actions done, decisions taken, actions done, proceedings 
taken and orders passed, prior to the appointed day, by the Central Government, by any 
officer of the Central Government, or by any other authority, with respect to assignment 
of spectrum or provision of telecommunication services, or telecommunication network 
or establishment of telecommunication infrastructure, in the belief or purported belief 
that the acts done, decisions taken, actions done, and proceedings taken, were being 
done, taken or passed under the Indian Telegraph Act, 885, the Indian Wireless 
Telegraphy Act, 933 or the Telegraph Wires (Unlawful Possession) Act, 950, shall be 
as valid and operative as if they had been done, taken or passed in accordance with 
law; and no suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintained or continued against any 
person whatsoever, on the ground that any such acts, decisions, proceedings taken 
were not done or taken in accordance with law. 


Existing rules 
to continue. 


Validation of 
certain acts 
and indemnity. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sections 4 (4), (5) and 57(/)] 
ASSIGNMENT OF SPECTRUM THROUGH ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS 
l. National security and defence. 
2. Law enforcement and crime prevention. 
3. Public broadcasting services. 
4. Disaster management, safeguarding life and property. 
5. Promoting scientific research, resource development, and exploration. 
6. Safety and operation of roads, railways, metro, regional rail, inland waterways, airports, 
ports, pipelines, shipping, and other transport systems. 
7. Conservation of natural resources and wildlife. 
8. Meteorological department and weather forecasting. 
9. Internationally recognised dedicated bands for amateur stations, navigation, telemetry, 
and other like usages. 

0. Use by Central Government, State Governments, or their entities or other authorised 
entities for safety and operations of mines, ports and oil exploration and such other 
activities where the use of spectrum is primarily for supporting the safety and operations. 

ll. Public Mobile Radio Trunking Services. 

2. Radio backhaul for telecommunication services. 

Explanation.—The term "radio backhaul" shall mean the use of radio frequency only 
to interconnect telecommunication equipment, other than the customer equipment in 
telecommunication networks. 

3. Community Radio Stations. 

4. In-flight and maritime connectivity. 

5. Space research and application, launch vehicle operations and ground station for satellite 
control. 

l6. Certain satellite-based services such as: Teleports, Television channels, Direct To Home, 
Headend In The Sky, Digital Satellite News Gathering, Very Small Aperture Terminal, 
Global Mobile Personal Communication by Satellites, National Long Distance, 
International Long Distance, Mobile Satellite Service in L and S bands. 

47. Use by Central Government, State Governments or their authorised agencies for 
telecommunication services. 

8. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) and Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited 
(MTNL). 

9. Testing, trial, experimental, demonstration purposes for enabling implementation of new 


technologies, including for creation of one or more Regulatory Sandboxes. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See sections 32(/) (a) and 34 (8)] 


CIVIL PENALTIES FOR BREACH OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER SECTIONS 32 AND 34. 


Categorisation 
Severe 

Major 
Moderate 
Minor 


Non-severe 


Civil Penalty 

Up to Rs. 5 Crore 
Up to Rs. | Crore 
Up to Rs. l0 lakh 
Upto Rs. | lakh 


Written warning. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[Part []— 


THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[See sections 33(/), (2), 34(/), (3), (5) and 34(8)] 


CIVIL PENALTIES FOR CERTAIN CONTRAVENTIONS 


SI. No. Contravention under the Act 


Civil Penalty 


l. (a) Possessing radio equipment without 
an authorisation or an exemption, except 
for the offence under clauses (d) and (f) of 
sub-section (3) of section 42; 


(b) Use of subscriber identity modules in 
excess of number notified. 


2. Use by any person or entity of a 
telecommunication service or 
telecommunication network knowing or 
having reason to believe that such 
telecommunication service or 
telecommunication network does not have 
the required authorisation under this Act. 


3. Contravention of the provisions of 
section 28 (Measures for protection of 
users). 


4. Contravention of any provision of this Act 
or rules, or any terms or conditions of an 
assignment or authorisation in relation to 
any matter under this Act, for which no 
penalty or punishment is provided 
elsewhere in this Act. 


First Offence: Civil penalty up to fifty 
thousand rupees. 


Each subsequent offence: Civil penalty up 
to two lakh rupees for each such instance. 


Civil penalty up to ten lakh rupees. 


First Offence: Civil penalty up to fifty 
thousand rupees. 

Each subsequent offence: Civil penalty up 
to two lakh rupees for each such instance, or 
suspension of telecommunication service, or 
a combination thereof. 


First Offence: Civil penalty up to twenty-five 
thousand rupees. 

Second or subsequent offence: Further Civil 
penalty up to fifty thousand rupees for every 
day after the first during which the 
contravention continues. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Telecommunication sector is a key driver of economic and social development. It is the 
gateway to digital services. Security of our country is vitally dependent on safety of 
telecommunication networks. Therefore, there is a need to create a legal and regulatory 
framework that focuses on safe and secure telecommunication network that provides for 
digitally inclusive growth. 


2. The current legal framework is governed by three laws enacted in 885, 933 and 
950. The nature of telecommunication, its usage and underlying technologies have undergone 
massive changes, especially in the past decade. Therefore, there is a need for enacting a 
legislation for telecom sector that serves the needs of our society. 


3. The Telecommunications Bill, 2023 amends and consolidates the laws relating to 
development, expansion and operation of telecommunication services and telecommunication 
networks; assignment of spectrum; and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


4. The Bill, inter alia, seeks to provide for the following— 


(a) A framework for authorisation of telecommunication services, 
telecommunication networks, and possession of radio equipment; assignment and 
efficient utilisation of spectrum including provisions for harmonisation and re-farming; 
development of new technologies; and regulatory sandbox for innovation using 
spectrum; 


(b) A framework for developing and maintaining telecom networks through right 
of way provisions, and establishment of common ducts; 


(c) A framework for standards and conformity assessment of telecommunication 
equipment, telecommunication identifiers, telecommunication network and 
telecommunication services; 


(d) Provisions for national security, public emergency and public safety; 
(e) Provisions for protection of users and defining duties of users; 
(7) A framework for resolution of disputes; 


(g) Compliance framework for effective implementation of the proposed 
legislation; 


(A) Saving of Part III of Indian Telegraph Act, |885 for cases pertaining to laying 
of transmission lines under section |64 of Electricity Act, 2003; 


(i) Repeal of the Indian Telegraph Act, 885, the Indian Wireless Telegraphy 
Act, |933 and the Telegraph Wires (Unlawful Possession) Act, |950; and 


(j) Amendments to certain provisions of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of 
India Act, 997. 


5. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill. 


6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


ASHWINI VAISHNAW. 


New DELHI; 
The |6th December, 2023. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Notes on clauses 


Clause | provides for the short title, extent and commencement of the proposed 
legislation, and for enforcement of the various sections of the proposed legislation on 
different dates. 


Clause 2 defines the various terms and expressions used in the proposed legislation. 


Sub-clause (/) of clause 3 provides that the authorisation from the Central Government 
shall be mandatory for any person to provide telecommunication services, establish, operate, 
maintain or expand telecommunication network, or possess radio equipment subject to such 
terms and conditions including fees or charges as may be provided by rules. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 3 provides that while making rules under sub-clause (/) the 
Central Government may provide for different terms and conditions of authorisation for 
different types of telecommunication services, telecommunication network or radio equipment. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 3 provides that the Central Government, may provide by rules 
in public interest may provide exemptions from requirement of authorisation. 


Sub-clause (4) of clause 3 provides that exemptions granted under the Indian Telegraph 
Act, [885 or the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, |933, shall continue under the proposed 
legislation, unless otherwise notified by the Central Government. 


Sub-clause (5) of clause 3 deals with merger, demerger or acquisition, or other forms of 
restructuring of authorised entities and such other terms and conditions as may be provided 
by rules. 


Sub-clause (6) of clause 3 provides for continuity of any license, registration, permission, 
by whatever name called, that have been granted prior to the appointed day of the proposed 
legislation. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 3 provides that an authorised entity under the proposed 
legislation which provides notified telecommunication services, shall be required to identify 
the person to whom it provides telecommunication services through use of any verifiable 
biometric based identification as may be provided by rules. 


Sub-clause (8) of clause 3 provides that the Central Government may allot 
telecommunication identifiers for use by authorised entities subject to such terms and 
conditions including fees or charges as may be provided by rules. 


Sub-clause (9) of clause 3 provides that the Central Government may allow use of 
telecommunication identifiers allotted by international bodies. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 4 provides that the Central Government is the owner of 
spectrum on behalf of the people and shall assign the spectrum in accordance with the 
proposed legislation and may notify a National Frequency Allocation Plan from time to time. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 4 provides that any person intending to use spectrum shall 
require an assignment from the Central Government. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 4 provides that the Central Government may by rules provide 
terms and conditions applicable for assignment of spectrum. 


Sub-clause (4) of clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall assign spectrum 
for telecommunication through auction, except for entries listed in the First Schedule for 
which assignment shall be done by administrative process. 


Sub-clause (5) of clause 4 specifies the Central Government may by notification amend 
entries in the First Schedule in public interest or in order to perform government functions or 
in cases where auction is not the preferred mode of assignment due to technical or economic 
reasons. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


Sub-clause (6) of clause 4 provides for Central Government to provide exemptions in 
the public interest, from the requirements of assignment under sub-clause (2). 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 4 provides for continuity of any exemption that may have 
been granted under the Indian Telegraph Act, !885 and Indian Wireless Telegraphy 
Act, 933 prior to the appointed day of the proposed legislation. 


Sub-clause (8) of clause 4 provides for continuity of spectrum assigned through the 
administrative process prior to the appointed day of the proposed legislation. 


Sub- clause (9) of clause 4 provides for continuity of terms and conditions on which 
any spectrum was assigned through auction prior to the appointed day of the proposed 
legislation. 


Clause 5 provides that the Central Government may allow re-farming or harmonisation 
of spectrum to enable more efficient use of spectrum subject to such terms and conditions as 
may be provided by rules. 


Clause 6 provides that the Central Government may enable the utilisation of the 
spectrum in a flexible, liberalised and technologically neutral manner subject to such terms 
and conditions including applicable fees and charges as may be provided by rules. 


Sub-clause (/) of clause 7 is an enabling provision to promote optimal use of the 
available spectrum subject to such terms and conditions as may be provided by rules. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 7 provides the Central Government to terminate an assignment 
or prescribe further terms and conditions, if it determines that the assigned spectrum has 
remained unutilised without any sufficient reasons. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 8 provides for monitoring and enforcement mechanism to 
enable interference-free use of the assigned spectrum. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 8 provides for the sharing, trading, leasing and surrender of 
assigned spectrum. 


Clause 9 provides that no person shall be entitled to the refund of any fees or charges 
paid in respect of or under an authorisation or assignment, if such authorisation or assignment 
is suspended, curtailed, revoked or varied. 


mom 


Clause 0 provides for definitions of the terms "facility provider", "public entity" and 
"public property" used in Chapter III. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause | | provides that a facility provider may submit an application 
to a public entity to seek permissions for right of way for telecommunication network in 
public property. 


Sub- clause (2) of clause |! provides a public entity, receiving an application under 
sub-clause (/) to grant permission for right of way. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause |] mandates the public entity to grant permission under 
sub-clause (2) in an expeditious manner, and subject to prescribed administrative expenses 
and compensation as may be provided by rules. 


Sub-clause (4) of clause | provides that any rejection of an application for right of 
way shall be based on reasonable grounds to be recorded in writing. 


Sub-clause (5) of clause | | mandates that the facility provider shall do as little damage 
as possible to the public property, and ensure that the functionality and continuity of 
operations over such public property is not adversely affected. 


Sub-clause (6) of clause ] provides for obligations of the facility provider if any 
damage is caused to the property. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Sub-clause (7) of clause |! provides that the provisions of clause | | shall be applicable 
to any public property vested for such projects or class of projects as notified by the Central 
Government, and in such cases, applications for right of way shall be made to the public 
entity granting the concession, contract or permission for such projects. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 2 provides for application process for right of way on property 
other than public property. A facility provider in such a case is required to submit an application 
for right of way for telecommunication network to the person under whose ownership, 
control or management of such property is vested. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause |2 provides that the person receiving the application under 
sub-clause (/) shall provide right of way subject to mutual agreement with the facility provider. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause [2 mandates the facility provider to do as little damage as 
possible to the property when exercising right of way. 


Sub- clause (4) of clause 2 provides for obligations of the facility provider in case of 
any damage to the property. 


Sub-clause (5) of clause |2 provides the Central Government to set forth procedure for 
right of way on property other than public property. 


Sub-clause (6) of clause |2 deals with situations when the person under 
sub-clause (2) of clause 2 fails to provide the right of way requested. In such situations, the 
Central Government may, in the public interest, determine that such facility provider shall be 
permitted the right of way to establish, operate, maintain such telecommunication network, 
subject to prescribed terms and conditions. 


Clause |3 provides that any person providing right of way under Clauses || or 2, 
shall ensure grant of right of way to the facility providers in a non-discriminatory manner 
and, as far as practicable, on a non-exclusive basis. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause |4 provides that a facility provider shall not have any right, 
title or interest in the property on which telecommunication network is established, except 
the right to use the property as provided under Clauses ! or 2. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 4 provides that the telecommunication network installed on 
any property, shall not be subject to any claims, encumbrances, liquidation or the like, 
relating to such property. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause |4 provides that telecommunication network installed on any 
property, shall not be considered as part of such property, including for the purposes of any 
transaction related to that property, or any property tax, levy, cess, fees or duties as may be 
applicable on that property. 


Sub- clause (4) of clause 4 provides that, except for cases where action is necessary 
to deal with any natural disaster or public emergency, no public entity shall take coercive 
actions such as sealing, preventing access, or forcible shutdown of the telecommunication 
network, unless permission of an officer authorised by the Central Government has been 
obtained for this purpose. 


Sub-clause (4) of clause 5 provides for the Central Government to notify infrastructure 
projects that are mandated to establish common ducts or conduits or cable corridors, for 
installation of telecommunication network. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 5 provides that the telecommunication network referred to in 
sub-clause (/) shall be made available on open access basis to facility providers, subject to 
such terms and conditions including fees and charges as may be provided by rules. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 6 deals with situations when telecommunication network 
may need to be relocated or altered, pursuant to the interests of the person entitled to deal 
with the underlying property where the telecommunication network has been placed. Such 
person may request the facility provider to undertake the relocation or alteration. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3] 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 6 provides for adjustment of the compensation while defraying 
the expense of the relocation or alteration. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 6 provides that if any dispute arises, the matter shall be 
determined by the authority referred to in sub-clause (2) of clause I8. 


Sub-clause (4) of clause 6 provides that if the facility provider omits to comply with 
the requisition for relocation or alteration, the person making such requisition may apply to 
the District Magistrate within whose jurisdiction the property is situated, to order the 
relocation or alteration. 


Sub-clause (5) of clause 6 deals with powers of the District Magistrate while receiving 
the application for relocation or alteration. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause !7 provides for the procedure to be followed if a person is 
desirous to deal with their property in a manner likely to cause damage to or interrupt or 
interfere with the telecommunication network established on such property or with 
telecommunication services. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 7 provides for obligations of the facility provider, the Central 
Government or any other authority to provide details of telecommunication network and 
precautionary measures to be undertaken, within such timelines as may be provided by 
rules. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause |7 deals with situations where notice under sub-clause (/) is 
given by a person in exercise of rights relating to their property with the bona fide intention 
of averting imminent danger of personal injury to himself. 


Sub-clause (4) of clause |7 provides the procedure when a person fails to comply with 
the requirement of giving notice or deals with the property in a manner that is likely to cause 
or causes damage to the telecommunication network or interrupts or interferes with it. 


Sub-clause (5) of clause |7 provides that any dispute in relation to damages shall be 
determined by the District Judge. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 8 provides for dispute resolution powers of the District 
Magistrate relating to right of way. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause |8 provides that disputes relating to compensation shall be 
determined by the District Judge within whose jurisdiction the property is situated. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 8 provides that every determination of a dispute by the 
District Magistrate or District Judge shall be final. 


Sub-clause (4) of clause |8 provides that nothing shall affect the right of any person 
to recover by suit the whole or part of any compensation paid by the facility provider, from 
the person who has received the same. 


Clause |9 empowers the Central Government to notify standards and conformity 
assessment measures in respect of telecommunication services, telecommunication network, 
telecommunication equipment, or telecommunication identifiers. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 20 provides for powers of the Central Government or State 
Government in relation to temporary possession of any telecommunication services or 
telecommunication network, and appropriate mechanism for priority routing of messages, 
upon occurrence of any public emergency, or for disaster management, or in the interest of 
public safety. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 20 provides for other actions in relation to occurrence of 
public emergency or in the interest of public safety, where the Central Government, or a State 
Government, is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient to do so, in the interest of the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, defence and security of the State, friendly relations with 
foreign States, public order, or for preventing incitement to the commission of any offence. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 20 provides that press messages, intended to be published in 
India, of correspondents accredited to the Central Government or a State Government shall 
not be intercepted or detained unless their transmission is specifically prohibited by order. 


Sub-clause (4) of clause 20 provides that the actions taken under Clause 20 shall only 
be for such duration and in such manner as prescribed. 


Clause 2 deals with measures that the Central Government may take in the interest of 
national security. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 22 provides for measures to ensure cybersecurity of 
telecommunication network and telecommunication services. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 22 provides that these measures may include collection, 
analysis and dissemination of traffic data that is generated, transmitted, received or stored in 
telecommunication networks. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 22 provides that the Central Government may by notification, 
declare any telecommunication network, or part thereof, as Critical Telecommunication 
Infrastructure. 


Sub-clause (4) of clause 22 provides the Central Government may by rules provide for 
the standards, security practices and upgradation requirements for such Critical 
Telecommunication Infrastructure. 


Clause 23 empowers the Central Government to direct any authorised entity to transmit 
specific messages in public interest. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 24 provides that the Universal Service Obligation Fund under 
the Indian Telegraph Act, |885 shall be the Digital Bharat Nidhi under the proposed Act. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 24 provides that any sums of money attributable to the Digital 
Bharat Nidhi that are paid pursuant to an authorisation under clause 3 shall be credited to the 
Digital Bharat Nidhi. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 24 provides that the balance to the credit of Digital Bharat 
Nidhi shall not lapse at the end of the financial year. 


Sub-clause (4) of clause 24 provides that all amounts payable under licenses granted 
prior to the appointed day towards the Universal Service Obligation Fund shall be deemed to 
be amounts payable towards the Digital Bharat Nidhi. 


Clause 25 provides for the mechanism for crediting of sums of money received towards 
the Digital Bharat Nidhi, and the objectives of the Digital Bharat Nidhi. 


Clause 26 provides that the Digital Bharat Nidhi shall be administered in a manner, as 
may be provided by rules. 


Clause 27 empowers the Central Government to create one or more regulatory sandboxes 
for the purposes of encouraging and facilitating innovation and technological development 
in telecommunication. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 28 defines the term "specified message". 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 28 provides that the Central Government, may make rules to 
provide for measures for protection of users in consonance with any regulations notified by 
the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 28 provides that an authorised entity providing 
telecommunication services shall establish an online mechanism for redressal of user 
grievances in such manner as may be provided by rules. 


Clause 29 specifies the duty of users under the proposed legislation. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


Sub-clause (/) of clause 30 provides that the Central Government may establish or 
approve one or more online dispute resolution mechanisms for resolution of disputes between 
users and authorised entities. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 30 provides that every authorised entity providing 
telecommunication services shall participate in the dispute resolution mechanism established 
under sub-clause (/). 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 30 provides that participation in this mechanism shall not 
affect the rights of consumers under the Consumer Protection Act, 209. 


Clause 3l provides for definitions of "Adjudicating Officer" appointed under 
Clause 35, and "Designated Appeals Committee" appointed under Clause 36. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 32 provides for the powers of the Adjudicating Officer with 
reference to breach of any terms and conditions of authorisation or assignment granted 
under the proposed legislation. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 32 provides for measures that the Central Government may 
take after duly considering recommendations of the Adjudicating Officer. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 32 specifies factors that the Adjudicating Officer would need 
to consider while imposing penalties as specified under the Second Schedule of the proposed 
legislation. 


Sub-clause (7) of clause 33 provides for powers of the Adjudicating Officer while 
undertaking inquiry into contraventions as specified in the Third Schedule of the proposed 
legislation. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 33 provides that provisions of the Third Schedule shall also 
apply to the abetment of or attempt to commit, or conspiracy to commit such contravention. 


Clause 34 provides for voluntary undertaking which may be submitted by an authorised 
entity or assignee upon breach of terms and conditions of authorisation or assignment or 
specific contraventions listed in the Third Schedule of the proposed legislation. 


Clause 35 provides for the appointment of one or more Adjudicating Officers. 


Clause 36 provides for the appointment of officers to the Designated Appeals 
Committee. 


Clause 37 provides for the process to be followed by Adjudicating Officer and 
Designated Appeals Committee. 


Clause 38 provides for enforcement of orders of the Adjudicating Officer and 
Designated Appeals Committee. 


Clause 39 provides that appeals from the orders of Designated Appeals Committee 
with respect to matters under sub-clause (/) of clause 32 or orders of the Central Government 
under sub-clause (2) of clause 32 shall lie with Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate 
Tribunal constituted under the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 997. 


Clause 40 provides that appeals from the orders of Designated Appeals Committee 
with respect to matters under clause 33 shall lie with any civil court having jurisdiction over 
the matter. 


Clause 4 provides that no civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter 
which the Adjudicating Officer, the Designated Appeals Committee, the Central Government 
or the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal are empowered by the proposed 
Legislation to determine. 


Clause 42 relates to general provisions relating to offences. 


Clause 43 provides for powers of search by an authorised officer in relation to offences 
under the proposed Legislation. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Clause 44 provides for supply of information to authorised officers. 


Clause 45 provides for the Central Government to provide by rules the security interest 
that an authorised entity may provide to lenders financing such entities. 


Clause 46 provides the grant of certification for operation of radio equipment on 
vessels registered under the Merchant Shipping Act, 958, aircrafts registered under the 
Aircraft Act, !934 and any other category of vessels or vehicles as notified. 


Clause 47 deals with certification required for installation and operation of an amateur 
station. 


Clause 48 prohibits possession or use of any equipment that blocks telecommunication, 
unless permitted by the Central Government. 


Clause 49 provides that penalties imposed under the proposed legislation shall be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of, any liability in respect of payment of compensation or 
payment of any fees or charges due by an authorised entity or assignee. 


Clause 50 provides for the applicability of the proposed legislation to offences or 
contraventions committed outside India. 


Clause 5 provides for protection of action taken in good faith. 
Clause 52 provides for consistency with other laws. 


Clause 53 provides that the implementation of the proposed legislation shall be digital 
by design. 


Clause 54 provides that an employee of an authorised entity shall not be compelled to 
appear as witness, in any legal proceeding to which such authorised entity is not a party, to 
prove the electronic records, except as required by order of the Court or a Judge made for 
special cause. 


Clause 55 provides that authorisations or assignment in the Continental Shelf and the 
Exclusive Economic Zone of India and the rights of an authorised entity or assignee, shall be 
subject to the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other 
Maritime Zones Act, |976, and applicable international laws as accepted and ratified by 
India. 


Clause 56 confers powers on the Central Government to make rules. 


Clause 57 confers powers on the Central Government to amend the Schedules of the 
proposed legislation by notification. 


Clause 58 provides power to remove difficulties. 


Clause 59 provides for certain amendments to the Telecom Regulatory Authority of 
India Act, 997. 


Clause 60 provides for the repeal of the Indian Telegraph Act, 885, the Indian Wireless 
Telegraphy Act, !933 and the Telegraph Wires (Unlawful Possession) Act, l950. Any action 
taken including grant of license, registration or assignment, any order, or proceeding, pending 
or ongoing, under the repealed legislations shall be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the proposed legislation. 


Clause 6| provides for existing rules to continue. It states that all rules, orders, made 
or purported to have been made under the repealed Acts shall continue until they are 
superseded by rules under the proposed legislation. 


Clause 62 deals with validation of certain Acts and grant of indemnity. 


The First Schedule is a list of the purposes for which spectrum shall be assigned 
through administrative process. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


The Second Schedule provides for civil penalties for breach of terms and conditions of 
authorisation or assignment. 


The Third Schedule provides for civil penalties for certain contraventions of the 
proposed legislation. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 9, sub-clauses (4) and (6) of clause 2, sub-clause (2) of clause 5, clause 25 
and clause 33 of the Bill, inter alia, provides that the sums of money received towards the 
Digital Bharat Nidhi established under clause 24, shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund 
of India and the Central Government may after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf, credit such proceeds to the Digital Bharat Nidhi from time to time for being 
utilised exclusively to meet any or all of the objectives listed in the clause. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 56 of the Bill, seeks to empower the Central Government, by notification and 
subject to the condition of previous publication, not inconsistent with the provisions of the 
Act, to make rules for— 


(a) the terms and conditions, including fees or charges for obtaining authorisation 
under sub-clause (/) of clause 3; 


(9) the manner of exemption for providing authorisation under sub-clause (3) of 
clause 3; 


(c) the terms and conditions, including fees and charges, applicable to the original 
authorised entity that emerges pursuant to any merger, demerger, acquisition, or other 
forms of restructuring, under sub-clause (5) of clause 3; 


(d) the terms and conditions for migration under sub-clause (6) of clause 3; 


(e) the verifiable biometric based identification to be used by an authorised 
entity of telecommunication services under sub-clause (7) of clause 3; 


(f) the terms and conditions, including fees or charges for allotment of 
telecommunication identifiers for use by authorised entities under sub-clause (8) of 
clause 3; 


(g) the terms and conditions for the assignment of spectrum, including the 
frequency range, methodology for pricing, price, fees and charges, payment mechanism, 
duration and procedure under sub-clause (3) of clause 4; 


(h) the manner of exemptions for assignment of spectrum under sub-clause (6) 
of clause 4; 


(7) the terms and conditions for re-farming and harmonisation under clause 5; 


(7) the terms and conditions, including applicable fees and charges, and any 
other relevant condition subject to which the utilisation of the spectrum in a flexible, 
liberalised and technologically neutral manner under clause 6; 


(kK) the terms and conditions for optimal utilisation of spectrum under 
sub-clause (/) of clause 7; 


(J) the period of unutilised spectrum for insufficient reasons and further terms 
and conditions relating to spectrum utilisation under sub-clause (2) of clause 7; 


(m) the terms and conditions, including applicable fees or charges for sharing, 
trading, leasing and surrender of assigned spectrum, under sub-clause (2) of clause 8; 


36 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(n) the timeline for granting permission for right of way for telecommunication 
network in public property; and the amount for administrative expenses and 
compensation for right of way under sub-clause (3) of clause |]; 


(०) the procedure to be followed by a facility provider to enter, survey, establish, 
operate, maintain, repair, replace or relocate the telecommunication network, including 
the notice period, the manner of issuance of notice, the framework governing objections 
by owner or occupier of the property, the manner in which such objections would be 
resolved, and matters relating to the compensation payable for any damage under 
sub-clause (5) of clause 2; 


(p) the terms and conditions, including charges for right of way, and compensation 
for damage to the property, under sub-clause (6) of clause |2; 


(4) the terms and conditions, including fees and charges subject to which the 
telecommunication network to be made available on open access basis to facility 
providers under sub-clause (2) of clause 5; 


(r) the procedure and manner for giving prior notice under sub-clause (/) of 
clause |7; 


(s) the timeline for responding the notice with details of telecommunication 
network and precautionary measures to be undertaken by the facility provider under 
sub-clause (2) of clause 7; 


(4) the procedure and safeguards for public emergency or public safety under 
sub-clause (2) of clause 20; 


(४) the manner for taking action for public emergency or public safety under 
sub-clause (4) of clause 20; 


(v) the measures to protect and ensure cyber security of, telecommunication 
networks and telecommunication services under sub-clause (/) of clause 22; 


(w) the standards, security practices, upgradation requirements and 
procedures to be implemented for the Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure under 
sub-clause (4) of clause 22; 


(x) the manner for administration of Digital Bharat Nidhi under clause 26; 
(y) the manner and duration for Regulatory Sandbox under clause 27; 
(z) the measures for protection of users under sub-clause (2) of clause 28; 


(za) the manner for registration of any grievance and redressal of such grievances 
pertaining to the telecommunication service under sub-clause (3) of clause 28; 


(zb) the terms and conditions for participating in the dispute resolution mechanism 
under sub-clause (2) of clause 30; 


(zc) the form, manner and fees to be accompanied with the complaint under 
sub-clause (/) of clause 33; 


(zd) the manner for holding inquiry by the Adjudicating Officer under 
sub-clause (/) of clause 35; 


(ze) the form, manner and fee for filing an appeal before the Designated Appeals 
Committee under sub-clause (2) of clause 36; 


(zf) the techno-legal measures for functioning of Adjudicating Officer and the 
Designated Appeals Committee under sub-clause (/) of clause 37; 


(zg) the terms and conditions of security interest under clause 45; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


(zh) the terms and conditions, including applicable fees and charges for granting 
certificates under clause 46; and 


(zi) the manner of certification, qualification, and terms and conditions, including 
fees and charges for the examination for amateur station operator under clause 47. 


2. The matters in respect of which the said rules may be made are matters of procedure 
and administrative details, and as such, it is not practicable to provide for them in the 
proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH, 


Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!l0054. 


