रजिस्ट्री सं” डी? एल"--(एन)04/0007/2003---23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


The Gazette of Gudia 


GoM. -ZT. Wet. -37.-08202 3-248020 
CG-DL-E-082023-248020 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग I[— खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 2] नई दिल्‍ली, बृहस्पतिवार, अगस्त 0, 2023/ श्रावण 9, 945 (शक) 
No. 2] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, AUGUST 0, 2023/SRAVANA 9, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


RAJYA SABHA 


The following Bill has been introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the l0th August, 
2023:— 


Britt No. LVII oF 2023 


A Bill to regulate the appointment, conditions of service and term of office of the Chief 
Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners, the procedure for 
transaction of business by the Election Commission and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Short title and 
Commissioners (Appointment, Conditions of Service and Term of Office) Act, 2023. SpEeeneement 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) "Chief Election Commissioner" means the Chief Election Commissioner 
appointed under clause (2) of article 324 of the Constitution and in accordance with 
this Act; 


Election 
Commission. 


Appointment 
of Chief 
Election 
Commissioner 
and other 
Election 
Commissioners. 


Qualifications 
of Chief 
Election 
Commissioner 
and other 
Election 


Commissioners. 


Search 
Committee. 


Selection 
Committee. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) "Election Commission" means the Election Commission referred to in 
clause () of article 324 of the Constitution; 


(c) "Election Commissioner" means any other Election Commissioner appointed 
under clause (2) of article 324 of the Constitution and in accordance with this Act; 


(d) "Search Committee" means the Search Committee for preparation of panel of 
persons for consideration for appointment as Chief Election Commissioner and other 
Election Commissioners; and 


(e) "Selection Committee" means the Selection Committee that recommends 
appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners. 


CHAPTER II 


APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF CHIEF ELECTION COMMISSIONER AND OTHER ELECTION 
COMMISSIONERS 


3. The Election Commission shall consist of— 
(a) Chief Election Commissioner; and 


(b) such number of other Election Commissioners as the President may fix from 
time to time. 


4. The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be 
appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal. 


5. The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be 
appointed from amongst persons who are holding or have held a post equivalent to the rank 
of Secretary to the Government of India and shall be persons of integrity, who have 
knowledge of and experience in management and conduct of elections. 


6. A Search Committee headed by the Cabinet Secretary and comprising of two other 
members not below the rank of Secretary to the Government of India, having knowledge 
and experience in matters relating to elections, shall prepare a panel of five persons for 
consideration of the Selection Committee, for appointment as the Chief Election Commissioner 
and other Election Commissioners. 


7. (7) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be 
appointed by the President on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting 
of— 


(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson; 
(9) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People—Member; 
(c) a Union Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Prime Minister—Member. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
where the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People has not been recognised as 
such, the leader of the single largest party in opposition of the Government in the House of 
the People shall be deemed to be the Leader of Opposition. 


(2) The appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners 
shall not be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of, 
the Selection Committee. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


8. (J) The Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure in a transparent 
manner for selecting the Chief Election Commissioner or other Election Commissioners. 


(2) The Selection Committee may also consider any other person than those included 
in the panel by the Search Committee. 


9. (/) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall hold 
office for a term of six years from the date on which he assumes his office or till he attains the 
age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier. 


(2) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall not be 
eligible for re-appointment. 


(3) Where an Election Commissioner is appointed as Chief Election Commissioner, his 
term of office shall not be more than six years in aggregate as the Election Commissioner 
and the Chief Election Commissioner. 


CHAPTER III 


SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF CHIEF ELECTION COMMISSIONER 
AND OTHER ELECTION COMMISSIONERS 


0. (7) The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chief Election 
Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be the same as those of the Cabinet 
Secretary: 


Provided that the Salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chief 
Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners, holding office immediately before 
the date of commencement of this Act shall not be varied to their disadvantage. 


(2) If a person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the Chief 
Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner, was in receipt of, or being eligible so to 
do, had elected to draw, a pension (other than a disability or wound pension) in respect of 
any previous service under the Central Government or a State Government, his salary in 
respect of service as the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner shall be 
reduced— 


(a) by the amount of that pension; and 


(b) ifhe had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion of the pension 
due to him in respect of such previous service, the commuted value thereof, by the 
amount of that portion of the pension. 


(3) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be entitled 
to dearness allowance as may be admissible to Cabinet Secretary. 


(4) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be entitled 
to encashment of fifty per cent. of earned leave to his credit at the time of completion of 
tenure. 


(5) Where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner had retired 
from the service of the Central Government or a State Government prior to appointment as 
such, the aggregate period for which the encashment of unutilised earned leave he shall be 
entitled, shall be subject to a maximum period as admissible to the Cabinet Secretary. 


Il. (/) The Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner may, at any 
time, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office. 


(2) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall not be 
removed except in accordance with the provisions contained in the first and second provisos 
respectively of clause (5) of article 324 of the Constitution. 


Power of 
Selection 
Committee to 
regulate its 
own 
procedure. 


Term of office. 


Salary, etc. 


Resignation 
and removal. 


Leave. 


Pension. 


Right to 
subscribe to 
General 
Provident 
Fund. 


Other 
conditions of 
service. 


Transaction 
of business. 


Disposal of 
business. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2.(/) The Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner may be granted 
leave in accordance with the rules for the time being applicable to the service to which he 
belonged before the date of his appointment and he shall be entitled to carry forward the 
leave standing at his credit on such date, irrespective of the provisions contained in 
section 3. 


(2) The power to grant or refuse leave to the Chief Election Commissioner or an 
Election Commissioner and to revoke or curtail leave granted to him, shall vest in the 
President. 


3. (7) Where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner was in 
service of Government, he shall be deemed to have retired from the service on the date on 
which he enters upon office as the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner 
as the case may be. 


(2) The Chief Election Commissioner or other Election Commissioners who at the 
time of his appointment as such, was in service of the Central Government or a State 
Government, shall at his option to be exercised within a period of six months from the date 
of such appointment, be entitled to draw his pension and other retirement benefits under 
the rules applicable to the service to which he belonged, with effect from the date of his 
appointment as the Chief Election Commissioner or other Election Commissioner. 


(3) Except where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner demits 
office by resignation, he shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to have demitted his 
office only if,— 


(a) he has completed the term of office specified in section 9; or 
(b) he has attained the age of sixty-five years; or 
(c) his demission of office is medically certified to be necessitated by ill-health. 


4. Every person holding office as the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election 
Commissioner shall be entitled to subscribe to the General Provident Fund under the General 
Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules, 960. 


I5. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the conditions of service relating to 
travelling allowance, medical facilities, leave travel concession, conveyance facilities, and 
such other conditions of service as are, for the time being, applicable to the Cabinet Secretary, 
shall be applicable to the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners. 


CHAPTER IV 
TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS OF ELECTION COMMISSION 


6. The business of the Election Commission shall be transacted in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act. 


7. (/) The Election Commission may, by unanimous decision, regulate the procedure 
for transaction of its business as also allocation of its business amongst the Chief Election 
Commissioner and other Election Commissioners. 


(2) All business of the Election Commission shall, as far as possible, be transacted 
unanimously, and if the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners 
differ in opinion on any matter, such matter shall be decided according to the opinion of the 
majority. 


ll of I99]. 


0 of 897. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


CHAPTER V 


MISCELLANEOUS 


8. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, within a period of five years from the date of commencement of this Act, 
by order not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under sub-section (/) shall, as soon as may be after it is made, 
be laid before each House of Parliament. 


9. Every order made under section 8 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order, or both Houses agree 
that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that order. 


20. (/) The Election Commission (Conditions of Service of Election Commissioners 
and Transaction of Business) Act, !99] is hereby repealed. 


(2) Anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken under 
the Act hereby repealed shall, insofar as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 


(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice 
or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 897 with regard to 
the effect of repeal. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Laying. 


Repeal and 
saving. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The matters regarding conditions of service of Chief Election Commissioner and 
other Election Commissioners, the procedure for transaction of business of the Election 
Commission, etc., are presently governed by the Election Commission (Conditions of Service 
of Election Commissioners and Transaction of Business) Act, !99l. The said Act do not 
contain provisions regarding the qualifications, search committee for preparing panel of 
persons for consideration and recommendation by the Selection Committee for appointment 
as Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) and other Election Commissioners (ECs) and other 
incidental provisions. 


2. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 04 of 20I5 (Anoop Baranwal 
Vs Union of India) declared that the appointment of CEC and ECs shall be made by the 
President on the basis of advice tendered by a Committee consisting of the Prime Minister, 
the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha and in case, there is no such leader, the leader of 
the largest party in the opposition in Lok Sabha having the largest numerical strength; and 
the Chief Justice of India. It has been clarified in the aforesaid judgment that the said norm 
provided by the Supreme Court will continue to hold good till a law is made by the Parliament. 


3. The proposed Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners 
(Appointment, Conditions of Service and Term of Office) Bill, 2023, inter alia, provides 
for— 


(a) defining various expressions used in the Bill; 


(b) appointment, qualifications, Search Committee, Selection Committee, term 
of office, salary, resignation and removal, leave, pension, etc., of the Chief Election 
Commissioner and other Election Commissioners; and 


(c) transaction of business and disposal of business of the Election Commission. 


4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL. 
The 4th August, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners (Appointment, 
Conditions of Service and Term of Office) Bill, 2023, if enacted, is not likely to involve any 
expenditure either recurring or non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


P. C. MODY, 


Secretary-General. 


PUBLISHED BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, RAJYA SABHA, UNDER RULE 68 OFTHE RULES OF PROCEDURE 
AND CONDUCT OF BUSINESS IN THE RAJYA SABHA. 


