रजिस्ट्री de Se wee (एन)04/0007/2003- 25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-17122025-268563 
CG-DL-E-17122025-268563 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


ae 22] नई दिल्‍ली, मंगलवार, दिसम्बर 16, 2025/अग्रहायण 25, 1946 (शक) 
No. 22] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, DECEMBER 16, 2025/AGRAHAYANA 25, 1946 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on 16th December, 2025:- 


BILL No. 197 OF 2025 


A Bill to establish a rural development framework aligned with the national vision of Viksit 
Bharat @2047, by providing a statutory guarantee of one hundred and 
twenty-five days of wage employment in every financial year to every rural 
household whose adult members volunteer to undertake unskilled manual 
work, to promote empowerment, growth, convergence and saturation for a 
prosperous and resilient rural Bharat; and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


WHEREAS to align the rural development framework with the national vision 
of Viksit Bharat @2047 by providing an enhanced statutory wage-employment 
guarantee of one hundred and twenty-five days in each financial year to such rural 
households whose adult members volunteer to undertake unskilled manual work, 
thereby enabling them to participate more effectively in the expanded livelihood 
security framework; 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


AND WHEREAS to focus on empowerment, growth, convergence and saturation 
through public works aggregating into forming Viksit Bharat National Rural 
Infrastructure Stack, with a thematic focus on water security through water-related 
works, core rural infrastructure, livelihood-related infrastructure and special works 
to mitigate extreme weather events; 


AND WHEREAS to facilitate adequate farm-labour availability during peak 
agricultural seasons, and, in view of the wage-employment guarantee for the rural 
workforce; 


AND WHEREAS to institutionalise convergence, saturation-driven planning and 
whole of government delivery through Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans, integrated 
with the PM Gati Shakti to address the varying needs of Gram Panchayats, and 
powered by geospatial systems, digital public infrastructure, District and State 
planning mechanisms, with such plans aggregated at the Block, District, State and 
National levels; 


AND WHEREAS to modernise governance, accountability and citizen 
engagement through a comprehensive digital ecosystem, including biometric 
authentication at various levels, global positioning system or mobile based worksite 
monitoring, real-time management information system dashboards, proactive public 
disclosures, and use of Artificial Intelligence for planning, audits and fraud-risk 
mitigation. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 


as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title and 1. (J) This Act may be called the Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and 


commencement Ajeevika Mission (Gramin) VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) BILL, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint: 


Provided that the different dates may be appointed for different States or for 
different areas in a State and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force 
of that provision in such State or, as the case may be, in such area. 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “adult” means a person who has completed the eighteenth year 
of age; 


(b) “applicant” means the head of a household or any of its other adult 
members who has applied for employment under the Scheme; 


(c) “Block” means a community development area within a district 
comprising a group of Gram Panchayats; 


(व) “Central Council” means the Central Grameen Rozgar Guarantee 
Council constituted under section 12; 


(e) “Centrally Sponsored Scheme” means a scheme in which the Central 
Government provides full or partial financial assistance and the State 
Governments undertake its implementation; 


(f) “District Programme Coordinator” means an officer of the State 
Government designated as such officer under sub-section (/) of section 17 for 
the implementation of the Scheme in a district; 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(g) “household” means the members of a family related to cach other by 
blood, marriage or adoption and normally residing together and sharing meals 
or holding a common ration card; 


(A) “tmplementing agency” includes any department of the Central 
Government or a State Government, a Zila Parishad, Panchayat at 
intermediate level, Gram Panchayat or any local authority or the Government 
undertaking, to undertake the implementation of any work taken up under 
the Scheme; 


(7) “intermediate level” means a level between the village and district 
levels as specified under clause (c) of Article 243 to the Constitution of India; 


(j) “National Level Steering Committee” means a steering committee 
constituted by the Central Government under sub-section (/) of section 14; 


(४0) “normative allocation” means the allocation of the fund made by the 
Central Government to the State; 


(2) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
and the term “notify” or notified, shall be construed accordingly; 


(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(n) “Programme Officer” means an officer at the Block level appointed 
under sub-section (/) of section18; 


(०) “rural area” means any area in a State except those areas covered by 
any urban local body or a Cantonment Board established or constituted under 
any law for the time being in force; 


(p) “Schedule” means Schedules appended to this Act; 


(q) “Scheme” means the Scheme notified by the State Government under 
sub-section (/) of section 8; 


(r) “State” means a State specified in the First Schedule to the 
Constitution and includes a Union territory; 


(s) “State Council” means the State Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Council 
constituted under sub-section (/) of section 13; 


(t) “State Level Steering Committee” means a steering committee 
constituted under sub-section (/) of section 15; 


(४) “unskilled manual work” means any physical work which any adult 
person is capable of doing without any skill or special training; 


(v) “Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack” means the 
consolidated aggregation comprising proposed works emerging from the 
Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans aggregated at the District and State 
levels, and aligned with the four thematic domains of works specified 
in Schedule I; 


(w) *Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan” means a future-ready, convergence- 
based local development plan aligned with the vision of Viksit Bharat @2047, 
formulated by the Gram Panchayat through a participatory and evidence-based 
process, and serving as the basis for identification and prioritisation of works 
under this Act, as provided in sub-section (3) of section 4; 


(x) “wage rate” means the wage rate referred to in section 10; 


(0) “work” means any work undertaken or executed under the Scheme. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


CHAPTER II 


IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK 


State 3. (1) The State Government, shall within six months from the date of 
Covemmen, commencement of this Act, by notification, make a Scheme consistent with the 
implementation ie : é है 

framieworle for provisions of this Act and the features provided therein. 

Scheme. 


(2) The Scheme made under sub-section (/) shall be implemented as a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme, under which the financial liability shall be shared 
between the Central Government and the State Government in accordance with the 
fund-sharing pattern provided under sub-section (2) of section 22 of this Act, 
including enhanced share of the Central Government in respect of the North-Eastern 
States and Himalayan States, and the responsibility of the State Government to bear 
any expenditure incurred in excess of its allocated share. 


Planning 4. (J) All works undertaken under this Act shall be originated from the Viksit 
hemi on Gram Panchayat Plans prepared under sub-section (3), and consolidated at the 
rice Rts Block, District and State levels and further aggregated into the Viksit Bharat 
Bharat @ 2047. National Rural Infrastructure Stack, which shall comprise a comprehensive listing 


of works aligned with National development priorities. 


(2) The Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack shall encompass 
four thematic focus domains, namely:— 


(a) water security through water-related works; 

(b) core rural infrastructure; 

(c) livelihood-related infrastructure; and 

(व) works for the mitigation of extreme weather events. 


(3) Rural works planning under this Act shall be undertaken through Viksit 
Gram Panchayat Plans, prepared by the Gram Panchayats and integrated with the 
PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan, so as to enable spatially optimised 
infrastructure development and strengthened inter-departmental convergence in 
accordance with the provisions specified in Schedule I. 


(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3), Gram Panchayats shall be categorised 
into Category A, Category B and Category C, in accordance with the provisions 
specified in Schedule I. 


(5) The Central Government shall determine the State-wise normative 
allocation for each financial year, based on objective parameters as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


(6) Any expenditure incurred by a State in excess of its normative allocation 
shall be borne by the State Government in such manner and by such procedure as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


Giiarsnisect 5. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such rural 
wage area in the State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every 
Das eae household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work, not less 
; than one hundred and twenty-five days of guaranteed employment in a financial 

year in accordance with the Scheme made under this Act. 


(2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme shall 
be entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work. 


(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily wages 
shall be made on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the 
date on which such work was done. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(4) The Central Government or the State Government, may within the limits 
of economic capacity and development, make provisions for securing work to every 
adult member of a household under the Scheme for any period beyond the period 
guaranteed under sub-section (/), as may be expedient. 


6. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or rules made Facilitating 
thereunder, and to facilitate adequate availability of agricultural labour during peak ae 
agricultural seasons, no work shall be commenced or executed under this Act, labour 
during such peak seasons as may be notified under sub-section (2). availability 

during peak 

(2) The State Governments shall notify in advance, a period aggregating to agricultural 


sixty days in a financial year, covering the peak agricultural seasons of sowing and 02०७ 


harvesting, during which works under this Act, shall not be undertaken. 


(3) The State Government may issue distinct notifications for different areas 
of the State, including districts, blocks or Gram Panchayats, based on agro-climatic 
zones, local patterns of agricultural activities or other relevant factors, and every 
such notification shall have a binding effect for the purposes of this Act. 


(4) All authorities responsible for planning, sanctioning or executing works 
under this Act shall ensure that all works are undertaken only outside the notified 
peak agricultural seasons. 


7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government Relaxations 
may recommend to the Central Government, the need for special operational करन कक 
relaxations during natural calamities or other extraordinary circumstances for the extraordinary 
purpose of ensuring timely response and support to affected households. circumstances. 


(2) The Central Government may, upon consideration of the recommendations 
received from the State Government, make specific relaxations, including temporary 
expansion of permissible works, relaxed documentation norms, or enhanced wage 
employment provisioning, as may be appropriate to address the situation. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (2), the Central Government may 
declare such relaxations as may be appropriate to address the situation. 


CHAPTER III 


Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): 
VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) Scheme 


8. (/) For the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of section 3, every Viksit Bharat— 
State Government shall, make a Scheme, for providing a guarantee of one hundred shea ris 
and twenty-five days of wage employment in a financial year to every rural Ajeevika 
household in the rural areas covered under the Scheme and whose adult members, Mission 
by application, volunteer to do unskilled manual work subject to the conditions ale ee a 
under this Act. (विकसित 

(2) The State Government shall publish a summary of the Scheme made under भारत-जी राम 
sub-section (1) in at least two local newspapers, one of which shall be in a vernacular जी) Scheme. 
language circulating in the area or areas to which the Scheme applies, and shall also 
make such summary publicly available through electronic means, including the 
official website of the State Government or any designated digital platform. 

(3) The Scheme made under sub-section (/) shall conform to and provide for 
the minimum features specified in Schedule I. 

9. (1) The State Government may, without prejudice to the conditions Conditions for 
specified in Schedule II, specify in the Scheme the conditions for providing ae 4 
guaranteed employment under this Act. employment. 


(2) The persons employed under the Scheme made under this Act, shall be 
entitled to such facilities not less than the minimum facilities specified in 
Schedule II. 


Wage rate. 


Payment of 
unemployment 
allowance. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


10. The Central Government may, by notification, specify the wage rate for 
the purposes of this Act, which shall apply to all unskilled manual work provided 
under the Scheme: 


Provided that different wage rates may be notified by the Central Government 
for different areas: 


Provided further that the wage rate so notified shall not be less than the 
prevailing wage rate as notified under section 6 of the Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005: 


Provided also that until a wage rate is notified by the Central Government 
under this section, the wage rates notified under section 6 of the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, shall continue to apply in the 
areas covered by this Act. 


11. (/) If an applicant for employment under the Scheme is not provided such 
employment within fifteen days of receipt of his application seeking employment or 
from the date on which the employment has been sought in the case of an advance 
application, whichever is later, he shall be entitled to a daily unemployment 
allowance in accordance with the provision of this section. 


(2) Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be prescribed by 
the State Government and subject to the provisions of this Act and the Scheme and 
the economic capacity of the State Government, the unemployment allowance 
payable under sub-section (/) shall be paid to the applicants of a household, 
subject to the guarantee provided under this Act, at such rate as may be 
specified by the State Government, by notification, in consultation with the 
State Council: 


Provided that no such rate shall be less than one-fourth of the notified wage 
rate for the first thirty days during the financial year and not less than one-half of 
the wage rate for the remaining period of the financial year. 


(3) The liability of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance to 
a household during any financial year shall cease as soon as— 


(a) the applicant is directed by the Gram Panchayat or Programme 
Officer to report for work either by himself or depute at least one adult member 
of the household; or 


(b) the period for which employment is sought, comes to an end and no 
member of the household of the applicant had turned up for employment; or 


(c) the adult members of the household of the applicant have received in 
total at least one hundred and twenty-five days of work within the financial 
year; or 


(d) the household of the applicant has earned as much from the wages 
and employment allowance taken together which is equal to the wages for one 
hundred and twenty-five days of work during the financial year. 


(4) The unemployment allowance payable to the household of an applicant 
jointly, shall be sanctioned and disbursed by the Programme Officer or such local 
authority (including the Panchayat at the District, intermediate or village level) as 
the State Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf. 


(5) Every payment of unemployment allowance under sub-section (/), shall 
be made or offered not later than fifteen days from the date on which it became due 
for payment. 


(6) The State Government may prescribe the procedure for the payment of 
unemployment allowance under this Act. 


42 of 2005. 


42 of 2005. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


CHAPTER IV 
IMPLEMENTING AND MONITORING AUTHORITIES 


12. (J) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by Central Gramin 
notification, appoint, there shall be constituted a Council to be called the Central ee 
Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Council to discharge the functions and perform the duties Council. 


assigned to it under this Act. 


(2) The Central Council shall consist of Chairperson, representatives of 
Central Government and State Governments, not more than fifteen non-official 
members representing Panchayati Raj Institutions, organisations of workers and 
weaker section of the society and a Member-Secretary not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India. 


(3) The composition, terms and conditions of appointment, tenure, and 
meeting procedures shall be such, as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(4) The Central Council shall perform such functions, duties and advisory 
roles relating to evaluation, monitoring, implementation support and reporting under 
this Act as may be assigned to it by the Central Government, and the detailed 
functions, responsibilities and modalities of functioning shall be such, as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


13. (/) For the purposes of regular monitoring and reviewing the implementation State Gramin 
of the provisions of this Act at the State level, every State Government shall, by cane 
notification, constitute a State Council to be known as the State Gramin Rozgar Council. 


Guarantee Council, consisting of a Chairperson and such number of official members 
as may be determined by the State Government and not more than fifteen non-official 
members nominated by the State Government from Panchayati Raj Institutions, 
organisations of workers and weaker section of the society: 


Provided that not less than one-third of the non-official members nominated 
under this sub-section shall be women: 


Provided further that not less than one-third of the non-official members shall 
belong to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes 
and Minorities. 


(2) The terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and members 
of the State Council may be appointed and the time, place and procedure of the 
meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) of the Council shall be such, as 
may be prescribed by the State Government. 


(3) The duties and functions of the State Council shall include— 


(a) advising the State Government on all matters concerning the Scheme 
and its implementation in the State; 


(b) reviewing the monitoring and redressal mechanisms from time to 
time and recommending improvements; 


(c) monitoring the implementation of this Act and the Scheme in the 
State and coordinating such implementation with the Central Council; 


(d) preparing the annual report to be laid before the State Legislature by 
the State Government; 


(e) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the Central 
Council or the State Government. 


(4) The State Council shall have the power to undertake an evaluation of the 
Scheme operating in the State and for that purpose to collect or cause to be collected 
statistics pertaining to the rural economy and the implementation of the Scheme and 
Programmes in the State. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


National Level 14. (J) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a National 
pares Level Steering Committee to recommend decisions relating to normative allocations 
ommittee. 


to States and to advise on matters requiring inter-ministerial consultation, including 
convergence framework and to provide high level oversight for the effective 
implementation of this Act. 


(2) The National Level Steering Committee shall consist of such senior 
officials of the Central Government and such other members as may be determined 
by the Central Government, and the terms and conditions of their appointment shall 
be such, as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(3) The National Level Steering Committee shall— 
(a) recommend decisions relating to normative allocations to States; 


(6) recommend policy measures on matters requiring inter-ministerial 
consultation, including convergence initiatives and frameworks; 


(c) provide high level strategic oversight for effective implementation of 
this Act; 


(d) review performance of States and recommend corrective or 
supportive measures; 


(e) facilitate coordination among the Ministries and Departments of the 
Central Government and between the Central Government and State 
Governments for effective convergence and implementation of the provisions 
of this Act; 


(f) advise on standards, guidelines, monitoring systems, digital and 
geospatial public infrastructure necessary for implementation of the 
provisions of this Act; and 


(g) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central 


Government. 
State Level 15. (J) The State Government shall, constitute a State Level Steering 
Steering Committee to provide operational guidance, coordination, and monitor the 


10०७. 5 ; 
OES implementation of the Scheme. 


(2) The State Level Steering Committee constituted under sub-section (/), 
shall be presided over by the Chief Secretary of the State or by an officer not below 
the rank of Additional Chief Secretary nominated by the State Government and shall 
comprise of the following members namely:— 


(a) Principal Secretary or Secretary of the respective Department; 
(6) the Director or Commissioner (in-charge of the Scheme); 


(c) Principal Secretaries or Secretaries of relevant Departments of the 
State Government; 


(d) such number of subject-matter experts, as may be determined by the 
State Government; 


(e) representatives of technical or research institutions; and 


(f) one member nominated by the Department of Rural Development, 
Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India. 


(3) The State Level Steering Committee, shall— 


(a) oversee State wide planning and convergence with other 
programmes; 


(6) review of district performance and ensure timely preparation of the 
aggregate State plan; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(c) coordinate with the National Level Steering Committee and 
implement directions issued therefrom; 


(d) support digital systems, monitoring arrangements, and process 
improvements at the State level; and 


(e) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State 


Government. 

16. (1) The Panchayats at the district, intermediate and village levels shall be Principal 
the principal authorities for planning, implementation and monitoring of the Scheme Saas, 
made under this Act. implementation 


ee है f Scheme. 
(2) The Panchayat at the district level, shall oversee and coordinate ee 


implementation of the Scheme in the district, including finalisation and approval of 
the aggregate district level plan, supervision and monitoring of works, ensuring 
convergence, and perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State 
Government. 


(3) The Panchayat at the intermediate level, shall prepare and finalise the 
aggregate Block level plan, support Gram Panchayats in planning and 
implementation, supervise works at Gram Panchayat and Block levels, facilitate 
convergence with line departments. 


(4) The Gram Panchayat shall register households, receive and process 
applications for work, prepare the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans, execute the works 
assigned to it, maintain such records as may be specified by the State Government, 
and discharge such other responsibilities as may be entrusted to it under the Scheme. 


17. (J) The District Collector or any officer of equivalent rank as the State District 
Government may decide, shall be designated as the District Programme Coordinator Ce 
for the implementation of the Scheme in the district. , 


(2) The District Programme Coordinator shall be responsible for the 
implementation of the Scheme in the district in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder. 


(3) The functions of the District Programme Coordinator shall be as follows, 
namely: — 


(a) the District Programme Coordinator shall be responsible for the 
consolidation and finalisation of the district aggregate plan and shall oversee 
convergence, implementation and monitoring of the Scheme at the district 
level in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 


(b) the District Programme Coordinator, shall ensure compliance with 
the provisions of this Act and with the directions and guidelines issued by the 
Central Government and the State Government, and shall accord such 
administrative sanctions and clearances as may be required for the timely and 
effective implementation of the Scheme, including those relating to digital, 
geospatial and monitoring systems; 


(c) the District Programme Coordinator shall coordinate with Programme 
Officers, and shall review, monitor and supervise their performance using the 
monitoring framework, management information system and accountability 
mechanisms established under this Act and the Scheme; 


(व) the District Programme Coordinator shall conduct periodic 
inspections of works undertaken under the Scheme, ensure adherence to 
quality and productivity standards, and shall redress the grievances of 
applicants through digital public infrastructure and designated grievance 
redressal systems in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(4) The Programme Officer and all other officers of the State Government and 
local authorities and bodies functioning within the district, shall assist the District 
Programme Coordinator in carrying out his functions under this Act. 


(5) The District Programme Coordinator, shall prepare an aggregate plan for 
the district under his jurisdiction by consolidating the approved Viksit Gram 
Panchayat Plans and aggregated Block Plans and the proposals received from the 


Zila panchayats. 
Programme 18. (/) At every Panchayat at intermediate level, the State Government shall 
Officer. appoint a person who is not below the rank of Block Development Officer with such 


qualifications and experience as may be determined by the State Government as 
Programme Officer at the panchayat at intermediate level. 


(2) The Programme Officer shall assist the Panchayat at the intermediate level 
in discharging its functions under this Act and the Scheme made thereunder. 


(3) The Programme Officer shall be responsible for matching the demand for 
employment with the employment opportunities arising from works in the area 
under his jurisdiction. 


(4) The Programme Officer shall prepare an aggregate plan for the Block 
under his jurisdiction by consolidating the approved Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans 
and the proposals received from intermediate panchayats. 


(5) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (/), the functions of the 
Programme Officer shall include— 


(a) monitoring all works and projects undertaken by the Gram 
Panchayats and other implementing agencies within the Block, ensuring 
alignment with the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans; 


(6) sanctioning and ensuring payment of unemployment allowance to 
eligible households in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 


(c) ensuring prompt and fair payment of wages to all labourers employed 
under the Scheme within the Block, including through digital and biometric 
authenticated payment systems, as may be specified by the Central 
Government; 


(d) ensuring that regular social audits of all works within the jurisdiction 
of each Gram Panchayat are conducted by the Gram Sabha, and that timely 
and appropriate action is taken on objections and findings arising from 
such audits; 


(e) dealing promptly with all complaints and grievances relating to the 
implementation of the Scheme within the Block, through the grievance 
redressal mechanisms established under sub-section (/) of section 25 of 
this Act; 


(f) ensuring the geo-tagging, digital recording, and management 
information system reporting of all works undertaken within the Block, and 
compliance with monitoring, productivity, and transparency framework, 
specified by the Central Government under this Act; 


(g) facilitating inter-departmental convergence at the Block level to 
support saturation-driven planning and the execution of works under the 
Scheme; and 


(A) any other function as may be assigned to him by the District 
Programme Coordinator and the State Government under this Act. 


(6) The Programme Officer shall perform his function under the direction, 
control and superintendence of the District Programme Coordinator. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


19. The Gram Panchayat, shall be responsible for,— cama 
0 am 
(a) registration of households and issuance of Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Panchayats. 
Cards; 


(6) receiving work applications and maintaining records of Gramin 
Rozgar Guarantee Cards; 


(c) preparing the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans; 


(d) every Gram Panchayat shall, after considering the recommendations 
of the Gram Sabha and the Ward Sabhas, keeping in view of the demand for 
works, prepare a Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan on saturation basis; 


(e) the Programme Officer shall allocate at least fifty per cent. of the 
works in terms of its cost under the Scheme to be implemented through the 
Gram Panchayats; 


(f) the Programme Officer shall supply each Gram Panchayat with— 
(४) the muster rolls for the works sanctioned to be executed by it; 


(ii) a list of employment opportunities available elsewhere to the 
residents of the Gram Panchayat; 


(g) the Gram Panchayat shall allocate employment opportunities among 
the applicants and ask them to report for work; 


(A) the works taken up by a Gram Panchayat under the Scheme, shall 
meet the required technical standards and measurements; 


(i) executing works allotted to it by the Programme Officer; and 


(7) A Gram Panchayat may take up any work under the Scheme from 
Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan within the area of the Gram Panchayat, as may 
be sanctioned by the Programme Officer. 


20. (1) The Gram Sabha, shall monitor and review the execution of all works bases 7 of 
undertaken under the Scheme within the jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat, in en tiga 


accordance with the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Gram Sabha shall conduct regular social audits of all works taken up 
under the Scheme within the Gram Panchayat, in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government. 


(3) The Gram Panchayat shall make available to the Gram Sabha all records 
and documents required for conduct of the social audit, including muster rolls, bills, 
vouchers, measurement books, sanction orders, digital records, geo-tagged 
photographs, and all other connected books of account and papers, whether 
maintained in physical or electronic form. 


21. The State Government, shall provide the necessary staff and technical Ne nace 
support to the District Programme Coordinator and the Programme Officer as may 07 in 
be necessary for the effective implementation of the Scheme. implementing 


Scheme. 


CHAPTER V 
NATURE OF THE SCHEME AND FUND SHARING PATTERN 


22. (1) The Scheme implemented under this Act, shall be a Centrally Nature of 


S S Scheme and 
ponsored Scheme. fund sharing 


pattern. 


(2) For the purposes of this Act, the fund-sharing pattern between the Central 
Government and the State Governments shall be 90:10 for the North Eastern States, 
Himalayan States and Union territory (Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu 
and Kashmir) and 60:40 for all other States and Union territories with legislature. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(3) For the Union territories without legislature, the Central Government shall 
bear the entire expenses of the Scheme in the manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 


(4) The Central Government shall determine the State-wise normative 
allocation for each financial year, based on objective parameters as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


(5) Any expenditure incurred by a State in excess of its normative allocation, 
shall be borne by the State Government in such manner and procedure as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


(6) In accordance with the State-wise normative allocation determined under 
this Act, the share of the Central Government shall include expenditure towards,— 


(a) payment of wages for unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled labour 
employed under the Scheme; 


(6) the material component of works, subject to the provisions in 
Schedule I; 


(c) such administrative expenses as may be specified by the Central 
Government, including salary and allowances of Programme Officers and 
supporting staff, administrative expenses of the Central Council, facilities 
required under Schedule II, and such other items as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 


(7) In accordance with the State-wise normative allocation determined under 
this Act, the share of the State Government shall include expenditure towards,— 


(a) payment of wages for unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled labour 
employed under the Scheme; 


(6) the material component of works, subject to the provisions in 
Schedule I; 


(c) such administrative expenses as may be specified by the Central 
Government, including salary and allowances of Programme Officers and 
supporting staff, administrative expenses of the State Council, facilities 
required under Schedule II, and such other items as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 


(8) The State Government, shall bear the expenditure towards unemployment 
allowance and delay compensation as may be prescribed by the State Government. 


CHAPTER VI 
TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY 
Transparency 23. (1) The District Programme Coordinator and all implementing agencies in the 
and 7 district shall be responsible for the proper utilisation and management of the funds 
accountability. 


placed at their disposal for the purpose of implementing the Scheme under this Act. 


(2) The manner of maintaining proper books and accounts relating to the 
employment of labourers and the expenditure incurred in connection with the 
implementation of the provisions of this Act, shall be such, as may be prescribed by 
the State Government. 


(3) The State Government may determine the arrangements to be made for the 
proper execution of works under the Scheme and to ensure transparency and 
accountability at all levels in the implementation of the Schemes. 


(4) All payments of wages and unemployment allowances shall be made 
directly to the person concerned in such manner, as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


(5) If any dispute or complaint arises concerning the implementation of the 
Scheme by the Gram Panchayat, the matter shall be referred to the Programme Officer. 


(6) The Programme Officer shall enter every dispute or complaint in a complaint 
register maintained by him and shall dispose of such dispute or complaint within a 
period of seven days of its receipt; and where the matter relates to any other authority, 
it shall be forwarded to such authority under intimation to the complainant. 


24. Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, transparency and accountability Technology- 
in the implementation of the provisions of this Act, shall be ensured through— ee 
transparency and 
public 


(a) biometric authentication of workers, functionaries, and transactions, 


५ > C accountability. 
in such manner as may be specified by the Central Government; : 


(b) geospatial technology—enabled planning, including geo-referencing, 
satellite imagery, digital mapping of works, and other approved spatial 
technologies, as may be specified by the Central Government; 


(c) mobile application—based and dashboard-based monitoring systems 
providing real-time visibility of demand, works, workforce deployment, 
payments, progress and other indicators, as may be specified by the Central 
Government; 


(d) weekly public disclosure systems, including digital and physical 
disclosure of key metrics, muster rolls, payments, sanctions, inspections and 
grievances, as may be specified by the Central Government; 


(e) strengthening of the social audit mechanism, and the adoption of such 
other technology-enabled systems as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


25. (1) The State Government shall, determine a time-bound and multi-tier Grievance 
grievance redressal mechanism at the Block level and the District level for dealing का 500 
with any complaint made by any person in respect of implementation of the Scheme , 
and lay down the procedure for disposal of such complaints in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(2) These mechanisms shall address grievances related to applicants, which 
include,— 


(a) failure of the Gram Panchayat or Programme Officer to provide 
employment within the stipulated period referred to in sub-section (/) of 
section 11; 


(b) non-payment or delayed payment of wages; 
(c) non-payment of unemployment allowance; 
(d) lack of specified worksite facilities as specified in Schedule I; 


(e) discrimination, harassment, or violation of worker rights, including 
those of women and vulnerable groups. 


Audit of 


26. (1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller aca 


and Auditor General of India, prescribe appropriate arrangements for audits of the 
accounts of the Schemes at all levels. 


(2) The accounts of the Scheme shall be maintained in such form and in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government. 


CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


27. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act, shall be liable to pay the Penalties for 
penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees. sen 


14 


Power to 
delegate. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
give directions. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to amend 
Schedules. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
make rules. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


28. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the powers 
exercisable by it (excluding the power to make rules) may, in such circumstances 
and subject to such conditions and limitations, be exercisable also by the State 
Government or such officer subordinate to the Central Government or the State 
Government as it may specify in such notification. 


(2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the powers 
exercisable by it (excluding the power to make rules and Schemes) may, in such 
circumstances and subject to such conditions and limitations, be exercisable also by 
such officer subordinate to it as it may specify in such notification. 


29. (1) The Central Government may give such directions as it may consider 
necessary to the State Government for the effective implementation of the 
provisions of this Act. 


(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (/), the Central 
Government may, on receipt of any complaint regarding any issue or improper 
utilisation of funds granted under this Act in respect of any Scheme, if prima facie 
satisfied that there is a case, cause an investigation into the complaint made by any 
agency designated by it and if necessary, order stoppage of release of funds to the 
Scheme and institute appropriate remedial measures for its proper implementation 
within a reasonable period of time. 


30. The provisions of this Act or the Scheme made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the 
time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such law: 


Provided that where a State Act exists or is enacted to provide employment 
guarantee for unskilled manual work to rural households consistent with the 
provisions of this Act under which the guarantee of the households is not less than 
and the conditions of employment are not inferior to what is guaranteed under this 
Act, the State Government shall have the option of implementing its own enactment: 


Provided further that in such cases the financial assistance shall be paid to the 
concemed State Government in such manner as shall be determined by the Central 
Government, which shall not exceed what the State would have been entitled to 
receive under this Act had a Scheme made under this Act had to be implemented. 


31. (/) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient 
to do so, it may, by notification, amend Schedule I or Schedule II. 


(2) A copy of every notification issued under sub-section (/) shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 


32. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the District 
Programme Coordinator, Programme Officer or any other person who is, or who is 
deemed to be, a public servant within the meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 in respect of anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or Schemes made thereunder. 


33. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, and subject to the 
condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) State-wise normative allocation for each financial year, based on 
objective parameters under sub-section (5) of section 4; 


(6) manner and procedure to bear the excess expenditure and its 
parameters under sub-section (6) of section 4; 


(c) the composition, terms and conditions of appointment, tenure and 
procedure of meeting under sub-section (3) of section 12; 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


(d) the detailed functions, responsibilities and modalities under 
sub-section (4) of section 12; 


(e) terms and conditions of appointment of officials of National Level 
Steering Committee under sub-section (2) of section 14; 


(f) manner to redress the grievance under clause (d) of sub-section (3) of 
section 17; 


(g) manner of conducting social audit by Gram Sabha under 
sub- section (2) of section 20; 


(h) manner to bear the expenses of Scheme under sub-section (3) of 
section 22; 


(i) objective parameters to determine the State-wise normative allocation 
under sub-section (4) of section 22; 


(j) manner and procedure to bear the excess expenditure under 
sub-section (5) of section 22; 


(k) other items under clause (c) of sub-section (6) of section 22; 
(2) other items under clause (c) of sub-section (7) of section 22; 


(m) expenditure towards unemployment allowance and delay 
compensation under sub-section (8) of section 22; 


(n) manner of payments of wages and unemployment allowances under 
sub-section (4) of section 23; 


(०) social audit mechanism, and the adoption of such other 
technology-enabled systems under clause (e) of section 24; 


(p) manner to lay down the procedure for disposal of complaints under 
sub-section (/) of section 25; 


(q) the manner of transfer and vesting under sub-section (5) of section 37; 


(r) any other matter which is to be, or prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


34. (1) The State Government may, by notification, and subject to the condition Power of State 
of previous publication, and consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules Sunsari © 
made by the Central Government, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) terms and conditions of eligibility under sub-section (2) of section 11; 


(5) terms, conditions, time, place and procedure of meeting and quorum 
under sub-section (2) of section 13; 


(c) manner of maintaining proper books and accounts under 
sub-section (2) of section 23; 


(d) form and manner to maintain the accounts of the Scheme under 
sub-section (2) of section 26. 


35.(/) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be Laying of rules 

laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is व 00007 05 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 

or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 

immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 

agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 

should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 

or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 

annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 

under that rule. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal, savings 
and transitional 
provisions. 


16 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(2) Every rule or Scheme made by the State Government under this Act shall, 
as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of the State Legislature 
where there are two Houses, and where there is one House of the State Legislature, 
before that House. 


36. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 


(2) No order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


(3) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 


37. (1) Save as provided in section 10, on and from such date as the Central 
Government may by notification appoint in this behalf (hereinafter referred to as the 
appointed date), the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act, 2005, together with all rules, notifications, Schemes, orders and guidelines 
made thereunder, shall stand repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything duly done or any action taken under 
the repealed Act, including any notification issued, scheme sanctioned, employment 
generated, muster roll prepared, wage liability accrued, or proceeding initiated, 
shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to 
have been done, taken, issued, sanctioned, accrued or incurred under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act, as if this Act had been in force at all 
material times. 


(3) All appointments, engagements, authorisations, approvals and 
administrative arrangements made under the repealed Act and continuing 
immediately before the appointed date shall, unless inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, continue to be valid and in force until they are altered, superseded or 
withdrawn under this Act. 


(4) All inquiries, investigations, audits and legal proceedings pending 
immediately before the appointed date shall be continued, heard and disposed of as 
if the repealed Act had not been repealed, and such proceedings shall not abate by 
reason only of such repeal. 


(5) All assets, liabilities, records, funds and obligations arising under, or 
relating to, the repealed Act shall stand transferred to and vest in the authorities 
constituted under this Act and shall be dealt with in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


42 of 2005. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


SCHEDULE I 
[See section 8 (3)] 


Minimum features of Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission 


(Gramin): VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) Scheme 


1. The Scheme notified under section 8 of the Act by all States shall be called 
the “Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): 
VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) Scheme” and all documents pertaining 
to the said Scheme shall have a mention of the Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar 
and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) 
Act, 2025. 


2. All Scheme documents pertaining to the said Scheme shall have a mention 
of the Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): 
VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत-जी राम Gh BILL, 2025. 


3. The core objectives of the Scheme shall be as follows:—(a) The primary 
objective of this Act is to align the rural development framework with the national 
vision of Viksit Bharat @2047 by providing an enhanced statutory wage- 
employment guarantee of one hundred and twenty-five days in each financial year 
to such rural households whose adult members volunteer to undertake unskilled 
manual work, thereby enabling them to participate more effectively in the expanded 
livelihood security framework. 


(6) To focus on empowerment, growth, convergence and saturation through 
public works aggregating into forming Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure 
Stack, with a thematic focus on water security through water-related works, core 
rural infrastructure, livelihood-related infrastructure and special works to mitigate 
extreme weather events. 


(c) To facilitate adequate farm-labour availability during peak agricultural 
seasons, and, in view of the wage-employment guarantee for the rural workforce. 


(d) To institutionalise convergence, saturation-driven planning and whole of 
government delivery through Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans, integrated with the PM 
Gati Shakti to address the varying needs of Gram Panchayats, powered by geospatial 
systems, digital public infrastructure, district and State planning mechanisms, with 
such plans aggregated at the Block, District, State and National levels. 


(e) To modernise governance, accountability and citizen engagement through a 
comprehensive digital ecosystem, including biometric authentication at various levels, 
global positioning system or mobile based worksite monitoring, real time 
management information system dashboards, proactive public disclosures and the use 
of Artificial Intelligence for planning, audits and fraud risk mitigation. 


4. Works under the Scheme—(/) Focus of the Scheme—Classification of 
Works: The Scheme shall focus on the following categories of works, as identified 
in the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans and aggregated into the Viksit Bharat National 
Rural Infrastructure Stack. 


(2) For the purposes of section 4 of the Act, the works to be taken up under 
the Scheme, shall fall under the following Categories, together with their thematic 
focus and intended outcomes, namely: — 


(a) Category I—Water-Related Works (for Water Security)— 


18 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(A) The focus shall include conservation, irrigation, groundwater 
recharge, source sustainability, rejuvenation of water bodies, watershed 
development and afforestation and the Illustrative works include— 


(7) construction of canals, flood or diversion channels, check 
dams, gully plugs and underground dykes; 


(zi) construction or rejuvenation of ponds, percolation tanks, 
recharge pits, recharge shafts, injection wells and associated water 
harvesting structures; 


(iii) irrigation open wells, micro-irrigation channels and field 
water distribution systems; 


(iv) reclamation of community waterlogged land; 


(v) afforestation and plantation works linked with soil and 
moisture conservation; and 


(vi) rooftop rainwater harvesting and other decentralised 
recharge systems. 


(B) Intended Outcomes—Strengthening of water security through 
integrated water resource management, recharge and conservation for 
long-term climate resilience. 


(6) Category II—Core Rural Infrastructure— 


(A) Thematic focus shall include core civic, social, governance and 
service-delivery infrastructure relating to education, health, drinking 
water, sanitation, connectivity, renewable energy and community 
services and the Illustrative works include— 


(7) construction or upgradation of rural roads, culverts, cross- 
drainage structures and village connectivity facilities; 


(ii) construction of Gram Panchayat Bhawans, Anganwadi 
centres, rural libraries and other public buildings; 


(iii) construction of school infrastructure, including kitchen 
sheds, additional classrooms, laboratories, compound walls and 
playgrounds; 


(iv) crematoria and community infrastructure; 


(v) solid and liquid waste management assets, including 
stabilising ponds, community sanitary complexes, and waste 
segregation and collection centres; 


(vi) installation of solar lighting systems and other renewable 
rural energy infrastructure; and 


(vii) village parking areas, transport sheds and other common 
rural amenities; 


(viii) rural housing works permissible under the schemes of 
the Central Government, including those permitted under the 
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana—Gramin; 


(ix) repair and maintenance of works created under the Jal 
Jeevan Mission for ensuring water supply. 


(B) Intended Outcome—Creation of foundational civic and social 
infrastructure ensuring basic amenities, improved service access and 
enhanced quality of life in rural areas. 


(2) Category I1]—Livelihood-related Infrastructure— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(A) Thematic focus shall include productive assets and facilities 
that enhance rural livelihoods through agriculture, livestock, fisheries, 
value addition, skilling and enterprise development and the Illustrative 
works include— 


(i) construction of training-cum-skill development centres 
and work sheds for livelihood activities; 


(ii) rural haats or weekly markets and other market 
infrastructure; 


(iii) food grain storage buildings, agricultural produce 
storage structures, cold storage units and other agri-value chain 
infrastructure; 


(iv) buildings for Self Help Groups and federation-level 
institutions; 


(v) compost structures, including vermicompost and NADEP 
units; 


(vi) development of silvipasture grasslands, dairy 
infrastructure and shelters for cattle, goats, pigs, poultry and other 
livestock; 


(vii) fisheries-related infrastructure, including fish drying 
yards; 


(viii) raising of nurseries and production of building material; 
and 


(ix) Integrated projects promoting circular and cyclical 
economy models, as may be approved by the Central Government. 


(B) Intended Outcome—Strengthening of sustainable livelihoods, 
value addition, enterprise development and self-reliant rural economies. 


(d) Category IV—Special works to mitigate Extreme Weather Events 
and Disaster Preparedness— 


(A) Thematic focus shall include disaster risk reduction, 
climate adaptation, and protection of rural communities and assets 
from floods, cyclones, storms, droughts, landslides, forest fires and 
other extreme weather events and the Illustrative works include— 


(i) construction of cyclone shelters, flood shelters and 
multipurpose disaster resilient structures; 


(ii) construction of diversion channels, embankments 
and other disaster-mitigation works; 


(iii) stabilising ponds and water structures for flood 
management; 


(iv) post-disaster rehabilitation, restoration and repair 
of rural roads and community assets; 


(v) windbreak and shelterbelt plantations; and 


(vi) forest fire management works, including fire 
breaks, fuel buffer zones and allied measures. 


19 


20 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(B) Intended Outcome—Creation of climate-resilient 
villages capable of withstanding extreme weather conditions. 


(3) Any other public work which may be notified by the Central Government. 
(4) Maintenance of rural public assets created under the Act. 


(5) Works for individual beneficiaries, including but not limited to housing- 
related works under the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana—Gramin, sanitation-related 
works, and other beneficiary-oriented developmental works undertaken under 
various schemes of the Central Government from time to time and expressly notified 
for inclusion under the Scheme, may also be taken up. The eligibility of such 
beneficiaries shall be as notified by the Central Government, aligned with the 
eligibility criteria specified under the respective Central Government schemes, with 
all such works conforming to the norms, standards and guidelines issued by the 
Central Government. 


(6) Without prejudice to the generality of the above, works creating individual 
assets as notified by the Central Government shall be prioritised on land or 
homestead owned by households belonging to— 


(a) the Scheduled Castes; 
(0) the Scheduled Tribes; 
(c) nomadic tribes; 

(d) denotified tribes; 


(e) economically weaker sections of the society as identified based on 
criteria notified by the Central Government; 


(f) women-headed households; 
(g) households headed by persons with disabilities; 
(A) beneficiaries of land reforms; 


(7) beneficiaries under the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana—Gramin 
(PMAY-G); and 


(j) beneficiaries under the Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 
(2 of 2007), and 


after exhausting the eligible beneficiaries under the above categories, works may be 
taken up on the lands of small or marginal farmers as identified on the basis of 
criteria notified by the Central Government, subject to such conditions as may be 
notified by the Central Government, including the requirement that such households 
possess a valid job card and have at least one adult member willing to work on the 
project undertaken on their land or homestead. 


5. Participatory Planning under the Scheme:—(/) All Central, State or local 
schemes, as may be notified by the Central Government for the purpose of 
convergence and saturation-based planning, shall be brought under a unified 
planning process anchored in the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans. 


(2) There shall be a systematic and participatory planning exercise 
undertaken at each tier of the Panchayati Raj system in accordance with 
the specified methodology. The Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans shall be 
prepared by the Gram Panchayats using GIS-based tools, PM Gati Shakti layers 
and other digital public infrastructure, and placed before the Gram Sabha for 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


approval. Works proposed to be undertaken by the Intermediate Panchayat, 
District Panchayat or other implementing agencies shall likewise be placed before 
the respective Panchayats along with the expected outputs and outcomes. The Viksit 
Gram Panchayat Plans shall be aggregated at the Block, District and State levels to 
ensure coherence with sectoral priorities, broader rural development strategies, and 
saturation-based planning for comprehensive coverage of eligible assets and 
outcomes across all Gram Panchayats. All works emerging from the Viksit Gram 
Panchayat Plans shall be consolidated into the Viksit Bharat—National Rural 
Infrastructure Stack. 


(3) Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan—Every Gram Panchayat shall prepare 
saturation-mode plans based on its classification into Category A, B, C, etc., 
determined based on development parameters, including proximity to urban areas, 
to address the varying needs of the Panchayats. All such works shall be drawn 
exclusively from the approved Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan, prepared using PM Gati 
Shakti, GIS-based tools and other digital public infrastructure. 


(4) The works identified in the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans shall be executed 
through various Central, State and local schemes in convergence. The schemes to 
be taken up for such convergence shall be notified by the Central Government. 


6. Framework for Convergence and Integrated Planning—A Unified 
Convergence Framework shall be established for coherent planning, execution and 
monitoring of all works undertaken in rural areas, and for this purpose— 


(/) All Central, State or local schemes, as may be notified by the Central 
Government for the purpose of convergence and saturation-based planning, 
shall be brought under a unified planning process anchored in the Viksit Gram 
Panchayat Plans; 


(2) All existing assets and proposed works, whether funded under this 
Act or through any other Central, State or local scheme, shall be mandatorily 
registered and tracked through the Viksit Bharat—National Rural 
Infrastructure Stack using the designated digital portal, which shall maintain 
a comprehensive register of rural public works, prevent duplication, integrate 
departmental investments, and align all works with saturation outcomes. 


(3) The Ministry of Rural Development shall prepare and periodically 
update the management information system, a nationally harmonised, single 
digital backbone for rural public works covering water security, core rural 
infrastructure, livelihood-related infrastructure, and special works to mitigate 
extreme weather events; and all planning shall follow a strict bottom-up 
process beginning with the preparation of the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan, 
which shall be successively aggregated at the Block, District and State levels, 
and the aggregated State Plan shall be placed before the State Level Steering 
Committee for approval. 


(4) Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack shall guide States, 
Districts and Panchayati Raj Institutions in identifying priority infrastructure 
gaps, standardising work designs, and ensuring that public investments 
contribute measurably to saturation outcomes at the Gram Panchayat, Block 
and District levels. 


(5) This institutional architecture shall ensure a_ single-plan, 
multi-funding approach, promote convergence across departments and 
schemes, and align all rural development efforts with the Viksit Bharat 2047 
vision of creating productive, resilient and transformative rural assets. 


21 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


7. Intra-State distribution of normative Allocation—The State Government 
shall, upon receipt of the approved normative allocation from the Central 
Government, ensure equitable, need-based and transparent intra-State distribution 
of the allocation across districts and Gram Panchayats, taking into consideration the 
categorisation of Gram Panchayats and the assessed local needs for determining 
Gram Panchayat-wise allocations and corresponding district allocations; and the 
detailed methodology, parameters and procedural requirements for such distribution 
shall be notified by the Central Government under sub-section (2) of section 14. 


8. Completion of Ongoing Works—At the time of opening new works, it shall 
be ensured that ongoing or incomplete works are prioritised for completion, subject 
to planning norms and the approved Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans. 


9. Technical Estimates and Standards for Works—Every work under this Act 
shall have a technical estimate and design sanctioned by an authority authorised by 
the State Government, based on the framework aligned with the Viksit Bharat 
National Rural Infrastructure Stack. While sanctioning estimates, the following 
shall be ensured. 


10. For works involving construction, appropriate labour-intensive 
technologies, depending upon the availability of labour and the use of local 
materials, shall be employed to the extent feasible. 


11. Bills of quantities shall use clear and commonly understood terminology 
to ensure transparency for all stakeholders. 


12. Each work shall have a summary of the estimate, design and a technical 
note indicating the expected outputs and outcomes. 


13. All technical estimates, designs and outcome notes shall be generated or 
uploaded through digital systems integrated with the designated management 
information system. 


14. Administrative and Financial Sanctions—(/) Works finalised at the Gram 
Panchayat level through the approved Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan and aggregated 
at the Block and District levels shall be accorded administrative or financial sanction 
by the competent authority as per the requirements and within thirty days. 


(2) The sanctioning authorities shall ensure that— 


(a) the proposed works are drawn exclusively from the approved Viksit 
Gram Panchayat Plan; 


(b) the works are consistent with thematic domains, and the Viksit 
Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack; 


(c) all sanctioned works are taken up through the designated digital 
portal under the Act. 


15. Muster Rolls and Attendance Systems—The muster rolls for works 
undertaken under this Act shall be maintained through digital systems and shall 
comply with the following requirements— 


(a) Each muster roll shall be in English and the local language and have 
a unique electronically generated identity number (e-muster) issued through 
the management information system. The muster roll shall include the names 
of all workers who have demanded or been allocated work and shall be 
authenticated by the authorised functionary of the Gram Panchayat or the 
Programme Officer. 


(6) Attendance at the worksite shall be recorded daily by an authorised 
person using biometric attendance systems, and all attendance details shall be 
made available for public viewing on a daily basis through the designated 
management information system. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(c) e-Muster rolls shall be processed by officials in the manner stipulated 
under the relevant guidelines. 


16. Measurement and Basis for Payment—(/) Payment of wages shall only be 
made based on measurements taken at the worksite by authorised technical 
personnel within three days of the closure of the muster roll, and recorded digitally 
through systems integrated with the designated management information system. 


(2) The State Government shall ensure the deployment of adequate technical 
personnel to enable timely measurement. Suitable persons may be trained and 
deployed, with delegated technical responsibilities, and shall be paid wages at 
skilled rates. 


17. Wage Linkage to Output and Schedule of Rates—The State Government 
shall ensure that wages without any gender bias are linked to the quantum of work 
completed, in accordance with the Rural Schedule of Rates notified on the basis of 
time-and-motion studies for different types of work and different seasons, and 
revised periodically. 


18. Special Schedule of Rates for Vulnerable Groups—A separate Schedule 
of Rates shall be finalised for women, the elderly, persons with disabilities and 
persons with debilitating ailments to facilitate their productive participation in 
suitable categories of work. 


19. Working Hours and Earning Norms—(a) The Schedule of Rates shall be 
framed so that an adult person working for eight hours, inclusive of one hour of rest, 
can earn an amount equivalent to the notified wage rate. 


(6) Working hours of an adult worker may be flexible but shall not extend 
beyond twelve hours in a day, including intervals for rest. 


20. Material Component—For all works undertaken under this Act, the cost 
of the material component shall not exceed forty per cent. at the District level. 


21. Execution Without Contractors—(/) No contractor shall be engaged for 
the execution of any work or component financed through expenditure under this 
Act. All such works shall be executed directly by the implementing agencies in 
accordance with the processes laid down under the Act, including mandatory 
proactive disclosures and the social audit process. 


(2) In cases of convergence where components of a work are financed under 
other schemes, the execution of those components may follow the norms of the 
converging scheme, including the use of contractors where permitted. 


22. As far as practicable, works executed by the programme implementation 
agencies shall be performed by using manual labour and no labour displacing 
machines shall be used. 


23. Transparent Procurement of Materials—All materials required for the 
execution of works shall be procured by the Gram Panchayat or the implementing 
agency through transparent procurement systems, including e-tendering processes, 
as specified by the State Government. 


24. Out of the administrative costs allowed under the Scheme, at least 
one-third shall be utilised at the Gram Panchayat level to employ and pay the Gram 
Rozgar Sahayak, other technical personnel as per the work done and for other 
administrative expenses. 


25. Transparency and Accountability —(/) Every Scheme prepared under this 
Act shall contain comprehensive provisions to ensure transparency and 
accountability at all levels of implementation, including Mandatory Public 
Disclosure and social audit. 


23 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(2) Mandatory Public Disclosure—(a) Mandatory Public disclosure shall be 
undertaken through digital systems integrated with the designated management 
information system and displayed at the village level for public scrutiny. This shall 
include. 


(6) Display at every worksite a “Janata Board” indicating details of 
the work, estimated labour days, material quantities in local terminology, and 
item-wise costs. 


(c) Digital and physical display of number of days of employment provided, 
wage payments, material payments, guarantees under the Act, works approved 
under the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan, and year-wise works taken up or completed 
by the Gram Panchayat and other implementing agencies. 


(d) Public disclosure of all information relating to works, labour demand, 
employment provided, payments, material utilisation and physical progress under 
this Act shall be carried out through digital systems integrated with the designated 
portal. Weekly disclosures shall be automatically generated and displayed in a 
publicly accessible physical and digital formats. In addition, the Gram Panchayat 
shall convene weekly disclosure meetings in the Gram Panchayat Bhawan to present 
the status of works, payments, grievances and other relevant information before the 
community. 


(e) The Ministry of Rural Development and the State Departments shall ensure 
that their official websites are regularly updated in compliance with clause (5) of 
sub-section (/) of section 4 of the Right to Information Act, 2005 (22 of 2005), with 
all information on the Act available in free, downloadable electronic form. 


(3) Social audit—(a) all works, expenditures and guarantees under this Act 
shall be subject to social audit at least once every six months in the manner as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government; 


(6) the procedure, standards and modalities for conducting social audits shall 
be as prescribed in the rules made under this Act; 


(c) until such rules are notified, the provisions of the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Schemes Rules, 2011 shall, mutatis 
mutandis, apply to the conduct of social audits under this Act. 


(4) Concurrent evaluation mechanism—For ensuring measurable 
outcomes and real-time accountability, technology-enabled monitoring shall be 
mandated for tracking work execution and post-completion asset outcomes, 
supported by verified data systems and spatial technologies. Weekly public 
disclosures shall be reinforced through a comprehensive transparency framework. 
A Concurrent Evaluation Mechanism, as may be specified by the Central 
Government through guidelines, shall provide continuous vigilance and enable 
timely corrective action. 


26. Recovery of misappropriated amounts—(/) Any misappropriation of 
amounts spent under the Act shall be recoverable under the relevant revenue laws 
for recovery prevailing in the State. 


(2) The portion of such recoveries pertaining to the Central share shall be 
remitted to the Consolidated Fund of India through the mechanism established by 
the Central Government. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


27. Inspection and Quality Control—The State Government shall ensure 
regular inspection and supervision of works by designated quality-control teams to 
verify adherence to quality standards, accuracy of measurements and conformity of 
wage payments to the actual quantum of work executed. Inspection reports shall be 
uploaded to the management information system. 


28. Grievance Redressal Mechanism—An effective grievance redressal 
mechanism shall be established under the Act, comprising the following 
components, namely:— 


(a) Institutional mechanisms for receiving grievances at the Ward, Gram 
Panchayat, Block and District levels, with at least one designated day each 
week when officials shall be mandatorily available to receive grievances; 


(5) Issuance of a dated acknowledgement for all grievances submitted in 
writing, telephonically, online, or orally to any authorised functionary; 


(c) Enquiry through spot verification or inspection and disposal shall be 
completed within seven working days of receipt of the grievance; 


(d) Upon completion of the enquiry, the concerned authority shall 
initiate immediate corrective action, and the grievance shall be resolved within 
fifteen days; 


(e) Failure to dispose of a grievance within seven working days at the 
level determined, shall be treated as a contravention of the provisions of this 
Act and shall attract action in accordance with section 27 or any corresponding 
provision of this Act; 


(f) Where prima facie evidence of financial irregularity is revealed 
during preliminary enquiry or through findings of the social audit report, the 
District Programme Coordinator shall, after obtaining legal advice, ensure that 
a First Information Report is lodged and necessary proceedings initiated; 


(8) The concermed authority shall inform the complainant in writing, 
physically or digitally, of the conclusions of the enquiry and the steps taken 
for redressal; 


(A) Action taken on grievances received by all implementing agencies 
shall be placed before the meetings of the Intermediate Panchayat and the 
District Panchayat for review and monitoring; 


(i) Appeals against the orders of the Gram Panchayat shall lie 
before the Programme Officer; appeals against the orders of the Programme 
Officer shall lie before the District Programme Coordinator; appeals against 
the orders of the District Programme Coordinator shall lie before the State 
Grievance Redressal Authority or any officer designated by the State 
Government; 


(j) All appeals shall be filed within forty-five days from the date of the 
order; 


(k) All appeals shall be disposed of within thirty days from the date of 
receipt; 


(J) Any grievance not resolved within fifteen days at the Ward, Gram 
Panchayat, Block or District level shall be automatically escalated to the next 
higher level through digital systems integrated with the designated 
management information system, and such escalations shall be continuously 
monitored electronically. 


25 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


29. Ombudsperson—The State Government shall appoint an Ombudsperson 
for each District to receive grievances, conduct enquiries and issue awards in 
accordance with the guidelines notified by the Central and the State Governments. 
The Ombudsperson shall operate through digital platforms integrated with the 
designated digital portal under this Act. 


30. Action for Contravention—Wherever contravention of any provision of 
this Act is established after due enquiry by the State Government, the District 
Programme Coordinator, the Programme Officer, the Ombudsperson or any other 
authority authorised by the State Government, action shall be taken in accordance 
with section 27 of this Act or any corresponding provision. 


31. Annual Reporting—The District Programme Coordinator, the Programme 
Officer and each Gram Panchayat shall prepare an annual report detailing facts, 
figures and achievements relating to the implementation of the Scheme within their 
jurisdiction. A copy of such report shall be made available to the public in physical 
or electronic form, on payment of such fee as may be specified in the Scheme. 


32. All accounts and records including muster rolls relating to the scheme shall 
be made available for public scrutiny free of cost. Any person desirous of obtaining 
a copy or relevant extracts therefrom may be provided such copies or extracts on 
demand not later than three working days from the date of receipt of application. 


33. Capacity Building and Strengthening Panchayats—There shall be a 
dedicated plan for training, Information Education Communication, digital literacy 
and strengthening Panchayati Raj Institutions. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


SCHEDULE II 
[See section 9(2)] 


1. Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card—(/) Household Registration—The adult 
member of every household residing in any rural area and willing to undertake 
unskilled manual work, may submit the names, ages and address of the household 
to the Gram Panchayat within whose jurisdiction they reside, for the purpose of 
registration of the household and issuance of a Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card. 


(2) Special Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card, where the job seeker is— 
(a) a single woman; or 
(b) a person with disability; or 
(c) persons above sixty years of age; or 
(d) a released bonded labourer; or 
(e) a person belonging to a Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group; or 
(f) a transgender person. 


(3) The Special Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card of a distinct colour, shall 
ensure special protection in the providing work, work evaluation, and worksite 
facilities, as applicable. 


(4) It shall be the duty of the Gram Panchayat, after making such enquiry, as 
it deems fit, to issue a Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card within fifteen days from the 
date of receipt of such application, containing therein a unique Gramin Rozgar 
Guarantee Card number with details of the registered adult members of the 
household, their photos, Bank or Post office account number, insurance policy 
number and the Aadhaar numbers, if any. 


(5) The Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card issued, shall be valid for three years, 
after which it may be renewed after due verification. 


(6) No Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card shall be cancelled except on any of the 
following grounds— 


(a) where it is found to be a duplicate; 


(6) where the entire household has permanently migrated to a place 
outside the jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat and no longer resides in the 
village; or 


(c) where all adult members of the registered household are deceased. 


(7) The State Government shall make arrangements for updating the following 
details in the Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card regularly while mentioning the key 
guarantees under the Act are clearly listed as follows:— 


(a) number of days for which work was demanded; 

(6) number of days of work allocated; 

(c) description of the work allocated along with the muster roll number; 
(d) measurement details; 

(e) unemployment allowance, if any, paid; 

(f) date-wise amount of wages paid; 


(g) delay compensation paid if any; 


(A) asset provided, if any. 


27 


28 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


2. Demand for work—(/) Every adult member of a registered household 
whose name appears in the Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card, shall be entitled to 
apply for unskilled manual work under the Scheme; and every such application shall 
be compulsorily registered, and a receipt issued with the date, which shall be entered 
in the given digital platform. 


(2) The State shall proactively verify the requirements of the Vulnerable 
Groups and provide them with work. 


(3) Application for work may be oral or written and made to the Ward member 
or to the Gram Panchayat or to the Programme Officer or any person authorised by 
the State Government or through digital platforms, or through any other means 
authorised by the State Government. 


(4) Applications for work may be filed individually or for a group together. 


(5) There shall be no limit on the number of days of employment for which a 
person may apply, or on the number of days of employment actually provided to 
him subject to the aggregate guarantee of the household. 


(6) Normally, applications for work must be for at least six days of continuous 
work. 


(7) Provision shall be made in the Scheme for advance application, that is, 
application which may be submitted earlier than the date from which employment 
is sought. 


(8) Provision shall be made in the Scheme for submission of multiple 
applications by the same person provided that the corresponding periods for which 
employment is sought do not overlap. 


3. Allocation of work—(/) The Gram Panchayat and Programme Officer shall 
ensure that every applicant shall be provided unskilled manual work in accordance 
with the provisions of the Scheme within fifteen days of receipt of an 
application or the date from which he seeks work in case of advance application, 
whichever is later. 


(2) Priority shall be given to women in such a way that at least one-third of 
the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and requested for work. 
Efforts to increase participation of single women and the person with disabilities 
shall be made. 


(3) Applicants who are provided with work shall be so intimated 
in writing, by means of a letter sent to him at the address given in the Gramin Rozgar 
Guarantee Card or through any other effective mode of communication or by a 
public notice displayed at the office of the Panchayats at district, intermediate or 
village level. 


(4) A list of persons who are provided with the work shall be displayed on the 
notice board of the Gram Panchayat and at the office of the Programme Officer and 
at such other place as the Programme Officer may deem necessary and the list shall 
be open for inspection by the State Government and any interested person. 


(5) As far as possible, the employment shall be provided within a radius of 
five kilometers of the village where the applicant resides at the time of applying. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(6) A new work under the Scheme can be commenced if at least ten labourers 
become available for work, provided that this condition shall not be applicable for 
new works, as determined by the State Government, in hilly areas and in respect of 
afforestation works. 


(7) In case the employment is provided outside the radius specified in 
sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph 3, it shall be provided within the Block, and the 
labourers shall be paid ten per cent. of the wage rate as extra wages to meet 
additional transportation and expenses for living. 


(8) A period of employment shall be for at least six days continuously, with 
not more than six days in a week. 


4. Worksite management—(/) For the purpose of transparency at the 
worksite, the following shall be ensured— 


(a) there shall be a project initiation meeting in which various provisions 
of the work shall be explained to the workers; 


(0) a copy of the sanction work order shall be available for public 
inspection at the worksite; 


(c) measurement record of each work and details of the workers shall be 
available for public inspection; 


(d) A Citizens’ Information Board shall be put up at every worksite and 
updated regularly in the manner specified by the Central Government; 


(e) The vigilance and Monitoring Committee set up according to the 
instructions of the Central Government may check all works and its evaluation 
report will be recorded in the Works Register in the format specified by the 
Central Government and submitted to the Gram Sabha during the Social 
Audit. 


(2) The facilities of safe drinking water, shade for children and periods of rest, 
first aid box with adequate material for emergency treatment for minor injuries and 
other health hazards connected with the work being performed shall be provided at 
the worksite. 


(3) In case the number of children below the age of five years accompanying 
the women working at any site is five or more, provisions shall be made to depute 
one of such women workers to look after such children. The person so deputed shall 
be paid wage rate. 


5. Welfare—(/) If any personal injury is caused to any person employed under 
the Scheme by any accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, he 
shall be entitled to such medical treatment as required, free of cost. 


(2) Where hospitalisation of the injured worker is necessary, the State 
Government shall arrange for such hospitalisation including accommodation, 
treatment, medicines and payment of daily allowance which is not less than half of 
the wage rate. 


(3) If a person employed under the Scheme meets with death or becomes 
permanently disabled by accident arising out of and in the course of employment, 
he or his legal heirs, as the case may be, shall be paid by the implementing agency 
an ex-gratia as per entitlement under the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana or 
as may be notified by the Central Government. 


(4) If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child accompanying a 
person who is employed under the Scheme, such person shall be entitled to medical 
treatment free of cost; and in case of death or disablement of the child due to the 
said accident, ex-gratia shall be paid to the legal guardians as determined by the 
State Government. 


29 


30 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


6. Wage payment—(/) In case the payment of wages is not made within fifteen 
days from the date of closure of the muster roll, the wage seekers shall be entitled 
to receive payment of compensation for the delay, at the rate of 0.05% of the unpaid 
wages per day of delay beyond the sixteenth day of closure of muster roll. 


(2) Any delay in payment of compensation beyond a period of fifteen days 
from the date it becomes payable, shall be considered in the same manner as the 
delay in payment of wages; 


(3) For the purpose of ensuring accountability in payment of wages and to 
calculate culpability of various functionaries or agencies, the States shall divide 
the processes leading to determination and payment of wages into various stages 
such as,— 


(a) measurement of work; 

(6) computerising the muster rolls; 
(c) computerising the measurements; 
(d) generation of wage lists; and 


(e) uploading Fund Transfer Orders (FTOs), and specify stage-wise 
maximum time limits along with the functionary or agency which is 
responsible for discharging the specific function. 


(4) The computer system shall have a provision to automatically calculate the 
compensation payable based on the date of closure of the muster roll and the date of 
deposit of wages in the accounts of the wage seekers. 


(5) The State Government shall pay the compensation upfront after due 
verification within the time limits as specified above and recover the compensation 
amount from the functionaries or agencies who are responsible for the delay in 
payment. 


(6) It shall be the duty of the District Programme Coordinator or Programme 
Officer to ensure that the system is operationalise. 


(7) The number of days of delay, the compensation payable and actually paid 
shall be reflected in the Management Information System. 


(8) Effective implementation of sub-paragraph (/) shall be considered 
necessary for the purposes of section 29 of the Act. 


7. The payment of wages shall, unless so exempted by the Central 
Government, be made through the individual savings accounts of the workers in the 
relevant Banks or Post Offices. 


8. In case of employment provided under the Scheme, there shall be no 
discrimination solely on the ground of gender and the provisions of the Equal 
Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 of 1976), shall be complied with. 


9. Record maintenance and grievance redressal system—The Gram Panchayat 
shall prepare and maintain or cause to be prepared and maintained such registers, 
vouchers and other documents in such form and in such manner as may be specified 
in the Scheme containing particulars of Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Cards and pass 
books issued, name, age and address of the head of the household and the adult 
members of the households registered with the Gram Panchayat. 


10. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, in the event of 
any national calamity such as flood, cyclone, tsunami and earthquake resulting in 
mass dislocation of rural population, the adult members of rural households of areas 
so affected may— 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(a) seek for registration and get Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card issued 
by the Gram Panchayat or Programme Officer of the area of temporary 
relocation; 


(6) submit written or oral applications for work to the Programme 
Officer or the Gram Panchayat of the area of temporary relocation; and 


(c) apply for re-registration and re-issuance of Gramin Rozgar Guarantee 
Card in the event of any loss or destruction. 


(2) The details of such Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Cards shall be intimated to 
the District Programme Coordinator. 


(3) In the event of restoration of normalcy, the Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card 
so issued shall be re-endorsed at original place of habitation and clubbed with the 
original Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card on being retrieved. 


(4) The number of days of employment provided shall be counted while 
computing 125 days of guaranteed employment per household. 


11. Every worker shall have an opportunity of being heard and register any 
grievance either orally or in writing, at all implementation levels for disposal as per 
the provisions of the Grievance Redressal Mechanism under the Scheme. 


31 


32 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): 
VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) Bill, 2025 is proposed to be introduced 
with the following background, object and reasons. 


2. Post-independence rural development policies in India focused on 
addressing poverty, improving agricultural productivity, absorbing surplus and 
under-employed rural labour through various wage employment schemes, 
strengthening rural infrastructure, etc. Over the decades, the approaches have 
evolved, ranging from community development programs to employment 
generation schemes to uplift rural communities. The nature of rural employment 
generation schemes has undergone continuous change based on the evolving 
socio-economic scenario. 


3. India’s rural employment schemes have evolved through several 
phases, starting with early programs, like, the Rural Manpower Programme (1960s) 
and Crash Scheme for Rural Employment (1971). In the 1980s, the National Rural 
Employment Programme and Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme 
were launched, later merged into Jawahar Rozgar Yojana in 1993 which 
consolidated into the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana in 1999, to streamline 
structured rural employment efforts. The Employment Assurance Scheme was 
introduced in 1993 to provide work during agricultural lean seasons. The 
Food for Work Programme, initiated in 1977-78 and later expanded as the National 
Food for Work Programme in 2004, provided food grains as wages for manual 
labour on public works, targeting most backward districts to improve both food 
security and employment. Notably, the Maharashtra Employment Guarantee 
Act, 1977 provided right to work to adult members of every rural household who 
volunteered to do unskilled manual work, thus bringing in the concept of a statutory 
right. 


4. While the earlier initiatives offered some relief to rural households, their 
scale and resources remained limited in relation to the broader challenges of 
unemployment and poverty in rural India. It was in this background that, in 2005, 
the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA) was enacted to provide a statutory framework for employment 
generation in rural areas. 


5. Over the past twenty years, Mahatma Gandhi NREGA has 
provided a guaranteed wage-employment to rural households ensuring wage 
income; however, further strengthening has become necessary in view 
of the significant socio-economic transformation witnessed in the rural landscape 
driven by widespread coverage of the social security interventions and 
saturation-oriented implementation of major Government schemes. Similarly, rural 
connectivity, rural housing, electrification, financial inclusion and digital access 
have deepened, the workforce has diversified, and aspirations have shifted towards 
better incomes, growth-oriented infrastructure, sustainable livelihoods and greater 
climate resilience. 


6. To cater to the changing aspirations, stronger convergence is required to 
establish an integrated, Whole-of-Government rural development framework 
covering several complementary Government schemes. It is essential that rural 
infrastructure creation must transition from fragmented provisioning to a coherent 
and future-oriented approach and it is also essential that resources are distributed in 
a fair manner to reduce disparities and promote inclusive growth across all rural 
areas of the country based on objective parameters. 


32 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


7. As national development advances, rural development programs require 
periodical revision to remain aligned with emerging needs and further aspirations. 
In the vastly changed circumstances of today, a transformational approach to rural 
development is essential to achieve the objectives of Viksit Bharat @2047. The 
expanding scale of development interventions is expected to create additional 
employment opportunities for rural households. It is imperative to engage the rural 
workforce more effectively to support the vision of Viksit Bharat, while 
empowering them through enhanced livelihood gurarantee. Therefore, the 
Government has resolved to enhance the wage-employment guarantee for rural 
households from one hundred days to one hundred and twenty-five days per 
financial year for anchoring rural asset creation through the enactment of an 
appropriate Act. 


8. The proposed Bill is titled the ‘““Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and 
Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): VB—G RAM 0 (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) 
Bill, 20257 to establish a rural development framework aligned with the national 
vision of Viksit Bharat @2047, by providing a statutory guarantee of one hundred 
and twenty-five days of wage employment in every financial year to every rural 
household whose adult members volunteer to undertake unskilled manual work; to 
promote empowerment, growth, convergence and saturation for a prosperous and 
resilient rural Bharat. 


9. The salient features of the proposed Bill are as follows:— 


(a) The primary objective of the Bill is to align the rural development 
framework with the national vision of Viksit Bharat @2047 by providing an 
enhanced statutory wage-employment guarantee of one hundred and 
twenty-five days in each financial year to such rural households whose adult 
members volunteer to undertake unskilled manual work, thereby enabling 
them to participate more effectively in the expanded livelihood security 
framework. 


(b) In view of the enhanced wage-employment guarantee for the rural 
workforce, it is also crucial to facilitate the availability of farm labour, 
especially during the peak agricultural season. In this context, the Bill shall 
have a provision to empower the States to notify in advance, certain duration, 
covering peak sowing and harvesting seasons, during which execution of 
works under this Bill will not be undertaken. 


(c) The focus shall be on empowerment, growth, convergence and 
saturation with Gram Panchayats as the primary institutions for participatory 
planning and execution, backed by appropriate professional and technical 
capacity. 


(d) The convergence, saturation-driven planning and whole of 
Government delivery shall be institutionalised through integration of Viksit 
Gram Panchayat Plans with the PM Gati Shakti to address the varying needs 
of Gram Panchayats, and powered by geospatial systems, digital public 
infrastructure, District and State planning mechanisms, with such plans 
aggregated at the Block, District, State and consolidated into Viksit Bharat 
National Rural Infrastructure Stack. 


(e) Every State Government shall prepare a Scheme for giving effect to 
the guarantee proposed under this Bill, within a period of six months from the 
date of the commencement of the Act and that shall be implemented as a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme. 


(f) The Central Government shall make normative allocation to each 
State, to be estimated based on objective parameters, as prescribed in the rules. 
Further, expenditure in excess of the approved normative allocation shall be 
the responsibility of the State Governments. 


33 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(g) Special relaxations shall be permissible during natural calamities or 
extraordinary circumstances as decided by the Central Government, enabling 
temporary modifications to the provisions for timely response and relief. 


(h) The wage rates for unskilled manual work shall be notified by the 
Central Government for the purpose of this legislation. Until such time as 
separate rates are notified, the wage rates notified under the Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA shall be deemed to be the applicable rates. 


(i) If an eligible applicant is not provided work as per the provisions of 
this Bill within the prescribed time limit, it will be obligatory on the part of 
the State Government to pay unemployment allowance at the prescribed rate. 


(j) The Central Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Council and the State Gramin 
Rozgar Guarantee Councils shall be constituted for review, monitoring and 
effective implementation of the provisions of the legislation in their respective 
areas. Steering committees at Central and State Level shall be constituted to 
recommend on matters concerning normative allocations, convergence and 
other such matters. 


(k) Provision for transparency and accountability shall be ensured 
through Biometric authentication, spatial technology-enabled planning, 
mobile and dashboard-based monitoring, and weekly public disclosure 
systems. The social audit mechanism shall be strengthened. 


(J) Provisions for Minimum features of the Scheme to be made under the 
Bill, have been laid down in the Bill. 


10 . The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; SHIVRAJ SINGH CHOUHAN. 
The 13th December, 2025. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Notes on clauses 


Clause 1 of the Bill provides for the short title and the commencement of 
the Bill. 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for definitions of terms and expressions used in 
the Bill. 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the requirement that each State Government 
shall, notify, within six months of commencement, make a Scheme consistent with 
the Bill and the Scheme to be implemented as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme. 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans as the origin of 
all works, their consolidation into Block, District and State plans, and the 
aggregation of the Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack, the four 
thematic domains of works, and categorisation of Gram Panchayats. 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the statuory guarantee of not less than one 
hundred and twenty-five days of wage employment in a financial year to every rural 
household volunteering to do unskilled manual work and further provides for 
guarantee of wages by a person who has done work under the scheme. 


Clause 6 of the Bill provides that no works shall be undertaken during notified 
peak agricultural seasons aggregating to sixty days to facilitate farm-labour 
availability in peak agricultural seasons. 


Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may decide special 
relaxations during natural calamities, or extraordinary circumstances on 
recommendation by the State Government. 


Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the requirement that every State shall make a 
Scheme to provide guaranteed wage-employment to every rural housefold to give 
effect to the Bill. 


Clause 9 of the Bill provides the conditons for providing guaranteed 
employment. 


Clause 10 of the Bill provides for the Central Government to notify the wage 
rate for unskilled manual work. 


Clause 11 of the Bill provides for entitlement to unemployment allowance if 
employment is not provided within fifteen days, at prescribed rates, to be paid by 
the State Government. 


Clause 12 of the Bill provides for the Central Government to notify the Central 
Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Council and its composition, tenure and terms and 
conditions of the Chairperson and non-official members by rules. 


Clause 13 of the Bill provides that the State Government to constitute the State 
Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Council, its composition, terms and conditions of the 
Chairperson and non-official members by rules. 


Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National Level Steering 
Committee to recommend normative allocations, advise on inter-ministerial 
convergence and provide high-level oversight. 


Clause 15 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a State Level Steering 
Committee to provide operational guidance, coordination and monitoring of 
implementation of the Scheme. 


Clause 16 of the Bill provides that Panchayats at district, intermediate and 
village levels shall be the principal authorities for planning, implementation and 
monitoring of the Scheme and defines their respective roles. 


35 


35 


36 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


Clause 17 of the Bill provides for the designation of the District Programme 
Coordinator, sets out the Coordinator’s responsibilities, including preparation of the 
district plan, supervision, inspections, grievance redress and aggregate district plan. 


Clause 18 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a Programme Officer at 
the intermediate level, and his functions. 


Clause 19 of the Bill provides for the responsibilities and functions of the 
Gram Panchayat, including registration of households, issuing Rozgar Guarantee 
Cards, preparing Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans, allocation of works and execution 
of works. 


Clause 20 of the Bill provides that the Gram Sabha shall monitor and review 
the execution of works, conduct regular social audits and have access to all records 
required for audit. 


Clause 21 of the Bill provides for the State Government to provide necessary 
staff and technical support to District Programme Coordinators and Programme 
Officers. 


Clause 22 of the Bill provides that the Scheme shall be a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme, specifies the fund-sharing ratios, determination of State-wise normative 
allocations and the Central and State components of eligible expenditure. 


Clause 23 of the Bill provides transparency and accountability, the 
responsibilities of the District Programme Coordinator and implementing agencies 
for proper fund utilisation, accounting, payments of wages and unemployment 
allowances by rules and disposal of complaints. 


Clause 24 of the Bill provides for technology enabled transparency and public 
accountability, including biometric authentication, geospatial planning, mobile or 
dashboard monitoring, weekly public disclosures and strengthened social audit 
mechanisms. 


Clause 25 of the Bill provides for a time-bound multi-tier grievance redressal 
mechanism at the Gram Panchayat, Block and District levels. 


Clause 26 of the Bill provides for audit arrangements of Schemes at all levels 
in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and for 
prescribed account maintenance. 


Clause 27 of the Bill provides for penalties for contravention of the Bill, with 
the penalty up to ten thousand rupees. 


Clause 28 of the Bill provides for the Central and State Governments to 
delegate powers by notification to subordinate officers. 


Clause 29 of the Bill provides for the Central Government’s power to give 
directions to States for effective implementation of Bill and to investigate 
complaints and, if necessary, suspend fund releases and order remedial measures. 


Clause 30 of the Bill provides for overriding effect. 


Clause 31 of the Bill provides for the power of the Central Government to 
amend Schedule. 


Clause 32 of the Bill provides for immunity from suit, prosecution or legal 
proceedings for public servants acting in good faith under the Bill. 


Clause 33 of the Bill provides for the Central Government to make rules 
subject to previous publication and lists specific matters the rules may cover. 


Clause 34 of the Bill provides for the State Government to make rules 
consistent with the Bill and Central rules and lists specific matters for State rules. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 35 of the Bill provides for the procedure for laying Central rules before 
Parliament and State rules before State Legislatures and for parliamentary 
modification or annulment. 


Clause 36 of the Bill provides for removal of difficulties. 


Clause 37 of the Bill provides for the repeal of the Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, from the appointed date and transitional 
provisions. 


37 


38 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill seeks to introduce the Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and 
Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) 
BILL, 2025, in the Parliament and to repeal the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005. 


1. Sub- clause (/) of clause 5 of the Bill provides that the State Government 
shall, in such rural area in the State, as may be notified by the Central Government, 
provide to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual 
work, not less than one hundred and twenty-five days of guaranteed employment in 
a financial year in accordance with the Scheme made under this legislation. 


This will require a large number of works to be taken up under the Scheme to 
be prepared in each State where the legislation is to be implemented. This will entail 
expenditure on the execution of works, covering both wage and material 
components, in accordance with clause 22 of the Bill. 


2. Sub-clauses (5) and (6) of clause 4 of the Bill provide that the Central 
Government shall determine the State-wise normative allocation for each financial 
year, based on objective parameters as may be prescribed. Any expenditure incurred 
by a State in excess of its normative allocation shall be borne by the State 
Government in a manner and procedure as may be prescribed. 


3. Clause 10 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes of this Bill, which shall apply to 
all unskilled manual work provided under the Scheme; different rates may be 
notified for different areas. 


4. Sub-clause (/) of clause 11 of the Bill provides that if an applicant for 
employment under the Scheme is not provided such employment within fifteen days 
of receipt of his application seeking employment or from the date on which the 
employment has been sought in the case of an advance application, whichever is 
later, he shall be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance. 


5. Sub-clause (2) of clause 11 of the Bill provides that the unemployment 
allowance shall be paid to applicants of a household subject to a legal guarantee of 
the household at such rate as may be specified by the State Government, by 
notification, in consultation with the State Council provided that no such rate shall 
be less than one-fourth of the notified wage rate for the first thirty days during the 
financial year and not less than one-half of the wage rate for the remaining period 
of the financial year. 


6. Sub-clause (3) (d) of clause 11 of the Bill provides that the liability of the 
State Government to pay unemployment allowance to a household during any 
financial year shall cease, as soon as the household of the applicant has earned as 
much from the wages and unemployment allowance taken together which is 
equal to the wages for one hundred and twenty-five days of work during the 
financial year. 


7. Clause 22 of the Bill provides for the nature of the Scheme and the funding 
pattern as follows:— 


(1) The Scheme implemented under this Bill, shall be a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme. 


(2) For the purposes of this Bill, the fund-sharing pattern between the 
Central Government and the State Governments shall be 90:10 for the North 
Eastern States and Himalayan States and Union territory (Uttarakhand, 
Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir), and 60:40 for all other States 
and Union territorries with legislature. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(3) For the Union territories without legislature, the Central Government 
shall bear the entire expenses of the Scheme in the manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) The Central Government shall determine the State-wise normative 
allocation for each financial year, based on objective parameters as may be 
prescribed. 


(5) Any expenditure incurred by a State in excess of its normative 
allocation shall be borne by the State Government in such manner and 
procedure as may be prescribed. 


(6) In accordance with the State-wise normative allocation determined 
under this Bill, the share of the Central Government shall include expenditure 
towards— 


(a) payment of wages for unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled labour 
employed under the Scheme; 


(b) the material component of works, subject to provisions in 
Schedule I; 


(c) such administrative expenses as may be specified by the 
Central Government, including salary and allowances of programme 
officers and supporting staff, administrative expenses of the Central 
Council, facilities required under Schedule II, and such other items as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(7) In accordance with the State-wise normative allocation determined 
under this Bill, the share of the State Government shall include expenditure 
towards— 


(a) payment of wages for unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled labour 
employed under the Scheme; 


(b) the material component of works, subject to provisions in 
Schedule I; 


(c) such administrative expenses as may be specified by the 
Central Government, including salary and allowances of programme 
officers and supporting staff, administrative expenses of the State 
Council, facilities required under Schedule II, and such other items as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(8) The State Government shall bear the expenditure towards 
unemployment allowance and delay compensation as may be prescribed by 
the State Government. 


8. The expenditure under the Scheme will depend on the number of persons 
reporting for work, wage rate and the material and administrative components of the 
work. If the legislation is implemented across the entire country, the total estimated 
annual requirement of funds on wage, material and administrative components is 
%1,51,282 crore (Rupees one lakh fifty-one thousand two hundred eighty-two crore), 
including the State share. Of this, the estimated Central share is €95,692.31 crore 
(Rupees ninety-five thousand six hundred ninety-two crore and thirty-one lakh). 


9.Upon repeal of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act,2005, it will be necessary to settle central pending liabilities payable to the 
States and union territories, up to the closure of Financial Year 2025-2026 or until 
the date of commencement of the Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and 
Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) 
BILL, 2025 comes into force, whichever is later. 


39 


40 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause (/) of clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of 
the said clause specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. 
These matters, inter alia, include— 


(a) State-wise normative allocation for each financial year, based on 
objective parameters under sub-section (5) of section 4; (b) manner and 
procedure to bear the excess expenditure and its parameters under 
sub-section (6) of section 4; (c) the composition, terms and conditions of 
appointment, tenure and procedure of meeting under sub-section (3) of 
section 12; (d) the detailed functions, responsibilities and modalities under 
sub-section (4) of section 12; (e) terms and conditions of appointment of 
officials of National Level Steering Committee under sub-section (2) of 
section 14; (f) manner to redress the grievance under clause (d) of 
sub-section (3) of section 17; (8) manner of conducting social audit by Gram 
Sabha under sub-section (2) of section 20; (4) manner to bear the expenses of 
Scheme under sub-section (3) of section 22; (i) objective parameters to 
determine the State-wise normative allocation under sub-sections (4) of 
section 22; (7) manner and procedure to bear the excess expenditure under 
sub-section (5) of section 22; (k) other items under clause (c) of 
sub-section (6) of section 22; (/) other items under clause (c) of 
sub-section (7) of section 22; (m) expenditure towards unemployment 
allowance and delay compensation under sub-section (8) of section 22; 
(n) manner of payments of wages and unemployment allowances under 
sub-section (4) of section 23; (0) social audit mechanism, and the adoption of 
such other technology-enabled systems under clause (e) of section 24; 
(p) manner to lay down the procedure for disposal of complaints under 
sub-section (/) of section 25; (q) the manner of transfer and vesting under 
sub-section (5) of section 37; (r) any other matter which is to be, or prescribed 
or in respect of which provision is to be made by rules for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act. 


2. Sub-clause (/) of clause 34 of the Bill empowers the State Government to 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) of the said 
clause specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These 
matters, inter alia, include— 


(a) terms and conditions of eligibility under sub-section (2) of 
section 11; (0) terms, conditions, time, place and procedure of meeting and 
quorum under sub-section (2) of section 13; (c) manner of maintaining proper 
books and accounts under sub-section (2) of section 23; (4) form and manner 
to maintain the accounts of the Scheme under sub-section (2) of section 26; 


3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure 
or administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. 
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 41 


LOK SABHA 


SECOND CORRIGENDA 
to 


VIKSIT BHARAT - GUARANTEE FOR ROZGAR AND AJEEVIKA MISSION (GRAMIN): VB- 
G RAM G (विकसित भारत जी राम जी) BILL, 2025 
[70 be / As introduced in Lok Sabha] 


1. Page 22, in SCHEDULE I line 8,- 

omit “under sub-section (2) of section 14" 
2. Page 22, in SCHEDULE I lines 15 and 16,- 

omit "While sanctioning estimates, the following shall be ensured." 
3. Page 24, in SCHEDULE I lines 3 and 4,- 


omit "This shall include." 


NEW DELHI; 


December 15,2025 .__ 


Agrahayana 24, 1947 (Saka) 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


LOK SABHA 


CORRIGENDA 
to 


Viksit Bharat - Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): VB-G RAM G (विकसित भारत जी 
राम जी) Bill, 2025 
[Zo be / As introduced in Lok Sabha] 


1... Page (i), In Arrangement of Clauses, 
against Clause 20,- 


for "work" 


read "works" 


2. Page 2, line 6,- 
for "BILL" 


read "ACT" 


3... Page 2, line 20,- 
for "Grameen" 
read "Gramin" 
4. Page 3, line 18,- 
Omit “at the Block level” 
5. 2886 3, line 25,- 
for "section 8” 
read "section 3" 
6. Page 6, line 39,- 
for "employment" 
read "unemployment" 
7. Page 7, line 4,- 
for "called" 


read "known as" 


P.T.O. 


Sec. 2] 


10. 


11. 


12. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Page 9, line 17,- 

for "levels, facilitate" 

read "levels, and facilitate" 
Page 10, line 20,- 

for "sub-section (1)" 

read "sub-section (2)" 
Page 13, line 39,- 

for "may in" 

read "may by rules provide for in" 
Page 13, line 40,- 

omit "prescribe" 
Page 14, line 33,- 

omit “Tor Schedule I" 
Page 14, line 34,- 

omit "A copy of" 


Page 14, line 35,- 


omit "as soon as may be after it is made" 


Page 15, omit lines 17 and 18 


Page 15, line 19,- 


for "(nh)" 


read "(m)" 


43 


44 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


24. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


Page 15, line 21,- 
for "(o)" 
read "(72)" 

Page 15, line 23,- 
jor "(p)" 
read "(o)" 

Page 15, line 25,- 
for "(७/" 
read "(p)" 

Page 15, line 26,- 
for "09" 
read "(q)" 


Page 15, after line 33, 


insert "(b) the procedure for payment of unemployment allowance 


under sub-section (b) of section! 1; " 
Page 15, line 34,- 
for "(b)" 
read "(c)" 


Page 15, after line 35, 


insert "(d) expenditure towards unemployment allowance and delay 


compensation under sub-section (8) of section 22;" 
Page 15, line 36,- 
jor "(oc)" 
read "(e)" 
Page 15, line 38,- 
for "(d)" 
read "(f)" 


P.T.O 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


26. Page 15, affer line 39, 
insert "(g) any other matter which 1s to be, or prescribed or in respect 
of which provision is to be made be the State Government, for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act." 
27. Page 17, line 13,- 
jor "BILL" 
read "Act" 
28. Page 18, line 36, omit "and" 
29. Page 18, line 41, after “Gramin;’ insert "and" 
NEW DELHI; 


December 14,2025  __ 


Agrahayana 23, 1947 (Saka) 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


BILL No. 195 OF 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938, the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 
and the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Sabka Bima Sabki Raksha (Amendment of Short title and 
Insurance Laws) Act, 2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


CHAPTER II 


AMENDMENTS TO THE INSURANCE ACT, 1938 


Construction of 2. Throughout the Insurance Act, 1938 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as 4 of 1938. 
ect of the principal Act),— 
certain 


ee (a) for the words “business of insurance”, wherever they occur, the 


expressions. words “insurance business” shall be substituted; 


(0) with respect to the term “insurer”, wherever 1 occurs, for the 
consequential terms, in respect of the same like “he, him or his”, the words “‘it 
or its” shall be substituted: 


(2) for the words “intermediary or insurance intermediary”, wherever 
they occur, the words “insurance intermediary” shall be substituted. 
Amendment of 3. In section 2 of the principal Act,— 
section 2. 


(४) in clause (3),— 


(a) in sub-clause (४), for the words “or city improvement trust in 
any presidency town;’, the word 7; and” shall be substituted; 


(8) sub-clause (iv) shall be omitted; 


(7) in clause (4A), for the words, brackets and figures “sub-section (/) 
of section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949”, the words and figures 10 of 1949. 
“section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949” shall be substituted; 


(iii) in clause (5),— 


(a) the words and figures “or a provident society as defined in 
Part III” shall be omitted; 


(b) for the words “or provident society’, the words “or any person 
authorised by it” shall be substituted; 


(iv) after clause (5), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 
*(5A) “class of insurance business” means the class of— 
(a) life insurance business; 
(0) general insurance business; 
(c) health insurance business; 
(d) re-insurance business; or 


(e) such other class of insurance business as may be notified 
by the Central Government in consultation with the Authority from 
time to time;’; 


(v) for clause (6C), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(6C) “health insurance business” means the business of effecting 
the contracts of insurance that provide sickness benefits or pay for 
medical and health expenses and includes,— 


(7) the personal accident insurance business of effecting the 
contracts of insurance that provide for payment of money in the 
event of death, disablement or hospitalisation arising out of an 
accident; and 


18 of 2013. 


42 of 2002. 


2 of 1912. 


39 of 2002. 


48 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(ii) the travel insurance business of effecting the contracts of 
insurance that provide for sickness benefits or pay for medical and 
health expenses or payment of money in the event of death, 
disablement or hospitalisation arising out of an accident or for 
losses suffered, in the course of travel; 


(6D) “insurance business” means the business of effecting 
insurance contracts and includes any other form of contract as may be 
notified by the Central Government in consultation with the Authority 
from time to time. 


Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “insurance contract” 
means the contract whereby the insurer, on payment of premium, 
undertakes to assume risk and to pay to the insured person an agreed 
compensation for loss, damage or liability arising from a contingent event 
on such terms and conditions and subject to such limitations as may be 
agreed;”; 


(vi) for clause (7A), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(7A) “Indian insurance company” means an insurer which is a 
company formed and registered under the Companies Act, 2013, as a 
public company and whose sole purpose is to carry on life insurance 
business or general insurance business or re-insurance business or health 
insurance business ;’; 


(vii) for clause (8A), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(8A) “insurance co-operative society” means an insurer being a 
co-operative society formed and registered on or after the 
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2002, as a 
co-operative society under— 


(a) the provisions of the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912; 


(b) any other law for the time being in force in any State 
relating to co-operative societies; or 


(c) the provisions of the Multi-State Co-operative Societies 
Act, 2002, 


and whose sole purpose is to carry on life insurance business or general 
insurance business or health insurance business in India ; ; 


(viii) for clause (9), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
© coe 29 p fh - . he 2 
(9) “insurer” means a person who carries on insurance business; ; 


(ix) for clause (JOB), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(10B) “insurance intermediary” includes— 
(a) insurance brokers; 
(b) re-insurance brokers; 
(c) insurance consultants; 
(d) corporate agents; 
(e) third party administrator; 


(f) surveyors and loss assessors; 


Sec. 2] 


Amendment of 
section 2C. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(g) managing general agents; 
(Ah) insurance repositories; and 


(i) such other entities, as may be notified by the Authority 
from time to time;’; 


(x) in clause (/3BA), for the word, figures and letters “section 10FB”, 
the word and figures “section 408” shall be substituted; 


(xi) in clause (1388), for the words, brackets, figures and letters 
“sub-section (/) of section 1OFR”, the word and figures “section 410” shall be 
substituted; 


(xii) after clause (J3BB), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


(1380८) “premium” means the amount paid or payable as 
consideration to the insurer by the policy holder for a contract of 
insurance; ; 


(xiii) after clause (/4), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“4A) “principal officer” means an officer of an insurer, 
authorised as such for the purposes of this Act;”; 


(xiv) in clause (16), for the word, brackets and figures “clause (72), the 
word, brackets and figures “clause (7/)” shall be substituted. 


4. In section 2C of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(i) in clause (0), after the words “relating to co-operative 
societies’, the words and figures “or the Multi-State Co-operative 
Societies Act, 2002” shall be inserted; 


(ii) after clause (0), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ba) a statutory body established by an Act of Parliament 
for time being in force to carry on insurance business; or”; 


(iii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(c) a company or a body established or incorporated under 
a law of any country outside India and engaged in re-insurance 
business that establishes a branch in India for the purpose of 
re-insurance business exclusively and includes Lloyd’s established 
under the Lloyd’s Act, 1871 (United Kingdom) or any of its 
Members:”; 


(iv) after the third proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided also that no company or a body established or 
incorporated under a law of any country outside India shall carry 
on any class of insurance business, other than re-insurance:”; 


(v) in the fourth proviso, for the words, brackets and letter “an 
insurer, being an Indian Insurance Company, insurance co-operative 
society or, a body corporate referred to in clause (c) of this sub-section 
carrying on the business of insurance”, the words “that an msurer 
carrying on insurance business” shall be substituted. 


39 of 2002. 


34 of 1871 
(UK). 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely: — 


“(4) No person other than an insurer shall use as part of its name 
or in connection with its business any of the words “insurance”, 
“insurer, “assurance”, “re-insurance’’, “insurance company” or any of 
their derivatives and no person shall carry on the insurance business in 
India unless it uses as part of its name at least one of such words, as may 


be specified by the regulations. 


(5) An insurance intermediary may only use the words 
“insurance’’, “assurance”, or “insurance company to indicate the nature 
of its organisation and services as an insurance intermediary, in 


accordance with the regulations. 


(6) An association of insurers or insurance intermediaries formed 
for the protection of their mutual interests and registered under the 
18 of 2013. Companies Act, 2013 or any other applicable law may only use the 
words “insurance’’, “assurance”, or “insurance company” to indicate the 
nature of its organisation, purposes and services, in accordance with the 
regulations.”. 


5. In section 2CA of the principal Act,— Amendment of 
है ५ : ; alE ; section 2CA. 
() in the marginal heading, after the words “Special Economic Zones”, 


the words “and International Financial Services Centres set up in Special 
Economic Zones” shall be inserted: 


(ii) for clauses (a) and (b), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(a) shall not apply to an insurer or insurance intermediary in any 
Special Economic Zone including International Financial Services 
Centres, set up under the provisions of the Special Economic Zones 
28 of 2005. Act, 2005; 


(b) shall apply to the insurer or insurance intermediary in any 

Special Economic Zone including International Financial Services 

Centres, set up under the provisions of the Special Economic Zones 

28 of 2005. Act, 2005, with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may 
be specified in the notification.”. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


6. In section 3 of the principal Act,— 
(7) for sub-sections (2) and (2A), the following sub-sections shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“(2) Every application for registration shall be in such form, 
manner and be accompanied by such documents and by such fee as may 
be specified by the regulations. 


(24) On receipt of an application for registration under 
sub-section (2), the Authority may, if satisfied after such inquiry as it 
may deem necessary, that,— 


(a) the financial condition and the general character of 
management of the applicant are sound; 


(b) the projected volume of business, the capital structure and 
earning prospects of the applicant shall be adequate; 


(c) the interest of the general public shall be served, if the 
certificate of registration is granted to the applicant; and 


Insertion of new 
section 3AA. 


Foreign 
investment in 
equity. 


Amendment of 
section 6. 


Amendment of 
section 6A. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(d) the applicant has complied with the provisions of this 
Act, as may be applicable and all other conditions as may be 
specified by the Authority, 


register the applicant as an insurer and grant it a certificate of 
registration.” 


(ii) in sub-section (3), for the words, brackets, letter and figures 
“sub-clause (d) of clause (9) of section 2”, the words, brackets, letters and 
figures “clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 2(7 shall be substituted; 


(iii) in sub-section (5C), the words, brackets, figures and letter “or has 
had an application under sub-section (4) of section 3A accepted,” shall be 
omitted; 


(iv) in sub-section (5D), for the word “Court”, wherever it occurs, the 
words “National Company Law Tribunal” shall be substituted. 


7. After section 3A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


“3AA. On and from the date of commencement of the Sabka Bima Sabki 
Raksha (Amendment of Insurance Laws) Act, 2025, the aggregate holdings of 
equity shares by foreign investors including portfolio investors in an Indian 
insurance company may extend upto one hundred per cent. of the paid-up 
equity capital and the foreign investment by such investors shall be subject to 
such conditions and such manner as may be prescribed. 


Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 
foreign direct investment in an Indian insurance company may extend upto 
one hundred per cent. to accelerate the growth in the insurance sector.” 


8. In section 6 of the principal Act,— 


(7) in sub-section (/), for the words, brackets, letter and figures 
“sub-clause (d) of clause (9) of section 2”, the words, brackets, letters and 
figures “clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 2(7 shall be substituted; 


(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) No insurer referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (/) of 
section 2C, shall be registered unless it has net owned fund of not less 
than one thousand crore rupees.” 


9. In section 6A of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “life insurance business or general 
insurance business or health insurance business or re-insurance business’, the 
words “insurance business” shall be substituted; 


(8) in sub-section (4),— 


(0) for the words “life insurance business, general and health 
insurance business and re-insurance business”, the words “insurance 
business” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (6), in sub-clause (iii), for the words “one per cent.”, 
the words “five per cent.” shall be substituted; 


(c) in sub-section (//), in clause (7), for the words, brackets and figures 
“sub-sections (/), (3), (5) and (6)”, the words, brackets and figures 
“sub-sections (/) and (5)” shall be substituted. 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


10. In section 6B of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words “life or 
general or health insurance or re-insurance business”, the words “insurance 
business” shall be substituted. 


11. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section 2,— 
(a) the words, brackets and figure “sub-section (/) of” shall be omitted; 
(6) for the word “Controller”, the word “Authority” shall be substituted; 


(c) in the first proviso, the words, brackets and letter, “clause (a) of” 
shall be omitted. 


12. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the words 
“a revenue account’, the words “and other financial statements” shall be inserted. 


13. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“12A. The eligibility criteria and experience for appointment of an 
Actuary by an insurer and the powers and functions of the Actuary shall be 
such as may be specified by the regulations.”. 


14. In section 13 of the principal Act,— 


(i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“Actuary report.”; 


(ii) for sub-sections (/) and (2), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely: — 


“(1) In every financial year, every insurer shall cause an 
investigation to be made by an Actuary into the financial condition of 
the business carried on by it including a valuation of its liabilities in 
respect thereto and shall cause a report of such Actuary to be made for 
such purpose and in such manner as may be specified by the regulations. 


(1A) The Authority may, having regard to the circumstances of any 
particular insurer, allow the insurer to have the investigation made at a 
date not later than two years from the date at which the previous 
investigation was made. 


(2) The provisions of sub-section (/) regarding the making of a 
report shall apply to an investigation into the financial condition of the 
insurer made with a view to the distribution of profits or an investigation 
made for any such purpose as the Authority may determine.”; 


(iii) in sub-sections (3) and (4), for the word “abstract”, the word 
“report” shall be substituted; 


(iv) sub-section (6) shall be omitted. 


15. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“14. (1) Every insurer, in respect of all business transacted by him, shall 
maintain— 


(a) a complete record of policies which shall contain all details of 
the policy application, policy contract and other relevant and connected 
information including,— 


[Part II— 


Amendment of 
section 6B. 


Amendment of 
section 10. 


Amendment of 
section 11. 


Insertion of new 
section 12A. 


Appointment of 
Actuary by 
insurer. 


Amendment of 
section 13. 


Substitution of 
new sections for 
section 14. 


Record of 
policies and 
claims. 


Processing of 
information of 
policyholders 
by insurers or 
other regulated 
entities of 
Authority. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(i) in respect of every policy issued by the insurer to an 
individual, the name, date of birth, address and (where available) 
email address of the policyholder, Aadhaar number or Permanent 
Account Number or such other identification number issued by 
any Central Authority for the purpose of unique identification of 
the individual, the date when the policy was effected and a record 
of any transfer, assignment or nomination of which the insurer has 
notice and any other information which the Authority shall specify 
from time to time; 


(ii) in respect of every policy issued by the insurer 
to any entity, the name, date of incorporation, address and email 
address, registration number or Permanent Account Number or 
such other identification number issued by any Central 
Authority for the purpose of unique identification of such entity, 
the date when the policy was effected and a record of any 
transfer, assignment or nomination of which the insurer has notice 
and any other information which the Authority shall specify from 
time to time; 


(6) a record of claims, every claim made together with the date of 
the claim, the name and address of the claimant and the date on which 
the claim was discharged, or, in the case of a claim which is rejected, the 
date of rejection and the grounds thereof; and 


(c) a record of policies and claims in accordance with 
clauses (a) and (b) may be maintained in such form, including electronic 
mode, as may be specified by the regulations. 


(2) Every insurer shall, in respect of all business transacted by him, 
endeavour to issue policies above a specified threshold in terms of sum assured 
and premium in electronic form, in such manner and form as may be specified 
by the regulations. 


(3) Every insurer shall on a concurrent basis, submit to the Authority or 
any entity regulated and authorised by the Authority, the record of policies as 
stated in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (/) in the manner and the details 
as may be specified by the regulations. 


14A. (1) The Authority may direct the insurers or other regulated entities 
of the Authority to process the Know Your Customer (K YC) information of 
the policyholders and the information and documents processed during the 
solicitation or subsequently, shall be in such form and manner, as may be 
specified by the regulations for the purposes of this Act and any other law for 
the time being in force. 


(2) The processing of the Know Your Customer (K YC) information of 
the policyholder and the information and documents processed during the 
solicitation or subsequently by the insurers or other regulated entities of the 
Authority shall be deemed to be valid for the performance of their functions 
under this Act or any other law for the time being in force. 


(3) The insurers or the other regulated entities of the Authority shall use 
the Know Your Customer (९५९) information of the policyholder and the 
information and documents processed during the solicitation or subsequently 
received in this section solely for the efficient discharge of its duties under 
this Act. 


54 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


14B. An insurer or other regulated entities of the Authority in possession 
or control of information of the policyholders, shall take such steps, as may be 
specified by the regulations, to ensure that the information of the policyholders 
maintained by such insurers or other regulated entities is accurate, complete 
and updated in all respects, secure and duly protected against any loss or 
unauthorised access or use, or unauthorised disclosure thereof. 


14C. (Z) Subject to any other law for the time being in force, insurers 
and other regulated entities of the Authority shall ensure that the Know Your 
Customer (K YC) information of the policyholders and the information and 
documents processed during the solicitation or subsequently during all times 
are maintained with utmost confidentiality and would be comprehensively 
protected. 


(2) Subject to sub-section (/), the said information shall not be parted or 
shared with any third party, except,— 


(a) where disclosure is compulsory in law; 
(6) where there is duty to the public to disclose; or 


(c) where the disclosure is made with the express consent of the 
customer.””. 


16. For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“15. The audited accounts and statements referred to in section 11 or 
sub-section (5) of section 13 and the statement referred to in section 13 shall 
be furnished to the Authority in such form and manner as may be specified by 
the regulations within a period of six months from the end of the period to 
which they refer.”. 


17. In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (d), the 


words, figures and letters “or section 28A or section 2887 shall be omitted. 


18. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words, brackets 


and figures “of sub-sections (/) and (2) of” shall be omitted. 


19. In section 26 of the principal Act, the words, brackets and letter “referred 


[Part II— 


Accuracy and 
security of 
information of 
policyholders. 


Confidentiality 
of information of 
policyholders. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 15. 


Submission of 
returns. 


Amendment of 
section 21. 


Amendment of 
section 22. 


Amendment of 
section 26. 


to, and, where the alteration affects the assured rates, advantages, terms and 
conditions offered in connection with life insurance policies the actuarial certificate 
referred to in clause (f) of the said sub-section shall accompany the particulars of 
the alteration” occurring at the end, shall be omitted. 

Substitution of 


new section for 
section 27. 


20. For section 27 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


Investment of 


“27. (1) Every insurer shall, in order to meet its liabilities, invest and at ‘ 
assets. 


all times keep invested assets of value not less than that of the liabilities in the 
following manner, namely:— 


(a) in case of an insurer carrying on life insurance business— 


(i) twenty-five per cent. of the said assets in Government 
securities; 


(ii) a further sum equal to not less than twenty-five per cent. 
of the said sum in Government securities or other approved 
securities; and 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(iii) the balance, in any of such approved investments, with 
such limitations, conditions and restrictions as may be specified by 
the regulations; 


(5) in the case of an insurer carrying on insurance business, other 
than life insurance business— 


(i) twenty per cent. of the said assets in Government 
securities; 


(ii) a further sum equal to not less than ten per cent. of the said 
sum in Government securities or other approved securities; and 


(iii) the balance, in any of such approved investments, with 
such limitations, conditions and restrictions as may be specified by 
the regulations: 


Provided that an insurer may, subject to such conditions as 
may be specified by the regulations, invest or keep invested any 
part of its controlled funds or assets otherwise than in approved 
investments, if such investments do not exceed fifteen per cent. of 
the assets referred to in this sub-section. 


(2) The investment of the whole or any part of the assets of the insurer 
shall be subject to— 


(a) the condition that the assets referred to in sub-section (/) shall 
be held free of any encumbrance, charge, hypothecation or lien; and 


(6) such limitations and conditions as may be specified by the 
regulations: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to 
a repo or a reverse repo transaction or a Government securities lending 
transaction undertaken in terms of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 
or directions issued thereunder. 


(3) Subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified by the 
regulations, an insurer may invest not more than five per cent. of the assets 
referred to in sub-section (/), by value, in a company or other body corporate 
which is owned or controlled by the promoters. 


(4) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect in any 
way, the manner in which any money relating to the provident fund of any 
employee or to any security taken from any employee or other moneys of a 
like nature are required to be held by or under any Central Act or State Act for 
the time being in force. 


(5) The assets being invested by an insurer incorporated or domiciled 
outside India, except to the extent of any part thereof which consists of foreign 
assets held outside India, shall be held in India and in the trust for the discharge 
of the liabilities and shall be vested in trustees resident in India and approved 
by the Authority, and the instrument of such trust shall be executed by the 
insurer, with the approval of the Authority, in such manner as may be specified 
by the regulations. 


(6) The Authority may, either generally or in any particular case, direct 
that any investment shall, subject to such conditions as may be imposed, be 
taken into account, in such manner as may be specified by the regulation, in 
computing the assets referred to in sub-section (/), and where any direction 
has been issued under this sub-section, the copies thereof shall be laid before 
each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is issued. 


55 


2 of 1934. 


56 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(7) If, at any time, the Authority considers any one or more of the 
investments of an insurer to be unsuitable or undesirable, the Authority may, 
after giving the insurer an opportunity of being heard, direct it to realise the 
investment or investments, and the insurer shall comply with the direction 
within such time as may be specified by the regulations. 


(8) Without prejudice to anything contained in this section, the Authority 
may, in the interest of the policyholders, specify by the regulations, the time, 
manner and other conditions of investment of assets to be held by an insurer 
for the purposes of this Act. 


(9) The Authority may give specific directions for the time, manner and 
other conditions subject to which the funds of policyholders shall be invested 
in the infrastructure and social sector, as may be specified by the regulations. 


(10) The Authority may, after taking into account the nature of business 
and to protect the interest of the policyholders, issue to an insurer the 
directions relating to the time, manner and other conditions of investment of 
assets to be held by it: 


Provided that no direction under this sub-section shall be issued unless 
the insurer concerned has been given an opportunity of being heard. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expressions— 


(i) “assets” means all the assets of insurer at their carrying value 
but does not include any assets specifically held against any fund or 
portion thereof in respect of which the Authority is satisfied that such 
fund or portion thereof, as the case may be, is regulated by the law of 
any country outside India or miscellaneous expenditure or in respect of 
which the Authority is satisfied that it would not be in the interest of the 
insurer to apply the provisions of this section; 


(ii) “controlled”, in relation to a company or other body corporate, 
means the right to appoint majority of its directors or to control its 
management or policy decisions exercisable by the promoters acting 
individually or in concert, directly or indirectly, including by virtue of 
shareholding or management rights or shareholders agreements or 
voting agreements; 


(iii) “controlled funds” mean,— 


(a) in the case of any insurer carrying on life insurance 
business— 


(i) all its funds, if it carries on no other class of 
insurance business; 


(ii) all the funds in India appertaining to life insurance 
business if it carries on some other class of insurance 
business also: 


Provided that the fund referred to in sub-clause (a) 
shall not include any fund or portion thereof in respect of 
which the Authority is satisfied that such fund or portion, as 
the case may be, is regulated by the law in force of any 
country outside India or it would not be in the interest of the 
insurer to apply the provisions of this section; 


(5) in the case of any other insurer carrying on life insurance 
business— 


(2) all its funds in India, if it carries on no other class of 
insurance business; 


Omission of 
sections 27A, 
27B, 27C and 
27D. 


Amendment of 
section 30. 


Amendment of 
section 31. 


Amendment of 
section 31A. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 32A. 


Prohibition of 
common officers 
and requirement 
as to whole-time 
officers. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(ii) all the funds in India appertaining to life 
insurance business, if it carries on some other class of insurance 
business also, but does not include any fund or portion thereof 
in respect of which the Authority is satisfied that such fund or 
portion thereof, as the case may be, is regulated by the law in 
force of any country outside India or in respect of which the 
Authority is satisfied that it would not be in the interest of the 
insurer to apply the provisions of this section; 


(iv) “liabilities” means the net liabilities of the insurer to the 


holders of policies; 


(v) “owned”, in relation to a company, means the holding of more 


than fifty per cent. of its paid-up share capital by the promoters, and 
includes a subsidiary company of such a company; and 


(vi) “promoter” means a person— 


(a) who has been named as such in a prospectus inviting offers 
from the public for the subscription or purchase of any securities of 
an insurer, or is identified as such by the insurer in its annual returns 
filed with the person having the duty of registering companies; 


(b) who has control over the affairs of the insurer, directly or 
indirectly whether as a shareholder, director or otherwise; or 


(c) in accordance with whose advice, directions or 
instructions, the board of directors of the insurer is accustomed to 
act but shall not apply to a person who is acting merely in a 
professional capacity.’ 


21. Sections 27A, 27B, 27C and 27D of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


22. In section 30 of the principal Act, the figures and letters “27A, 27B, 27C, 


27D”, occurring at both the places, shall be omitted. 


23. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the word, brackets 


and figure “sub-section (7), the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (5)” shall 


be substituted. 


24. In section 31A of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the portion 


beginning with “no insurer shall after expiry of one year” and ending with “in 
respect of the general insurance business of the insurer:”, the following shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“no msurer shall, after expiry of one year from the date of 
commencement of the Sabka Bima Sabki Raksha (Amendment of Insurance 
Laws) Act, 2025, be directed or managed by a company or a firm or employ 
as manager or officer or in any capacity, any person whose remuneration or 
any part thereof is in the form of commission or bonus or a share in the 
valuation surplus:”. 


25. For section 32A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“32A. (1) A Director or officer of an insurer shall not be a Director or 
officer of any other insurer carrying on the same class of insurance business 
or of a Banking company or of an investment company. 


(2) The Authority may, for such period, to such extent and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified by the regulations, exempt from the operation of 
this section, two or more such entities, for the purpose of facilitating their 
amalgamation or the transfer of business of one insurer to another. 


57 


58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(3) The provisions of sub-section (/) shall not apply to a Director 
nominated by the Central Government.”. 


26. In section 32B of the principal Act, for the words “life insurance business ee of 
2 : a5 nee + section si 
and general insurance business”, the words “insurance business” shall be 
substituted. 
27. In section 32C of the principal Act, for the words “life insurance or general ae र्ण 
insurance’, the word “insurance” shall be substituted. : 
28. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), in clause (a), after the eee of 
word “insurer”, the words “or insurance intermediary” shall be inserted. es 
29. In section 33A of the principal Act,— Amensinenkor 
section 33A. 


(7) for the words “at it or he”, the words “as it” shall be substituted; 


(ii) after the word “insurers”, the words “or insurance intermediaries” 
shall be inserted. 


30. In section 34 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following Amendment of 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely: — seen 


“(1) Where the Authority is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient,— 
(a) in the public interest; 


(b) to prevent the affairs of an insurer or insurance intermediary 
being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests of the 
policyholders or in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the insurer or 
insurance intermediary; or 


(c) to secure the proper management of an insurer or insurance 
intermediary, 


it may issue such directions as it deems fit, to insurer or insurance intermediary 
generally or in particular, including directions of disgorgement and such 
insurer or insurance intermediary shall comply with such directions: 


Provided that no such directions shall be issued to any insurer or 
insurance intermediary in particular unless such insurer or insurance 
intermediary has been given an opportunity of being heard. 


Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 
power to issue directions under this section shall include and always be 
deemed to have included the power to direct any person, who made profit or 
averted loss by indulging in any transaction or activity in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act and the Insurance Regulatory and Development 

41 of 1999. Authority Act, 1999 and rules or regulations made thereunder, to disgorge an 
amount equivalent to the wrongful gain made or loss averted by such 
contravention.”. 


31. In section 34A of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following Amendment of 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— section 34A. 


“(2) Nothing contained in sections 196, 197 and 203 of the Companies 
18 of 2013. Act, 2013 shall apply to any matter in respect of which the approval of the 


Authority is to be obtained under sub-section (/).”. 


है 2 6 ५ ५ Amendment of 
32. In section 34H of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— कम पक 


() in clause (a), for the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (2), the 
word, brackets and figure “sub-section (3)” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (5), for the word, brackets, figure and letter “sub-section (/4) 
the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (2)” shall be substituted; 


(iii) for clause (2), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


Amendment of 
section 35. 


Amendment of 
section 37. 


Amendment of 
section 37A. 


Amendment of 
section 40. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


“(c) a contravention of any provision of this Act or the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 has been committed 
or is likely to be committed by an insurer or insurance intermediary; or”; 


(iv) in clauses (7) and (2), after the word “insurer”, occurring at both the 
places, the words “or insurance intermediary” shall be inserted. 


33. In section 35 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(Z1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, no insurance business of an insurer or non-insurance 
business of any company, shall be transferred to or amalgamated with the 
insurance business of any other insurer except in accordance with a 
scheme prepared under this section and approved by the Authority, subject 
to the transferee insurer complying with the provisions of this Act at all 
times and any other conditions as may be specified by the regulations.”; 


(8) in sub-section (3),— 
(z) in clause (5), for the words “insurance business of each of the 
msurers’’, the words “business of cach of the entities” shall be substituted; 
(zi) in clause (c), the word “life” shall be omitted; 


(iii) in clause (e), after the words “was founded”, the words “or any 
other document as may be required by the Authority” shall be inserted; 


(iv) in the proviso,— 


(A) for the word “insurer”, the word “party” shall be 
substituted; 


(B) for the words and figures “or sections 7 and 8 of the 
Indian Life Assurance Companies Act, 1912”, the words “or any 
other applicable law” shall be substituted; 


(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(4) Without prejudice to anything contained in sections 35, 36, 
37, or 37A, the Authority may specify by regulations, the manner, 
procedure and other conditions for a scheme of arrangement or 
amalgamation or transfer of business for the purposes of this Act.”. 


34. In section 37 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the words “two or more insurers’, the words “two or more 
entities” shall be substituted; 


(b) in clause (2), in sub-clause (7), for the portion beginning with “insurance 
business of each of the insurer concerned” and ending with “Part-I of that 
Schedule”, the words “business of each of the entities concerned in such 
amalgamation or transfer, prepared in accordance with the regulations” shall be 
substituted. 


35. In section 37A of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the second 


proviso, for the word “Controller”, the word “Authority” shall be substituted. 


36. In section 40 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(2A) Without prejudice to anything contained in this section, the Authority 
may in the interest of the policyholders, specify by the regulations, the limits of 
any commission, remuneration or reward in any form payable to an insurance 
agent or an insurance intermediary, the manner of such payment, the manner of 
disclosures required and such other matters related to insurance agents or 
insurance intermediaries as may be necessary, for the purposes of this Act.” 


41 of 1999. 


6 of 1912. 


4 of 1999. 


18 of 2013. 


5 of 1972. 
3 of 1956. 


42 of 1999. 
15 of 2002. 


60 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


37. In section 40B of the principal Act, in the marginal heading, the word 
“life” shall be omitted. 


38. In section 40C of the principal Act, for the marginal heading, the following 
marginal heading shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Fumishing details of expenses of management by the insurer.”. 


39. In section 41 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in the proviso, for the 
words “a policy of life insurance taken out by himself on his own life’, the words 
“a policy of any class of insurance business taken out by himself in relation to risks 
associated with his own life, health or property” shall be substituted. 


40. In section 42D of the principal Act,— 


(7) in sub-section (2), after the words “insurance intermediary.”, the 
words “A person shall not begin to carry on or act as an insurance 
intermediary, unless he or it obtains a certificate of registration for the same 
from the Authority.” shall be inserted; 


(ii) for sub-sections (3) and (4), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“(3) Every application for registration as an insurance intermediary 
shall be in such form and manner and be accompanied by such 
documents and fee as may be specified by the regulations. 


(4) No application for the renewal of a registration under this 
section shall be entertained, if the application does not reach the issuing 
authority before the registration ceases to remain in force: 


Provided that the Authority may, if satisfied that undue hardship 
would be caused otherwise, accept any application on payment of late 
fee of seven hundred and fifty rupees. 


(4A) A registration made under this section shall remain in force 
subject to payment of such annual fee as may be specified by the 
regulations, until such registration is suspended or cancelled by the 
Authority, in accordance with such procedure as may be specified by it 
and the conditions referred to in sub-section (6).”; 


(iii) for sub-sections (6), (7) and (8), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“(6) The Authority may suspend or cancel the registration of an 
insurance intermediary, if such insurance intermediary— 


(7) contravenes any provision of this Act or the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder or makes a default in complying with 
any direction issued or order made; 


(ii) makes a default in complying with, or acts in 
contravention of, any requirement of the Companies Act, 2013 or 
the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 or the 
Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 or the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999 or the Prevention of Money Laundering 
Act, 2002; 


(ii) is convicted for an offence under any law for the time 
being in force; 


Amendment of 
section 40B. 


Amendment of 
section 40C. 


Amendment of 
section 41. 


Amendment of 
section 42D. 


Amendment of 
section 47. 


Amendment of 
section 48B. 


Amendment of 
section 49. 


Amendment of 
section 51. 


Amendment of 
section 52A. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 61 


(iv) having its holding company or a joint venture partner 
having its principal place of business in a country outside India 
that has been debarred by law or practice of such country to carry 
on insurance intermediary business; 


(v) fails to pay the annual fee required under 
sub-section (44); 


(vi) being a co-operative society set up under the respective 
State laws or, as the case may be, the Multi-State Co-operative 
Societies Act, 2002, contravenes the provisions of law as may be 
applicable to the insurance intermediary; 


(vii) no longer meets the requirements or is disqualified as 
per sub-section (5); or 


(viii) makes any other default or contravention, as may be 
specified by the regulations. 


(7) The manner of suspension or cancellation of registration of an 
insurance intermediary shall be such as may be specified by the 
regulations. 


(8) The Authority may issue a duplicate certificate of registration 
to replace a registration certificate which was lost, destroyed or 
mutilated, or in any other case where the Authority is of opinion that the 
issue of duplicate certificate is necessary, it may issue the same on 
payment of such fee as may be specified by the 1697 1015. ; 


(iv) sub-section (9) shall be omitted. 
41. In section 47 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(0) for the words “life insurance maturing”, the words “insurance duc” 
shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words “title to the amount secured thereby or for any other 
adequate reason”, the words “entitlement to receive the due payment” shall be 
substituted. 


42. In section 48B of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words, 
brackets, letter and figures “sub-clause (6) of clause (9) of section 2”, the words, 
brackets, letters and figures “clause (ba) of sub-section (/) of section 2C” shall be 
substituted. 


43. In section 49 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 

(7) for the words and figures “business of life insurance or any other class 
or sub-class of insurance business to which section 13 applies”, the words 
“insurance business” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words “the fund of such other class”, the words “the fund of 
the other class” shall be substituted; 


(iii) for the words and figures “abstract referred to in section 15”, the 
words and figures “report referred to in section 15” shall be substituted. 


44. In section 51 of the principal Act, for the words “not exceeding one rupee”, 
the words “of one rupee per page, subject to a maximum fee of two hundred and 
fifty rupees” shall be substituted. 


45. In section 52A of the principal Act,— 


(7) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“When Board of Directors and the like, superseded and 
Administrator for management of insurance business may be 
appointed.”; 


39 of 2002. 


62 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(ii) for sub-section (J), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(1) If at any time the Authority has reason to believe that an 
insurer carrying on insurance business is acting in a manner likely to be 
prejudicial to the interest of its policyholders, it may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing and after giving the insurer an opportunity of being 
heard, by order in writing, supersede the Board of directors or such other 
management or governing or executive committee of such insurer, and 
appoint an Administrator to manage the affairs of the insurer, under the 
direction and control of the Authority for such period not exceeding one 
year. 


(1A) The Authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
extend the period referred to in sub-section (/) from time to time.”. 


46. In section 55 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the word and 
figures “section 643”, the word and figures “section 468” shall be substituted. 


47. In section 61A of the principal Act, after sub-section (6), the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(7) Where the appeal filed before the National Company Law Appellate 
Tribunal under sub-section (/) is not disposed of within the said period of six 
months, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing therefor.”. 


48. In section 64 of the principal Act, for the words “on or before the last day 
of January in every calendar year’, the words “within such time as may be 
determined by the Authority” shall be substituted. 


49. In section 64F of the principal Act,— 
(४) in sub-section (/),— 


(a) in clause (a), for the word “four”, the word “seven” shall be 
substituted; 


(6) in clause (0), for the words “an eminent person’, the words 
“two eminent persons” shall be substituted; 


(c) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ca) two persons nominated by the Central Government;”; 
(ii) in sub-section (2),— 


(a) in clause (a), for the word “four”, the word “seven” shall be 
substituted; 


(6) for clauses (b) and (c), the following clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“(b) two eminent persons not connected with insurance 
business, nominated by the Authority; 


(c) three representatives from among insurance agents, 
insurance intermediaries and policyholders as may be nominated 
by the Authority; 


(d) one representative each from self-help groups and 
insurance co-operative societies as may be nominated by the 
Authority; and 


(e) two persons nominated by the Central Government:”. 


Amendment of 
section 55. 


Amendment of 
section 61A. 


Amendment of 
section 64. 


Amendment of 
section 64F. 


Amendment of 
section 64G. 


Amendment of 
section 64H. 


Amendment of 
section 64K. 


Amendment of 
section 64L. 


Amendment of 
section 64M. 


Amendment of 
section 64R. 


Omission of 
section 64ULA. 


Amendment of 
section 64VB. 


Amendment of 
section 101A. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 102. 


Penalty for 
default in 
complying with, 
or act in 
contravention of, 
this Act or 
Insurance 
Regulatory and 
Development 
Authority Act, 
1999. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


50. In section 64G of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the word 
“Chairman”, the word “Chairperson” shall be substituted. 


51. In section 64H of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words 
“General Council”, the words “General Insurance Council” shall be substituted. 


52. In section 64K of the principal Act,— 


(7) in sub-section (/), the words, brackets and figure “the proviso to 
sub-section (2) of” shall be omitted; 


(zi) in sub-section (4), the words, brackets and figures “sub-sections (/) 
and (2) of” shall be omitted; and the words, brackets and figures “‘or, as the 
case may be, of sub-section (2) of section 16” shall be omitted. 


53. In section 64L of the principal Act,— 
(४) in sub-section (/),— 


(a) in clause (a), after the words “general insurance business”, the 
words “, health insurance business and re-insurance business” shall be 
inserted; 


(0) in clause (2), after the words “general insurance policies”, the 
words “, health insurance policies and re-insurance policies” shall be 
inserted; 


(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) For the purpose of enabling it to effectively discharge its 
functions, the Executive Committee of the General Insurance Council 
may collect such fees as may be laid down in the bye-laws made by the 
General Insurance Council from the insurers carrying on general 
insurance business or health insurance business or re-insurance 
business.”, 


54. In section 64M of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), the words, brackets 
and figure “the proviso to sub-section (/) of” shall be omitted. 


55. In section 64R of the principal Act, in sub-section (J), in clause (6), for the 
words “any prescribed fee”, the words “fee, as laid down in the bye-laws made by 
the Life Insurance Council and General Insurance Council” shall be substituted. 


56. Section 64ULA of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


57. In section 64VB of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the 
Explanation,— 
(0) after the word “post”, the words “or by any online mode” shall be 
inserted; 
(ii) after the word “posted”, the words “or the money is received in 
msurer’s bank account” shall be inserted. 


58. In section 101A of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the words 
“Indian re-insurers’’, the words “a minimum of” shall be inserted. 


59. For section 102 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“102. If any insurer or insurance intermediary, who is required under 
this Act or the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, 
or rules or regulations made thereunder fails to,— 


(a) furnish any document, statement, account, return or report to 
the Authority; or 


(b) comply with the directions of the Authority; or 


(c) maintain solvency margin; or 


63 


41 of 1999. 


41 of 1999. 


41 of 1999. 


64 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(d) comply with the directions on the insurance treaties, 


he or it shall be liable to a penalty which shall be up to one lakh rupees for 
each day during which such failure continues subject to a maximum of ten 
crore rupees. 


60. In section 104 of the principal Act,— 


(7) in the marginal heading, the figures and letters  , 275, 27B, 27D” 
shall be omitted; 


(ii) the words, figures and letters *, section 27A, section 27B, 
section 27D” shall be omitted. 


61. After section 105B of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“105BA. (2) If any person who acts as an insurance intermediary without 
being registered under section 42D to act as such, he shall be liable to a penalty 
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to ten lakh rupees 
and any person who appoints as an insurance intermediary or any person not 
registered to act as such or transacts any insurance business in India through 
any such person, shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be less than ten 
lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees. 


(2) Where the person contravening the provisions of sub-section (/) is a 
company or firm, then, without prejudice to any other proceedings which may 
be taken against the company or firm, every director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company and every partner of the firm, who is knowingly 
a party to such contravention shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be 
less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to ten lakh rupees.”. 


62. In section 105C of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words, 
brackets, figures and letters “sub-sections (8) and (9) of section 42D, section 52F 
and section 105B”, the words, figures and letters “section 527, section 105B and 
section 105BA” shall be substituted. 


63. After section 105D of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“105E. (1) While determining the penalty to be imposed under the 
provisions of this Act or the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
Act, 1999 or rules or regulations made thereunder, the Authority shall have 
regard to the following factors, namely:— 


(a) the nature, gravity and duration of the default; 
(b) the repetitive nature of the default; 


(c) the disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever 
quantifiable, made as a result of the default; 


(d) the loss caused to the policyholders as a result of the default; 


(e) the action taken by the person to mitigate the effects and 
consequences of the default, and the timeliness and effectiveness of such 
action; 


(f) the number of policyholders impacted by such default; 


(g) whether the penalty to be imposed is proportionate, having 
regard to the need to secure observance of and deter breach of the 
provisions of this Act, the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority Act, 1999 and rules and regulations thereunder; and 


Amendment of 
section 104. 


Insertion of new 
section 10SBA. 


Penalty for 
contravention of 
section 42D. 


Amendment of 
section 105C. 


Insertion of new 
section 105E. 


Factors to be 
taken into 
account before 
imposing 
penalty. 


Amendment of 
section 106. 


Amendment of 
section 110B. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 110F. 
Provisions 
applicable to 
State 
Governments, 
and the like. 


Amendment of 
section 114. 


Amendment of 
section 114A. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(A) such other factors as may be deemed appropriate by the 
Authority: 


Provided that before imposing any penalty, the person shall be given an 
opportunity of being heard. 


(2) A brief of such penal action shall be disclosed in the form of press 
release on the website of the Authority within a period of thirty days. 


(3) The manner and procedure for imposing penalties may be such as 
specified by the regulations.”. 


64. In section 106 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (//), for the word and figures “section 237”, the word 
and figures “section 213” shall be substituted; 


(8) sub-section (/2) shall be omitted. 


65. In section 110B of the principal Act, the words, brackets and figures 
“under sub-section (/) of section 42” shall be omitted. 


66. For section 110F of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“110F. Notwithstanding any exemption granted under section 118, the 
provisions of sections 3, 3A, 33, 34, clause (a) of section 34E, 34F, 40C, 44A, 
64UM, 64V, 64VA, 64VB, 64VC, 101A, 101C and 110D, shall also apply, so 
far as may be, to and in relation to the general insurance business carried on 
by a State Government or a Government company as defined in clause (45) of 
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013.”. 


67. In section 114 of the principal Act,— 
(7) in sub-section (2),— 


(a) for clause (aaa), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(aaa) the conditions and manner of foreign investment 
under section 3AA;”; 


(b) clauses (d), (४), 0), (7) and (/) shall be omitted; 
(ii) sub-section (4) shall be omitted. 
68. In section 114A of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(1) The Authority may, by notification, make regulations 
consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, 
to carry out the purposes of this Act and while making the regulations 
shall ensure transparency by— 


(a) publishing draft regulations along with such other details 
on its website for inviting public comments for a specified period 
prior to issuing such regulations; 


(b) publishing a general statement of its response to the 
public comments not later than the date of notification of the 
regulations; and 


(c) periodically reviewing such regulations: 


18 of 2013. 


66 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


Provided that if the Authority is of the opinion that certain 
regulations are required to be made or existing regulations are to be 
amended urgently in the public interest or the subject matter of the 
regulation relates solely to the internal functioning of the Authority, it 
may dispense with the condition of publishing draft regulations and 
record the reasons for doing so: 


Provided further that if the Authority considers to approve the 
regulations in a form substantially different from the proposed 
regulations other than changes made in consideration of comments 
received by it, it shall repeat the process mentioned in this sub-section.” 


(5) in sub-section (2),— 


(i) in clause (f), after the words “revenue account’, the words “and 
other financial statements” shall be inserted; 


(ii) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(fa) the eligibility criteria and other conditions for an 
actuary under section 12A;”; 


(iii) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(g) the purpose for which and the manner in which the 
report of the actuary to be submitted, and the form and manner in 
which the statement shall be appended, under section 13;”; 


(iv) after clause (gb), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(gc) the form, manner and period for submission of returns 
to the Authority under section 15;”; 


(v) for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(Z) the investment of assets by an insurer in a time, manner, 
limitations, conditions and restrictions under section 27:”; 


(vi) for clause (ja), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(Ga) the form in which balance-sheets in respect of the 
insurance business of each of the insurers concerned and the 
manner in which actuarial reports and abstracts in respect of the 
insurance business are to be prepared under clauses (b) and (c) of 
sub-section (3) of section 35, and the manner, procedure and other 
conditions for a scheme of arrangement or amalgamation or 
transfer of business under sub-section (4) of section 35;”; 


(vii) for clause (q), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(q) the form, manner of making application for registration, 
the documents to be accompanied and the fee payable under 
sub-section (3) of section 42D; 


Sec. 2] 


Insertion of new 
sections 114B 
and 114C. 


Subsidiary 
instructions. 


Consultative 
Committee. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(qa) any other default subject to which the registration may 
be suspended or cancelled under clause (viii) of sub-section (6) of 
section 42D;”; 


(viii) for clause (r), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(r) the annual fee in relation to registration under 
sub-section (4A) of section 42D and the procedure for suspension 
or cancellation of registration under the said sub-section:”; 


(ix) for clause (v), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(v) the fee for issue of duplicate certificate of registration 
under sub-section (8) of section 42D;”; 


(x) after clause (vb), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(vba) the period, extent and conditions under which certain 
insurers may be exempted by the Authority under sub-section (3) 
of section 48B;”; 


(xi) after clause (zba), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zbb) the fee for inspection of the documents filed by an 
insurer with the Authority and obtaining a copy of said document 
or part thereof under section 119;”; 


(xii) after clause (zc), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zca) the manner and conditions of making subsidiary 
instructions under section 114B; 


(zcb) the manner of the constitution of Consultative 
Committees under section 114C:”. 


69. After section 114A, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:— 


“114B. (1) The Chairperson or one or more whole-time Members of the 
Authority or both may issue subsidiary instructions in such manner and subject 
to such conditions as may be specified by regulations for the following 
purposes, namely:— 


(a) clarifying the ambiguity of any regulation, if any; and 


(b) laying down any procedural requirement ancillary to any 
regulation: 


Provided that before making such instructions, the concerned 
Consultative Committee constituted under section 114C shall be consulted: 


Provided further that where subsidiary instructions are required to be 
made urgently, it may do so, without consulting the Consultative Committee 
after recording the reasons thereof. 


(2) Any contravention of the subsidiary instructions shall amount to 
contravention of the regulation it relates to. 


114C. The Authority shall constitute Consultative Committees in such 
manner as may be specified by regulations, to advise it on— 


(a) matters relating to the making of subsidiary instructions under 
section 114B; and 


67 


68 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(8) any other issue as may be determined by it: 


Provided that the advice of the Consultative Committee shall not be 
binding on the Authority.”. 


70. Section 115 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


71. For section 116 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“116. (1) The Central Government may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette and for the reasons to be recorded in writing, exempt any 
insurer constituted, incorporated or domiciled in any country outside India 
from any of the provisions of this Act which may be specified in the order 
either absolutely or subject to such conditions or modifications as may be 
provided in such order. 


(2) The order published under sub-section (/) shall be laid, as soon as 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.” 


72. In section 116A of the principal Act, in the proviso, the words, brackets 
and figure “sub-section (/) of”, the words, figures and letters “or section 28A or 
section 28B” and the words, brackets and figure “sub-section (2) of” shall be 
omitted. 


73. For section 117 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“117. Save as otherwise provided, nothing in this Act shall affect the 
liability of an insurer being a company to comply with the provisions of the 


18 of 2013. Companies Act, 2013.”. 
74. In section 118 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in clause (2), for the word and figures “section 617, the words, 
brackets and figures “clause (45) of section 2” shall be substituted: 
(ii) in clause (d),— 
(a) in sub-clause (i), for the words, brackets, letters and figures 
11 of 1922. “clause (a) of section 58N of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922”, the 
words, brackets and figures “sub-section (6) of section (2) of the 
43 of 1961. Income-tax Act, 1961” shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-clause (7), for the words “dependents: or”, the word 
“dependent:” shall be substituted: 


(c) sub-clause (iii) shall be omitted. 


75. For section 119 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“119. Any person may, on payment of such fees as may be specified by 
the regulations, — 


(i) inspect the documents filed by an insurer with the Authority 
under sub-section (2) of section 3; and 


(ii) obtain a copy of any such document or part thereof.”. 


76. Section 120 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


[Part II— 


Omission of 
section 115. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 116. 


Power to exempt 
from certain 
requirements. 


Amendment of 
section 116A. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 117. 


Saving. 


Amendment of 
section 118. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 119. 


Inspection and 
supply of copies 
of documents 
related to 
registration. 


Omission of 
section 120. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


Amendment of 
section 6A. 


Amendment of 
section 18. 


Amendment of 
section 22. 


Amendment of 
section 24. 


Amendment of 
section 28. 


Amendment of 
section 30A. 


Amendment of 
section 43. 


Amendment of 
section 44. 
Amendment of 
section 48. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1956 
77. In section 2 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (hereafter in this 
Chapter referred to as the Insurance Corporation Act),— 
(7) in clause (3), sub-clause (ii?) shall be omitted; 


(7) in clause (6), the words and figures “and a provident socicty as 
defined in section 65 of the Insurance Act” shall be omitted. 


78. In section 6A of the Insurance Corporation Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
words and figures “Companies Act, 1956”, the words and figures “Companies 
Act, 2013” shall be substituted. 


79. In section 18 of the Insurance Corporation Act, for sub-section (2), the 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(2) The Corporation shall establish zonal offices at Mumbai, Kolkata, 
Delhi, Kanpur and Chennai, and may establish such other zonal offices as it 
thinks fit.”. 


80. In section 22 of the Insurance Corporation Act, in sub-section (3), the 
words “in the prescribed manner” shall be omitted. 


81. In section 24 of the Insurance Corporation Act, after sub-section (2), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(3) Where a branch or office of the Corporation is situated in a country 
outside India, the funds of such branch or office shall be maintained in 
accordance with the laws of that country.”. 


82. In section 28 of the Insurance Corporation Act, after sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(4) Where a branch or office of the Corporation is situated in a country 
outside India, the surplus in such branch or office shall be utilised in 
accordance with the laws of such country.”. 


83. In section 30A of the Insurance Corporation Act, after the words and 
figures “Insurance Act, 1938. the words and figures “*, as applicable to the 
Corporation by virtue of section 43 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956” 
shall be inserted. 


84. In section 43 of the Insurance Corporation Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), the figures and letter “4757 shall be omitted and 
for the figures, letter and word “110C, 119, 121, 122 and 123”, the figures, 
letter and word “110C and 119” shall be substituted: 


(8) in sub-section (2),— 
(7) the figures and letters “28A”, “40A” and “44” shall be omitted; 


(ii) after the figures and letter “4087, the figures “427 shall be 
inserted; and 


(iii) for the figures and word 7107 to”, the figures and word “108 
to” shall be substituted; 


(c) sub-section (2A) shall be omitted; 


(d) in sub-section (3), after the words “the Insurance Act”, the words 
“and the rules and regulations made thereunder” shall be inserted. 


85. In section 44 of the Insurance Corporation Act, clause (5) shall be omitted. 


86. In section 48 of the Insurance Corporation Act, in sub-section (2), 
clause (h) shall be omitted. 


31 of 1956. 


1 of 1956. 
18 of 2013. 


31 of 1956. 


70 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENTS TO THE INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Act, 1999 


87. In section 2 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
Act, 1999 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Insurance Authority Act), in 
sub-section (/), for clause (7), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


41 of 1999. 


“(f) “insurance intermediary” shall have the same meaning as assigned 


4 of 1938. to it in clause (J0B) of section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938: . 


88. In section 4 of the Insurance Authority Act, in the long line, after the words 
“accountancy, administration”, the words “, mformation technology” shall be 
inserted. 


89. In section 5 of the Insurance Authority Act, for sub-section (/), the 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: — 


“(1) The term of office of the Chairperson and other whole-time 
members shall be five years from the date on which they enter upon their office 
or till they attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, and shall be 
eligible for reappointment.”. 


90. In section 14 of the Insurance Authority Act, in sub-section (2),— 


(i) in clause (7), the words, figures and letter “not so controlled and 
regulated by the Tariff Advisory Committee under section 64U of the 


4 of 1938. Insurance Act, 1938” shall be omitted; 


(ii) for clause (४), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(n) imposing such penalty as specified in section 102 of the 
Insurance Act, 1938 and for any violation of the provisions of this Act 
or rules or regulations made thereunder;””. 


4 of 1938. 


91. After section 14 of the Insurance Authority Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely: — 


“14A. The Authority may, for the purpose of efficient discharge of its 
functions and to regulate and develop the insurance business— 


(a) collect in such manner as it may think fit, information relating 
to policies and claims from any insurer or other regulated entities; and 


(6) furnish such information to any insurer or other regulated 
entities in accordance with the provisions of section 14C. 


14B. (/) For the purpose of enabling the Authority to discharge its 
functions under this Act and the Insurance Act, 1938, it may at any time direct 
any insurer or other regulated entities to submit statements relating to policies 
and policyholder related information in such form and within such time as may 
be specified by the regulations. 


4 of 1938. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for 
the time being in force or in any instrument regulating the constitution thereof 
or in any agreement executed by it, relating to the secrecy of its dealings with 
its constituents, an insurer or other regulated entities shall comply with any 
direction issued under sub-section (/). 


14C. (/) The insurer may, in connection with any insurance policy issued 
or proposed to be issued by it, to any person, make an application to the 
Authority in such form as the Authority may specify by the regulations. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


Amendment of 
section 4. 


Amendment of 
section 5. 


Amendment of 
section 14. 


Insertion of new 
sections 14A 

to 14E. 

Power of 
Authority to 
collect policy 
information. 


Power to call for 
returns 
containing 
policy 
information. 


Procedure for 
furnishing 
policyholder and 
policy related 
information to 
insurer or other 
regulated 
entities. 


Disclosure of 
information 
prohibited. 


Power to 
authorise. 


Amendment of 
section 16. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) The Authority shall process the application made under 
sub-section (/) within such period as may be specified by the regulations only 
after the insurer confirms to the Authority that the person has consented to 
provide access of his policy related information in accordance with the 
existing law and regulations framed in this regard including the preservation 
of evidence of such consent. 


(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (/), the Authority 
shall, as soon as may be, furnish the applicant with such policy related 
information as specified in the application, as may be in its possession: 


Provided that such information so furnished shall not disclose the names 
of the insurer or other regulated entities that has submitted such information 
to the Authority. 


(4) The Authority may in respect of each application levy such fees, as 
it may deem fit for furnishing such information. 


14D. (/) Any information contained in any statement submitted by an 
insurer or other regulated entities under section 14B or furnished by the 
Authority to any insurer or other regulated entities under section 14C, shall be 
treated as confidential and shall not, except for the specified intended 
purposes, be published or otherwise disclosed. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to— 


(a) the disclosure by any insurer or other regulated entities, with 
the previous permission of the Authority, of any information furnished 
to the Authority under section 14B or 14C; 


(6) the publication by the Authority, if it considers necessary in the 
public interest so to do, of any information collected by it under 
section 14B or 14C, in such consolidated form as it may think fit without 
disclosing the name of any insurer or other regulated entities or the 
policyholder; 


(c) the disclosure or publication by the Authority or the insurer or 
other regulated entities of any policy related information to any other 
insurance company, intermediary or regulated entity as permitted by the 
Authority under the regulations to be issued from time to time. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 
force, no court, tribunal or other authority shall compel the Authority or any 
insurer or other regulated entities to produce or to give inspection of any 
statement submitted by that insurer or other regulated entities under 
section 14B or 14C or to disclose any policy related information furnished by 
the Authority to that insurer or other regulated entities under section 14C. 


14E. The Authority may, for the efficient discharge of its functions under 
sections 14A to 14D, by a general or special order in writing, authorise any 
entity regulated by it or any other statutory body having similar objectives to 
perform such functions as specified in the said order.”. 


92. In section 16 of the Insurance Authority Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (2),— 
(i) in clause (0), after the words “for the purposes of this Act”, the 
words and figures “and the Insurance Act, 1938” shall be inserted; 
(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(c) the capital expenditure, as per annual capital expenditure 
plan approved by the Authority.”; 


71 


4 of 1938. 


72 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The Authority shall constitute a Reserve Fund and twenty-five 
per cent. of the annual surplus of the Fund in any year shall be credited 
to such Reserve Fund and such fund shall not exceed the total of annual 
expenditure of preceding three financial years. 


(4) After incurring all the expenses referred to in sub-section (2) 
and transfer to Reserve Fund as specified in sub-section (3), the surplus 
of the Fund shall be transferred to the Consolidated Fund of India. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression 
“Reserve Fund” means a fund to hold the surplus of the Fund, in the 
form and manner specified in sub-section (3) of section 16... 


93. After section 16 of the Insurance Authority Act, the following section shall Insertion of new 
be inserted, namely:— section 16A. 


“16A. (1) The Authority shall establish a fund to be called the Constitution of 


Policy oR . ए ion 77 Policyholders’ 
Policyholders’ Education and Protection Fund. Eeinsahign and 


(2) There shall be credited to the Policyholders’ Education and नि 010) 8070: 


Protection Fund the following amounts, namely:— 


(a) any grants and donations given to the Policyholders* Education 
and Protection Fund by the Central Government, State Governments, the 
Authority, companies or any other institutions for the purposes of the 
Policyholders’ Education and Protection Fund; 


(b) the sums realised by way of penalties by the Authority under 
4 of 1938. this Act or the Insurance Act, 1938 or rules and regulations thereunder; 
and 


(c) such other sums as may be specified by the regulations. 


(3) The Policyholders’ Education and Protection Fund shall be 
administered and utilised by the Authority for education of policyholders and 
protection of the interests of policyholders in the manner and for such other 
purposes as maybe specified by the regulations.”. 


94. In section 23 of the Insurance Authority Act, for sub-section (/), the Amendment of 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— RESHON 


“(1) The Authority may, for the efficient discharge of its functions under 
this Act, by a general or special order in writing by notification, delegate to 
the Chairperson or any other member or any officer of the Authority, subject 
to such conditions or restrictions, if any, as may be specified in the order, such 
of its powers and functions under this Act, except the power to make 
regulations and the power to register an insurer, as it may deem necessary or 
expedient.”. 


95. In section 26 of the Insurance Authority Act, for sub-section (/), the Amendment of 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— Becuon 26: 


“(1) The Authority may, in consultation with the Insurance Advisory 
Committee, by notification make regulations consistent with the provisions of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of this Act 
and while making the regulations shall ensure transparency by— 


(a) publishing draft regulations along with such other details as 
may be specified on its website and inviting public comments for a 
specified period prior to issuing such regulations; 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(b) publishing a general statement of its response to the public 
comments, not later than the date of notification of the regulations; and 


(c) periodically reviewing such regulations: 


Provided that if the Authority is of the opinion that certain regulations 
are required to be made or existing regulations to be amended urgently in the 
public interest or the subject matter of the regulation relates solely to the 
internal functioning of the Authority, it may dispense with the condition of 
prior publication and record the reason for doing so: 


Provided further that if the Authority decides to approve regulations in 
a form substantially different from the proposed regulations other than 
changes made in consideration of comments received by it, it shall repeat the 
process mentioned in this sub-section.”. 


73 


74 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Insurance Act, 1938 (“Insurance Act’) was enacted to consolidate and 
amend the laws relating to the business of insurance in the country. Later, the 
insurance business was opened for private sector and foreign direct investment up 
to 26 per cent. was permitted. At the same time, the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority Act, 1999 (“IRDA Act’) was enacted to protect the interests 
of the policyholders and to regulate, promote and ensure orderly growth of the 
insurance industry. These two Acts, along with the two other Acts, namely, the Life 
Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (“LIC Act”) and the General Insurance Business 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972 ((GIBNA Act’), form the legislative framework of the 
insurance sector in the country. 


2. Over the last two decades, the insurance sector has considerably expanded, 
providing insurance coverage to individuals, property and enterprises. However, in 
order to accelerate the growth and development of the insurance sector for enabling 
it to cater to the growing needs of the economy, it is essential to introduce a series 
of forward-looking reforms in the above-mentioned insurance laws. There is also 
need to create better awareness about insurance among citizens, to enhance 
policyholders” protection and to bring about transparency in governance and 
operations of the insurance companies and the regulator, so as to enhance the trust 
of the policyholders in the insurance ecosystem. 


3. Therefore, it is proposed to introduce the Sabka Bima Sabki Raksha 
(Amendment of Insurance Laws) Bill, 2025 in Parliament to amend various 
provisions contained in the Insurance Act, the LIC Act and the IRDA Act to achieve, 
inter alia, the following objectives, namely:— 


(a) to further accelerate the growth and development of the insurance 
sector; 


(b) to ensure better protection of policyholders; 


(c) to improve ease of doing business for insurance companies, 
intermediaries and other stakeholders; 


(d) to bring transparency in regulation making and to improve regulatory 
oversight over the sector; 


4. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in 
the Bill. 


5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 
The 12th December, 2025. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Notes on clauses 


Clause 1.—This clause provides for the “short title and commencement” of 
the proposed Legislation. 


Clause 2.—This clause seeks to substitute certain expressions by certain other 
expressions. 


Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the principal Act to 
substitute, insert and omit certain viz. “class of insurance business’’, “health insurance 


business”, “insurance business’, “insurer” and “insurance intermediary” etc. 


Clause 4.—This clause seeks to amend section 2C of the principal Act of 
definition to include statutory bodies, foreign reinsurance branches for recognising 
their eligibility and further seeks to expressly bring cross-border re-insurers within 
the scope of the said Act. 


Clause 5.—This clause seeks to amend section 2CA of the principal Act to 
include insurance intermediaries in International Financial Services Centres 
established in Special Economic Zones so as to allow Central Government to apply 
provisions of the said Act to such centres. 


Clause 6.—This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the principal Act to 
empower the Authority to grant registration to an insurer. 


Clause 7.—This clause seeks to insert new section 3AA in the principal Act 
to enable foreign direct investments up to 100% in Indian insurance companies. 


Clause 8.—This clause seeks to amend section 6 of the principal Act to reduce 
the net-owned fund requirements for foreign re-insurers, to encourage more foreign 
re-insurers to open branches in India. 


Clause 9.—This clause seeks to amend section 6A of the principal Act to 
change the requirement of previous approval by Authority for registration of transfer 
of shares from one per cent. to five per cent. of paid-up equity capital of insurer to 
facilitate the ease of doing business and reduce compliance burden on insurers. 


Clause 10.—This clause seeks to amend section 6B of the principal Act 
consequent to insertion of definition of “insurance business” in the said Act. 


Clause 11.—This clause seeks to amend section 10 of the principal Act to 
substitute the reference of Controller with the Authority. 


Clause 12.—This clause seeks to amend section 11 of the principal Act to 
provide for preparation of other financial statements, at the expiration of each 
financial year by the insurers. 


Clause 13.—The clause seeks to insert new section 12A in the principal Act 
to empower the Authority to specify the eligibility criteria and experience for 
appointment of an actuary. 


Clause 14.—This clause seeks to amend section 13 of the principal Act to omit 
the word “abstract” and to provide for investigation by an actuary of liabilities and 
financial condition of every insurer to bring all insurers and re-insurers under the 
same reporting framework. 


75 


76 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


Clause 15.—This clause seeks to amend section 14 of the principal Act and 
insert new sections 14A, 14B and 14C in the said Act to require the insurers to 
maintain complete record of policies issued by them, to provide for processing of 
policyholders’ information by the insurers in accordance with the regulations 
specified by the Authority, to ensure accuracy and security of policyholders’ 
information and to ensure confidentiality of such information. 


Clause 16.—This clause seeks to amend section 15 of the principal Act to 
facilitate electronic submission of returns. 


Clause 17.—This clause seeks to amend section 21 of the principal Act to 
update and streamline provisions. 


Clause 18.—This clause seeks to amend section 22 of the principal Act to 
update and streamline provisions. 


Clause 19.—This clause seeks to amend section 26 of the principal Act to 
update and streamline provisions. 


Clause 20.—This clause seeks to amend section 27 of the principal Act to 
empower the Authority to specify by regulations, the time, manner and other 
conditions of the investment of assets by insurers. 


Clause 21.—This clause seeks to omit sections 27A, 27B, 27C and 27D of the 
principal Act consequential to substitution of section 27 relating to investment of 
assets by insurers. 


Clause 22.—This clause seeks to amend section 30 of the principal Act to 
update and streamline provisions consequential to omission of sections 27A, 27B, 
27C and 27D of the said Act. 


Clause 23.—This clause seeks to amend section 31 of the principal Act 
consequential to substitution of section 27 relating to investment of assets by 
insurers. 


Clause 24.—This clause seeks to amend section 31A of the principal Act to 
simplify the provision of the said Act. 


Clause 25.—This clause seeks to substitute section 32A of the principal Act 
to extend the prohibition regarding appointment of common managing director and 
other officers to all insurers. 


Clause 26.—This clause seeks to amend section 32B of the principal Act 
consequential to insertion of definition of insurance business and to extend the 
obligation of carrying out business in rural and social sectors to all classes of 
insurance business. 


Clause 27.—This clause seeks to amend section 32C of the principal Act 
consequential to insertion of definition of insurance business and to extend the 
obligation of carrying out business in respect of rural or unorganised sector and 
backward classes of the society, to all classes of insurance business. 


Clause 28.—This clause seeks to amend section 33 of the principal Act to 
insert the word “insurance intermediary” in clause (a) of sub-section (6), to extend 
the power of the Authority to inspect and investigate to insurance intermediaries. 


Clause 29.—This clause seeks to amend section 33A of the principal Act to 
empower the Authority to appoint staff for the scrutiny of the returns, statements 
and information furnished by insurance intermediary. 


Clause 30.—This clause seeks to amend section 34 of the principal Act to 
empower the Authority to issue directions to insurance intermediary and to clarify 
the scope of such directions including disgorgement of wrongful gain made or loss 
averted. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 31.—This clause seeks to amend section 34A of the principal Act to 
substitute redundant provisions of law with the latest provisions of law. 


Clause 32.—This clause seeks to amend section 34H of the principal Act to 
extend the power of Authority regarding search and seizure over insurance 
intermediary also. 


Clause 33.—This clause seeks to amend section 35 of the principal Act to 
empower the Authority to approve a scheme of arrangement, including a merger, 
demerger, reverse merger etc. between an insurer and any company not engaged in 
the insurance business. 


Clause 34.—This clause seeks to amend section 37 of the principal Act to 
substitute the redundant provisions of the said Act. 


Clause 35.—This clause seeks to amend section 37A of the principal Act to 
substitute “Controller” with “Authority”. 


Clause 36.—This clause seeks to amend section 40 of the principal Act to 
empower the Authority to specify the limits of any commission, remuneration or 
reward in any form payable to an insurance agent or insurance intermediary in the 
interest of policyholders. 


Clause 37.—This clause seeks to amend the marginal heading of section 40B 
of the principal said Act. 


Clause 38.—This clause seeks to amend the marginal heading of section 40C 
of the principal said Act. 


Clause 39.—This clause seeks to amend section 41 of the principal Act to 
extend the exception from prohibition of rebates on certain commissions from life 
insurance to all classes of insurance business. 


Clause 40.—This clause seeks to amend section 42D of the principal Act to 
provide for detailed procedure for registration, suspension and cancellation of 
insurance intermediary by the Authority. 


Clause 41.—This clause seeks to amend section 47 of the principal Act to 
extend to all insurers, the provision on payment of money in the court in case of any 
dispute in relation to a policy of insurance. 


Clause 42.—This clause seeks to amend section 48B of the principal Act to 
update and streamline the provisions of the said Act. 


Clause 43.—This clause seeks to amend section 49 of the principal Act to 
extend restrictions on declaration of the dividends out of surplus to all insurers. 


Clause 44.—This clause seeks to amend section 51 of the principal Act to 
revise the fee for supply of certified copies of the questions put to insurer by 
policyholder. 


Clause 45.—This clause seeks to amend section 52A of the principal Act to 
empower the Authority to supersede the Board of Directors of an insurers where an 
administrator has been appointed. 


Clause 46.—This clause seeks to amend section 55 of the principal Act to 
substitute the redundant provision of law with latest provision of law. 


Clause 47.—This clause seeks to amend section 61A of the principal Act to 
put an obligation on Appellate authority to record reasons, if appeal is not disposed 
of within the time specified in the Act. 


Clause 48.—This clause seeks to amend section 64 of the principal Act to 
enable the Authority to determine by order the time within which certificate from 
the auditor regarding the submission of books of account and other documents. 


77 


78 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


Clause 49.—This clause seeks to amend section 64F of the principal Act to 
broad base membership of the Life Insurance Council and General Insurance 
Council and to provide for membership of two persons to be nominated by the 
Central Government in both Councils. 


Clause 50.—This clause seeks to amend section 64G of the principal Act to 
make the Act gender neutral. 


Clause 51.—This clause seeks to amend section 64H of the principal Act to 
align the usage of the defined term “General Insurance Council” with the provisions 
of the said Act. 


Clause 52.—This clause seeks to amend section 64K of the principal Act to 
omit the redundant provisions. 


Clause 53.—This clause seeks to amend section 64L of the principal Act to 
bring health insurance and re-insurance business within scope of functions of 
General Insurance Council and to align with section 64C of the said Act. 


Clause 54.—This clause seeks to amend section 64M of the principal Act to 
omit the redundant provisions of the said Act. 


Clause 55.—This clause seeks to amend section 64R of the principal Act to 
empower the Life Insurance Council and the General Insurance Council to lay down 
the required fee in bye-laws and to align with section 64R(/)(d)(iv) of the said Act. 


Clause 56.—This clause seeks to omit section 64ULA of the principal Act to 
omit the redundant provisions of the said Act. 


Clause 57.—This clause seeks to amend section 64VB of the principal Act to 
cover the instances of online payment of premium. 


Clause 58.—This clause seeks to amend section 101A of the principal Act to 
provide clarity in relation to percentage of sum assured. 


Clause 59.—This clause seeks to amend section 102 of the principal Act to 
include non-compliances under the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority Act, 1999 for penalty and rationalise the minimum penalty and the 
maximum amount. 


Clause 60.—This clause seeks to amend section 104 of the principal Act to 
omit reference to redundant provisions consequent to omission of sections 27A, 27B 
and 27D of the said Act. 


Clause 61.—This clause seeks to insert new section 105BA in the principal 
Act to move the penal provisions from section 42D to section 105BA and to specify 
the minimum threshold of penalty. 


Clause 62.—This clause seeks to amend section 105C of the principal Act to make 
changes consequent to amendments made in penalty provisions of the said Act. 


Clause 63.—This clause seeks to insert section 105E in the principal Act to 
provide for the factors that must be taken into account by the Authority while 
determining the penalty under the said Act. 


Clause 64.—This clause seeks to amend section 106 of the principal Act to 
omit the redundant provisions. 


Clause 65.—This clause seeks to amend section 110B of the principal Act to 
omit the redundant provisions. 


Clause 66.—This clause seeks to amend section 110F of the principal Act to 
substitute redundant provisions with latest provisions of law. 


Clause 67.—This clause seeks to amend section 114 of the principal Act to 
amend rule making powers. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 68.—This clause seeks to amend section 114A of the principal Act to 
make changes in the regulation making powers and to provide for transparency in 
the regulation making process by requiring public consultations and periodic review 
of the regulations. 


Clause 69.—This clause seeks to insert new sections 114B and 114C in the 
principal Act to provide for issuance of subsidiary instructions by the Chairperson or 
the whole-time Members of the Authority to clarify the ambiguity in any regulation 
or for laying down the procedural requirements ancillary to any regulation, in 
consultation with a Consultative Committee constituted by the Authority. 


Clause 70.—This clause seeks to omit section 115 of the principal Act to 
update and streamline provisions. 


Clause 71.—This clause seeks to amend section 116 of the principal Act to 
update and streamline provisions and to provide for laying of orders under this 
section before each House of Parliament. 


Clause 72.—This clause seeks to amend section 116A of the principal Act to 
update and streamline provisions of the said Act. 


Clause 73.—This clause seeks to amend section 117 of the principal Act to 
update and streamline provisions of the said Act. 


Clause 74.—This clause seeks to amend section 118 of the principal Act to 
update and streamline provisions of the said Act. 


Clause 75.—This clause seeks to amend section 119 of the principal Act to 
empower Authority to specify the fee for inspection and taking a copy of documents 
submitted by insurer with the Authority. 


Clause 76.—This clause seeks to omit section 120 of the principal Act to 
update and streamline provisions of the said Act. 


Clause 77.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Life Insurance 
Corporation Act, 1956 (Insurance Corporation Act) to omit, update and streamline 
provisions of the said Act. 


Clause 78.—This clause seeks to amend section 6A of the Insurance 
Corporation Act to update the references to the Companies Act, 2013. 


Clause 79.—This clause seeks to amend section 18 of the Insurance 
Corporation Act to empower the Corporation to establish zonal offices on its own, 
without prior approval of the Central Government. 


Clause 80.—This clause seeks to amend section 22 of the Insurance 
Corporation Act so as to provide the manner of constitution of an Employees and 
Agents Relation Committee to be determined by the Corporation. 


Clause 81.—This clause seeks to amend section 24 of the Insurance 
Corporation Act to provide the overseas branches of the Corporation to maintain the 
funds of the branch or office in accordance with the laws of that country. 


Clause 82.—This clause seeks to amend section 28 of the Insurance 
Corporation Act to provide the overseas branches of the Corporation to utilise the 
surplus in such branch or office in accordance with the laws of that country. 


Clause 83.—This clause seeks to amend section 30A of the Insurance 
Corporation Act to make it mandatory for the Corporation to comply with the 
provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 as applicable to it by virtue of the section 43 
of the Insurance Corporation Act. 


Clause 84.—This clause seeks to amend section 43 of the Insurance 
Corporation Act to omit references to outdated provisions of the said Act. 


79 


80 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


Clause 85.—This clause seeks to amend section 44 of the Insurance 
Corporation Act to omit reference to a redundant provision of the said Act. 


Clause 86.—This clause seeks to amend section 48 of the Insurance 
Corporation Act to omit the reference to rule-making power for the manner of 
constitution of an Employees and Agents Relation Committee. 


Clause 87.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority Act, 1999 (Insurance Authority Act) to modify and 
substitute the definition of insurance intermediary of the said Act. 


Clause 88.—This clause seeks to amend section 4 of the Insurance Authority 
Act to include knowledge and experience of information technology among 
desirable qualifications for appointment as member of Authority. 


Clause 89.—This clause seeks to amend section 5 of the Insurance Authority 
Act to bring parity in the age limit for holding office among Chairperson and 
whole-time members. 


Clause 90.—This clause seeks to amend section 14 of the Insurance Authority 
Act to update and streamline provisions of the said Act. 


Clause 91.—This clause seeks to insert new sections 14A, 14B, 14C, 14D and 
14E in the Insurance Authority Act to empower the Authority for collecting 
information relation to policies and claims from insurers and other regulated entities 
for efficient discharge of its functions, and to regulate and develop the insurance 
business. 


Clause 92.—This clause seeks to amend section 16 of the Insurance Authority 
Act to allow for the annual surplus funds of IRDAI to be kept in a Reserve Fund 
and post all expenses by the Authority and provide for transfer of the surplus to the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


Clause 93——This clause seeks to insert new section 16A in the Insurance 
Authority Act to allow for creation of a Policyholders’ Education and Protection Fund. 


Clause 94.—This clause seeks to amend section 23 of the Insurance Authority 
Act to enable the Authority to delegate functions to the Chairperson or any other 
member or officer of the Authority, other than the powers to frame regulations and 
grant of registration to insurer. 


Clause 95.—This clause seeks to amend section 26 of the Insurance Authority 
Act to make the regulation process more transparent and inclusive and to align the 
provision with the corresponding change in section 114A of Insurance Act, 1938. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The provisions of the Sabka Bima Sabki Raksha (Amendment of Insurance 
Laws) Bill, 2025, if enacted, do not involve any expenditure of recurring or 
non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


81 


82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


REVISED FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM TO THE SABKA 
BIMA SABKI RAKSHA (AMENDMENT OF INSURANCE 
LAWS) BILL, 2025 


Clause 93 of the Sabka Bima Sabki Raksha (Amendment of Insurance Jaws) Baill, 
2025 provides for the constitution of the Policyholders’ Education and Protection Fund 
and, if enacted, would involve expenditure from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


2 However, it is not possible to estimate the likely expenditure to be incurred on this 


account at this stage. 


4 
पंकज चौधरी ' 
PANKAJ CHAUDHARY 


वित्त मंत्रालय में मंत्री 
राज्य म॑ 
Minister of State in Ministry of Finance 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 67 of the Bill proposes to amend section 114 of the Insurance Act, 1938 
(“Act”) which empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the 
purposes of the Act, relating to the conditions of foreign investment under 
sub-section (2) of section 3AA. 


2.Clause 68 of the Bill proposes to amend section 114A of the Act which 
empowers the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India, to make 
regulations to carry out the purposes of the Act. The Authority shall ensure 
transparency in making regulations by publishing draft regulations on its website 
for inviting public comments prior to issuing such regulations. The Authority shall 
make regulations on the following matters, namely:—(7) the preparation of 
balance-sheet, profit and loss account and a separate account of receipts and 
payments and revenue account and other financial statements under sub-section (/) 
of section 11; (7) the eligibility criteria and other conditions for an actuary under 
section 12A; (iii) the purpose for which and the manner in which the report of the 
actuary is to be submitted and the form and manner in which the statement shall be 
appended under section 13; (iv) the form, manner and period for submission of 
returns to the Authority under section 15; (v) the manner of execution of instrument 
of Trust by the insurer under sub-section (5) of section 27; (vi) the investment of 
assets by an insurer in a time and manner set out under section 27; (vii) the form in 
which balance-sheets in respect of the insurance business of each of the insurers 
concerned and the manner in which actuarial reports and abstracts in respect of the 
insurance business shall be prepared under clauses (5) and (c) of sub-section (3) of 
section 35, and the manner, procedure and other conditions for a scheme of 
arrangement or amalgamation or transfer of business under sub-section (4) of 
section 35; (viii) the form and manner of making application for registration, the 
documents to be accompanied and the fee to be paid under sub-section (3) of section 
42D; (ix) any other default subject to which the registration may be suspended or 
cancelled under clause (viii) of sub-section (6) of section 42D; (x) the annual fee in 
relation to registration under sub-section (4A) of section 42D and the procedure for 
suspension or cancellation of registration under the said sub-section; (x7) the fee for 
issuance of duplicate certificate of registration under sub-section (8) of section 42D; 
(xii) the period, extent and conditions under which certain insurers may be exempted 
by Authority under sub-section (3) of section 48B; (xiii) fee to be paid for inspection 
of the documents filed by an insurer with the Authority and obtaining a copy of said 
document or part thereof under section 119; (xiv) the manner and conditions of 
making subsidiary instructions under section 114B; and (xv) the manner of the 
constitution of Consultative Committees under section 114C. 


3. Clause 69 of the Bill seeks to insert section 114B of the Act, which 
empowers the Chairperson or one or more whole-time Members of the Authority to 
issue subsidiary instructions in such manner and subject to such conditions as may 
be specified by regulations for (7) clarifying the ambiguity of any regulation, if any; 
and (ii) laying down any procedural requirement ancillary to any regulation. 


4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made or 
subsidiary instructions issued are matters of procedure or administrative detail and 
it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secterary General. 


83 


84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


LOK SABHA 


SECOND CORRIGENDA 
to 


THE SABKA BIMA SABKI RAKSHA (AMENDMENT OF INSURANCE LAWS) BILL, 2025 
[Zo be / As introduced in Lok Sabha] 


1. Page 27, line 15,- 
for "establish" 


read "constitute" 


NEW DELHI; 


December 15,2025 _ 


Agrahayana 24, 1947 (Saka) 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 85 


LOK SABHA 


CORRIGENDA 
to 


THE SABKA BIMA SABKT RAKSHA (AMENDMENT OF INSURANCE LAWS) BILL, 2025 
[Zo be / As introduced in Lok Sabha] 


1. Page 7, line 24,- 
for "including a valuation" 


read “including the valuation" 


2. Page 7, line 29,- 
for "date at which" 


read " date on which" 


3. Page 10, line 46,- 
for "regulation," 


read "regulations" 
4. Page 15, line 5, omit “the” 


5. Page 15, lines 11 to 14, may be read as under- 


"(i) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:- 

“(2A) A person shall not begin to carry on or act as in insurance 
intermediary, unless he or it obtains a certificate of registration for the 
same from the Authority." 


86 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


Page 16, line 21,- 
for "issue" 


read "issuance" 


Page 17, line 39,- 
for "business nominated" 


read "business as may be nominated" 


Page 19, line 13,- 
for "liable to a penalty" 


read “liable to penalty" 


Page 19, line 17,- 
for "liable to a penalty" 


read “liable to penalty" 


Page 19, line 23,- 
for "liable to a penalty" 


read “liable to penalty" 


Page 22, line 11,- 
for "issue" 


read "issuance" 


Page 22, line 32,- 
for "by regulations" 


read " by the regulations" 


PLO: 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 87 


13. Page 26, line 10, omit "such" 


14. Page 28, line 8,- 
for "prior publication" 


read "publishing draft regulations" 


NEW DELHI; 


December 14,2025 _ 


Agrahayana 23, 1947 (Saka) 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002. 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054 


Digitally signed 


KSHITIZ bykstinz 


MGIPMRND—395G\($4)—17-12-2025. MOHAN sisi 


