रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. 0. L.-33004/99 


AIX = राज्जपन्र 


Che Gazette of India 


OM. -ZT. Wet. -37.-23092024-2574 
CG-DL-E-23092024-2574 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 


भाग प---खण्ड 3---उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं. 3824] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, सितम्बर 23, 2024/आशिवन I, 946 
No. 38I]] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 2024/ASVINA l, 946 


गृह मंत्रालय 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्‍ली, 23 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4468(a).— ala aca ने, विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिनियम, 7967 (4967 का 37) 
(जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिनियम कहा गया है) की धारा 3 की उपधारा (॥) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते 
हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग Il, खंड 3, उपखंड (ii), तारीख 45 मार्च, 2024 
में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 474 (अ), तारीख 45 मार्च, 2024 (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात Sad अधिसूचना 
कहा गया है) के द्वारा जम्मू एवं कश्मीर पीपुल्स फ्रीडम लीग (जेकेपीएफएल) को विधिविरुद्ध संगम के रूप में घोषित 
किया था; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा () के साथ पठित धारा 5 की उपधारा (॥) द्वारा 
प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग ॥, खंड 3, 
उपखंड (ii), तारीख 5 अप्रैल, 2024 में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 7629 (A), तारीख 5 अप्रैल, 2024 के द्वारा 
विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिकरण कहा गया है) का गठन किया था, 
जिसमें दिल्‍ली उच्च न्यायालय की न्यायाधीश न्यायमूर्ति नीना बंसल कृष्णा थीं; 


676 GI/2024 (l) 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (॥) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, 
इस न्यायनिर्णयन के प्रयोजन के लिए कि क्या जम्मू एवं कश्मीर पीपुल्स फ्रीडम लीग (जेकेपीएफएल) को विधिविरुद्ध संगम 
के रूप में घोषित किए जाने का पर्याप्त कारण था या नहीं, तारीख 42 अप्रैल, 2024 को sea अधिकरण को उक्त 
अधिसूचना निर्दिष्ट की थी; 


और, Set अधिकरण ने, Set अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (3) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, 
उक्त अधिसूचना में की गई घोषणा की पुष्टि करते हुए तारीख 4 सितम्बर, 2024 को एक आदेश पारित किया था; 


अतः, अब, केंद्रीय सरकार उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (4) के अनुसरण में, उक्त अधिकरण के आदेश 
को प्रकाशित करती है, अर्थात्‌:- 


---: अधिकरण का आदेश अंग्रेजी भाग में छपा है :--- 


(न्यायमूर्ति नीना बंसल कृष्णा) 
विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण” 


[फा. सं. 44047/55/2024/एन.आई.-एम.एफ.ओ.] 


अभिजीत सिन्हा, संयुक्त सचिव 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 23rd September, 2024 


S.O. 4468(E).—Whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by 
sub-section () of section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, [967 (37 of 967) (hereinafter 
referred to as the said Act), declared the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League (JKPFL) as an 
unlawful association vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, number 
S.O. 44(B), dated the 5" March, 2024 (hereinafter referred to as the said notification) published in the 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (ii), dated the 5" March, 2024; 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (l) of 
section 5 read with sub-section (l) of section 4 of the said Act constituted the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the said Tribunal) consisting of Justice Neena Bansal 
Krishna, Judge, High Court of Delhi vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, number 5.0. 629(E), dated the 5" April, 2024 published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (ii), dated the 5" April, 2024; 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (l) of 
section 4 of the said Act referred the said notification to the said Tribunal on 2 April, 2024 for the 
purpose of adjudicating whether or not there was sufficient cause for declaring the Jammu and Kashmir 
Peoples Freedom League (JKPFL) as an unlawful association; 


And, whereas, the said Tribunal in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of section 4 
of the said Act, passed an order on 4" September, 2024, confirming the declaration made in the said 
notification; 

Now, therefore, in pursuance of sub-section (4) of section 4 of the said Act, the Central 
Government hereby publishes the order of the said Tribunal, namely: - 

“UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL, 
HIGH COURT OF DELHI, NEW DELHI. 
Date of Decision: 47 September, 2024 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
Gazette Notification no. 5.0. 44 (E) dated 5" March, 2024 declaring the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples 


Freedom League (JKPFL) as an unlawful association under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Act, 967. 


AND IN THE MATTER OF : 


Reference under Section 4 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 967 made to this Tribunal by the 
Government of India through the Ministry of Home Affairs vide Gazette Notification no. 8.0. 629 (E) 
dated 05" April, 2024. 


Present : Dr. Ajay Gulati, Registrar, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal. 


Ms. Aishwarya Bhati (Addl. Solicitor General) along with Mr. Amit Prasad, Mr. Rajat 
Nair, Ms. Poornima Singh, Ms. Manisha Chava and Mr. Abhijeet Singh, ld. Counsels for 
the Union of India. 


Mr. Parth Awasthi and Ms. Deepika Gupta, ld. Counsels for Union Territory of Jammu & 
Kshmir. 


Mr. Antariksh Singh Rathore, Asstt. Commandant and Mr. Sameer Shukla, Asstt. Section 
Officer, Ministry of Home Affairs. 


Mr. Arjun Chopra, Law Researcher. 
CORAM: 
HON’BLE Ms. JUSTICE NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


ORDER 


५ This order answers Reference under section 4(3) read with section 3(3) of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 967 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’ or ‘UA(P)A’, for short) made to this Tribunal 
which has been constituted vide Gazette Notification no. 5.0. 629 (E) dt. 05" April, 2024, under Section 
5(l) of the Act, by the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, for adjudicating whether or not 
there is sufficient cause for declaring the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League (‘JK PFL?’ in short) 
as an “unlawful association”. 


I. THE NOTIFICATION 
2. The Central Government published Gazette Notification (extra-ordinary) no. S.O. 4l4(E) dated 
5" March, 2024 in exercise of the powers conferred under section 3(l) of the UA(P) Act and declared 
JKPFL to be an “unlawful association”. A copy of the said notification has been sent to this Tribunal, as 


contemplated under Rule 5(i) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 968 (“UA(P) Rules” in 
short). The said notification dated 5" March, 2024 reads as under: 


“8.0. 44(E)-Whereas, the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League (hereinafter 
referred to as the JKPFL) chaired by Mohammad Farooq Shah @ Farooq Rehmani is indulging in 
unlawful activities, which are prejudicial to the integrity, sovereignty, and security of the country; 


And, whereas, members of the JKPFL have remained involved in supporting terrorist 
activities and anti-India propaganda for fuelling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir; 


And, whereas, the leaders and members of the JKPFL have been involved in mobilizing 
fund for perpetrating unlawful activities, including supporting secessionist, separatist and terrorist 
activities in Jammu and Kashmir; 


And, whereas, the JKPFL and its members by their activities show sheer disrespect 
towards the constitutional authority and constitutional set up of the country; 


And, whereas, JKPFL is involved in promoting, aiding and abetting secession of Jammu 
and Kashmir from India by involving in anti-national and subversive activities; sowing seeds of 
dis-affection amongst people; exhorting people to destabilize law and order; encouraging the use 
of arms to separate Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India and promoting hatred against 
established Government; 


And, whereas, the Central Government is of the opinion that if there is no immediate curb 
or control of unlawful activities of the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League (JKPFL), it 
will use this opportunity to — 


(i) continue with the anti-national activities which are detrimental to the territorial 
integrity, security and sovereignty of the country; 


(ii) continue advocating the secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India 
while disputing its accession to the Union of India; and 


(iii) continue propagating false narrative and anti-national sentiments among the 
people of Jammu and Kashmir with the intention to cause disaffection against 
India and disrupt public order; 


And, whereas, the Central Government for the above-mentioned reasons is firmly of the 
opinion that having regard to the activities of the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League 
(JKPFL), it is necessary to declare the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League (JKPFL) as 
an ‘unlawful association’ with immediate effect; 


Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (/) of section 3 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, /967 (37 of 7967), the Central Government hereby declares 
the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League (JKPFL) as an unlawful association; 


The Central Government, having regard to the above circumstances, is of firm opinion that 
it is necessary to declare the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League (JKPFL) as an 
‘unlawful association’ with immediate effect, and accordingly, in exercise of the powers conferred 
by the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 3 of the said Act, the Central Government hereby directs 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


that this notification shall, subject to any order that may be made under section 4 of the said Act, 
have effect for a period of five years from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.” 


3. As can be seen, the notification also enumerates the reasons/ circumstances, as contemplated under 
proviso to Section 3(3) of the Act, for declaring the said association as unlawful, with immediate effect. 


Il. THE BACKGROUND NOTE 


4. Along with the reference to this Tribunal under Section 4 of the UA(P)A, the Central Government 
has submitted before this Tribunal a Background Note, as is contemplated under Rule 5 (ii) of the UA(P) 
Rules, |968. 


3: The Background Note states that Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League (JKPFL), a 
Pakistan supported separatist organisation, was formed in April, 2003 by Mohammad Farooq Shah @ 
Farooq Rehmani, who was earlier associated with proscribed unlawful association Jamaat-e-lslami, Jammu 
and Kashmir (Jel) and separatist organisation 'Jammu and Kashmir Peoples League’ formed by one Nazir 
Ahmed Wani. 


6. In 989, Farooq Rehmani crossed over to Pakistan and had been carrying out separatist activities 
from Pakistan. In 992, Jammu and Kashmir Peoples League (JKPL) faced a split into Rehmani and Sheikh 
Aziz factions. Al-Fatha Force was the terrorist wing of Rehmani faction of JKPL. On 22™ April, 2023, he 
renamed his faction Jammu and Kashmir Peoples League (Rehmani) as Jammu and Kashmir Peoples 
Freedom League and became its chairman. 


7 The Note further highlights that since its inception, JKPFL continues to further secessionist 
activities in Jammu and Kashmir through its Chairman Mohammad Farooq Shah sitting in Pakistan and 
activities/ foot soldiers operating in Jammu and Kashmir. JKPFL remains a constant under current threat in 
pushing its secessionist agenda in Jammu and Kashmir and radicalizing the youth towards secessionist and 
terrorist activities. JKPFL in effect, supplemented the activities of Jammu and Kashmir People League 
(JKPL); however under a different banner i.e. JKPFL with its headquarters in Pakistan. 


8. Objective of JKPFL has been to separate Jammu and Kashmir from India. It has supported the 
Pakistani agenda of generating feeling of hatred and disaffection against the country, to achieve the bigger 
goal of amputating Jammu and Kashmir from India. With active backing of Pakistan, the outfit promotes 
secessionist, separatist, and terror activities to separate Kashmir from India. 


9. The activists / members of JKPFL are glorifying terrorists, have provided background support to 
terrorist organizations, propagated false narrative among the masses, boycotted elections as well as incited 
youth for violent activities. 


0. Further, as per the Background Note, present Leadership / Executive Members of JKPFL 
are as under: 


SL. No. Name Designation Address 

l. Farooq Ahmed Shah @ Farooq | Chairman Onagam, Bandpora, at 

Rehmani S/o Abdul Ahad Shah present in Pakistan Occupied 
Kashmir (POK) 

2. Mohammad Ramzan Khan @ Altaf | Chairman, Kashmir | Khanpora, Gundpora, 
s/o Gulam Nabi Khan Chapter Bandipora, J & K 

3. Dr. Atta-ur-Rehman Tantray s/o | Member Bandibagh, Budgam 
Abdul Salam Tantray 

II. Further as per the Background Note, JKPFL along with other separatists fanned the sentiments of 


the people against the Government over Amarnath Land Row in 2008 through their misinformation 
campaign and by spreading false information which resulted in Amarnath Land Row agitation causing large 
scale violence and damage to the public and private properties. Muzaffarabad Chalo call was given by a co- 
ordination committee, in which JKPFL played a pivotal role in coordinating, facilitating, organizing and 
addressing mobs across the valley, when the people of Jammu and Kashmir were appealed to march to 
Muzaffarabad, the capital of Pakistan-occupied-Kashmir. In the subsequent Law and Order situation, few 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


civilians including separatist leader Sheikh Aziz died which further escalated the street violence. A total of 
around 449 stone pelting incidents on Security Forces were reported, in which 53 civilians died and 522 got 
injured. Besides 70 Police / Security Forces personal were also injured. JKPFL actively nurtured and 
financed the stone pelters who were lured into continuing violent protests and other anti-national activities. 


2. In order to give massive thrust to Pakistani agenda in sustaining its terrorist and secessionist 
ecosystem in Jammu and Kashmir, separatist outfits in a calculated manner portrayed the death of two 
ladies in Shopian in the year 2009 by describing it as rape and murder perpetrated by the security forces. 
The entire design was to create a false narrative against the Central Government and its law enforcement 
agencies, so as to generate hatred and disaffection against India amongst general masses. JKPFL played 
significant role in issuing Hartal and Shopian Chalo calls which resulted in intense law and order issues. 


3. Death of some stone pelting youth in Kashmir valley, during handling of law and order in the year 
200, was exploited by the separatist to accelerate momentum to their ‘Quit Kashmir’ campaign. JKPFL 
played a pivotal role in instigating youth to continue and fuel up mass unrest by brazenly issuing various 
protest calendars which resulted in long drawn protests during the year. The trouble in the State was 
fomented by elements who were sponsored / aided and patronized by JKPFL led by Farooq Rehmani. A 
total of around 2794 stone pelting incidents were reported in which 2 civilians lost their lives, !047 got 
injured while 0 police personal attained martyrdom and around 588 police/ Security Forces personnel got 
injured in these incidents. 


4. As per the background note, JKPFL, after the killing of Burhan Wani in 206 and acting on the 
instructions of Pakistan’s ISI, exploited the situation intensely and actively provoked, incited and lured the 
youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in order to keep the anti- 
India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars which resulted in the death of 86 
persons and injuries to 8932 civilians. 2 police jawans were martyred and about 8370 police / Security 
Forces also got injured in these riots. 


Criminal Cases against JKPFL activists 


[35 The Background Note mentions the complicity of JKPFL cadres in criminal and anti-national 
activities as is evident from the criminal cases that stand registered against them. Cases have been 
registered against the JKPFL and its activists under various provisions of law including the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act and other substantive offences. The cases registered against the JKPFL activists 
/ members provide clinching evidence regarding their involvement in various unlawful activities. A list of 
cases registered by the Jammu and Kashmir Police against members / activists of JKPFL is given as under : 


S. Case FIR No. Brief of the case Name of accused in 


No FIR 

l. FIR no. 95/20ll u/s 43 | On 03.09.20ll PS Bandipore got a | Mohammad Ramzan 
UA(P)A, PS & District- | reliable input to the effect that some | Khan 
Bandipore persons affiliated with the Hurriyat 


among whom, some were residing in 
the jurisdiction of P.S. Bandipore, and 
some outsiders were propagating 
national and _ separatist sentiments 
prejudicial to the integrity and security 
of the state. 


2. FIR. no. 33/2022 u/s 22 IPC, 
2/3 E&IMCO Act, 8, 20, 38, 
UA(P)A, PS and District - 
Bandipore 


4 accused persons ex-filtrated to 
Pakistan for subversive training of 
Arms and Ammunition. They were 
trained at different camps under the 
guidance of Syed Salahuddin, Hafiz 
Mohad Syed etc. They helped terrorists 
to cross over the LOC and reach 
Bandipore. 


Farooq Ahmad Shah @ 
Rehmani r/o Bandipore 
and 3 Others 


[भाग W—are 30॥)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 7 


Consequently, keeping in view the unlawful activities of JKPFL, the Central Govt. decided to declare the 
said organization as an unlawful association under the UA(P)A, 967. 


Il. STATUTORY PROVISIONS. 


6. The relevant statutory proceedings in regard to the present Reference proceedings are discussed as 
under: 


Section 2 (0) and (9) of the UA(P)A, read as follows: 
“2. Definitions. - (2) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 


(o) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or association, means any action taken by such 
individual or association (whether by committing an act or by words, either spoken or written, or 
by signs or by visible representation or otherwise), - 


(i) Which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground whatsoever, 
the cession of a part of the territory of India or, the secession of a part of the territory 
of India from the Union, or which incites any individual or group of individuals to 
bring about such cession or secession; or 


(ii) Which disclaims, questions, disrupts, or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of India; or 


(iii) Which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India; 
ce * 4 a” . . 
(p) “unlawful association” means any association, - 


(i) which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids persons to 
undertake any unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such activity; or 


(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable under Section I53-A or 
Section 7353-98 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 7660), or which encourages or aids 
persons to undertake any such activity, or of which the members undertake any such 
activity: 


Provided that nothing contained in sub-clause (ii), shall apply to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir”. 


7. Section 2(0) of the Act defines ‘unlawful activity’. It means “any action taken” by an association or 
an individual of the kind mentioned in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of the said sub-section. Any action taken has 
reference to and must be of the kind stipulated in and covered by clauses (i), (ii) or (iii). Action can be 
either written or spoken, by sign or by visible representation or even otherwise. Clause (i) refers to “action 
taken’ with the intent or which supports any claim for secession or cession of any part of India or incites 
any individual or group of individuals to bring about secession or cession. Clause (ii) refers to “action 
taken” which has the effect of disclaiming, questioning, disrupting or intending to disrupt the sovereignty 
and territorial integrity of India. Clause (iii) refers to “action taken” which causes or is intended to cause 
disaffection against India. 


8. Unlawful association has been defined in section 2(p) of the Act and consists of two parts: (i) and 
(ii). Part (i) refers to unlawful activity defined in section 2(0) and encompasses associations which have the 
object that encourage or even aid persons to undertake the said activity. The last part of Part () widens the 
definition of the term “unlawful association” to include an association of which members undertake 
unlawful activity. In a way, therefore, the association is vicariously liable and can be regarded as an 
unlawful association if members of an association undertake unlawful activity. 


9. Section 2(p)(i) does not refer to unlawful activities defined in section 2(0) of the Act, but refers to 
Sections 53A and 53B of the Indian Penal Code, 860 UIPC for short). An association which encourages 
or aids or the object of which is to encourage or aid persons to undertake activities punishable under 
Section 53A or 53B is an unlawful association. “Object” for which an association is formed can in many 
cases be in writing but encouragement and aid to persons to undertake activities under Sections 53A and 
53B may be oral or in writing. The last part of Section 2(p)(ii) widens and expands the scope of the term 
“unlawful association”, when it stipulates that an association of which members undertake activities which 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


are punishable under Section 53A or 53B of the IPC, is an unlawful association. An association, 
therefore, can become an unlawful association if its members undertake any activity covered by Section 
53A or 53B of the IPC. 


IV. NATURE AND SCOPE OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE PRESENT TRIBUNAL 


20. The nature of the proceedings before this Tribunal and the scope of inquiry in the present 
proceedings have been laid down by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind vs. Union of India 
(995) SCC 428 in the specific context of the provisions of the UA(P)A, 967. The proceedings before 
this Tribunal are civil in nature and the standard of proof is the standard prescribed by the Supreme Court 
in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). This lis has to be decided by objectively examining which version is 
more acceptable and credible. In this regard, reference may be made to the following observations in 
Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra): 


“30. The allegations made by the Central Government against the Association - Jamaat-E-Islami 
Hind - were totally denied. It was, therefore, necessary that the Tribunal should have adjudicated 
the controversy in the manner indicated. Shri Soli J. Sorabjee, learned counsel for the Association, 
Jamaat-E-Islami Hind, contended that apart from the allegations made being not proved, in law 
such acts even if proved, do not constitute "unlawful activity" within the meaning of that expression 
defined in the Act. In the present case, the alternative submission of Shri Sorabjee does not arise 
for consideration on the view we are taking on his first submission. The only material produced by 
the Central Government to support the notification issued by it under Section 3(7) of the Act, apart 
from a resume based on certain intelligence reports, are the statements of Shri T.N. Srivastava, 
Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and Shri N.C. Padhi, Joint Director, IB. Neither Shri 
Srivastava nor Shri Padhi has deposed to any fact on the basis of personal knowledge. Their entire 
version is based on official record. The resume is based on intelligence reports submitted by 
persons whose names have not been disclosed on the ground of confidentiality. In other words, no 
person has deposed from personal knowledge whose veracity could be tested by cross-examination. 
Assuming that it was not in public interest to disclose the identity of those persons or to produce 
them for cross-examination by the other side, some method should have been adopted by the 
Tribunal to test the credibility of their version. The Tribunal did not require production of those 
persons before it, even in camera, to question them and test the credibility of their version. On the 
other hand, the persons to whom the alleged unlawful acts of the Association are attributed filed 
their affidavits denying the allegations and also deposed as witnesses to rebut these allegations. In 
such a situation, the Tribunal had no means by which it could decide objectively, which of the two 
conflicting versions to accept as credible. There was thus no objective determination of the factual 
basis for the notification to amount to adjudication by the Tribunal, contemplated by the statute. 
The Tribunal has merely proceeded to accept the version of the Central Government without taking 
care to know even itself the source from which it came or to assess credibility of the version 
sufficient to inspire confidence justifying its acceptance in preference to the sworn denial of the 
witnesses examined by the other side. Obviously, the Tribunal did not properly appreciate and fully 
comprehend its role in the scheme of the statute and the nature of adjudication required to be made 
by it. The order of the Tribunal cannot, therefore, be sustained." 


2I. The present Tribunal, constituted under the UA(P)A, has been vested with certain powers and the 
procedure to be adopted by it under section 5 read with section 9 of the said Act, which are reproduced as 
under: 


“9. Tribunal. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, 
as and when necessary, a tribunal to be known as the "Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal" 
consisting of one person, to be appointed by the Central Government: Provided that no person 
shall be so appointed unless he is a Judge of a High Court. 


(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the 
presiding officer of the Tribunal, then, the Central Government shall appoint another person 
in accordance with the provisions of this section to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may 
be continued before the Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled. 


[भाग W—are 30॥)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9 


(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Tribunal such staff as may be necessary 
for the discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


(5) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of its functions including the place or 
places at which it will hold its sittings. 


(6) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this Act, have the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, /906 (5 of /906,, 
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: - 


(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining 
him on oath; 

(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible 
as evidence; 


(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or office ; 
(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses. 


(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections /93 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 7660) and the Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 795 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, /696 (5 of /696). ” 


“9, Procedure to be followed in the disposal of applications under this Act.—Subject to any rules 
that may be made under this Act, the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding any 
inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 4 or by a Court of the District Judge in disposing of any 
application under sub-section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section § shall, so far as may be, 
be the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, /996 (5 of 79068), for the investigation 
of claims and the decision of the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, 
shall be final.” 


22. Further, under section 4(l) of Act, the Central Government refers the Notification (issued under 
section 3() of the Act) to the Tribunal for “adjudicating” whether or not there is “sufficient cause” for 
declaring the association unlawful. Section 4(2) requires issuance of notice on the association affected to 
show-cause as to why should the ‘association’ not be declared as unlawful? Section 4(3) mandates an 
inquiry in the manner specified in section 9 after calling for such information as may be necessary from 
Central Government or from office bearers or members of the association. The Tribunal under section 4(3) 
is required to adjudicate and make an order, as it may deem fit, either confirming the declaration made in 
the notification or cancelling the same. After interpreting the said provisions of the UA(P)A in Jamaat-e- 
Islami Hind (supra), it was held by the Supreme Court as under: 


“Il..... The entire procedure contemplates an objective determination made on the basis of 
material placed before the Tribunal by the two sides; and the inquiry is in the nature of 
adjudication of a lis between two parties, the outcome of which depends on the weight of the 
material produced by them. Credibility of the material should, ordinarily, be capable of objective 
assessment. The decision to be made by the Tribunal is “whether or not there is sufficient cause 
for declaring the Association unlawful”. Such a determination requires the Tribunal to reach the 
conclusion that the material to support the declaration outweighs the material against it and the 
additional weight to support the declaration is sufficient to sustain it. The test of greater 
probability appears to be the pragmatic test applicable in the context.” 


23. On the question of confidential information that is sought to be withheld, the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court emphasized that the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose of assessing credibility of the 
information and the Tribunal should satisfy itself whether it can safely rely upon it. This was necessary as 
in certain situations, source of information or disclosure of full particulars may be against public interest. 
Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of information and its source in public interest 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


enables the Tribunal to test the credibility of confidential information for objectively deciding the 
Reference. It was emphasized that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine 
in nature and, therefore, material or information gathered for various reasons may require confidentiality. 
Disclosure, it was held, can jeopardize criminal cases which have pending investigation or are on trial. 


24. On the question of nature and type of evidence which can be relied upon by the Tribunal, the 
Supreme Court referred to Rule 3 of UA(P) Rules, 968. Rule 3() stipulates that the Tribunal subject to 
sub-rule (2) shall follow, “as far as practicable”, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence 
Act. In this regard, reference can be made to the following observations in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra): 


“22. ...The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a 
procedure would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in 
controversy after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without 
abdicating its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a course 
would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each 
case, while protecting the rights of the association and its members, without jeopardizing the 
public interest. This would also ensure that the process of adjudication is not denuded of its content 
and the decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by it on all points in controversy 
after adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion already formed by the Central 
Government. 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer [408 US 47]: 33 L Ed 2d 484 
(l972)] the United States Supreme Court, in a case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum 
requirements to be followed, as under: (L Ed pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They include 
(a) written notice of the claimed violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of 
evidence against him; (c) opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and 
documentary evidence; (d) the right to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses 
(unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing confrontation); 
(e) a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a traditional parole board, members of 
which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement by the 
factfinders as to the evidence relied on and reasons for revoking parole. We emphasise 
there is no thought to equate this second stage of parole revocation to a criminal 
prosecution in any sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the process should be flexible enough to 
consider evidence including letters, affidavits, and other material that would not be 
admissible in an adversary criminal trial.” 


XXX XXX XXX 


26. ......The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a show-cause notice, of existence 
of sufficient cause to justify the declaration must necessarily imply and import into the inquiry, the 
minimum requirement of natural justice to ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is its own 
opinion, formed on the entire available material, and not a mere imprimatur of the Tribunal affixed 
to the opinion of the Central Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a fair procedure to prevent the 
vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure in a given case, would depend on the 
materials constituting the factual foundation of the notification and the manner in which the 
Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to be determined by the Tribunal keeping in view the 
nature of its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of natural justice, the fact that the materials in 
such matters are not confined to legal evidence in the strict sense, and that the scrutiny is not a 
criminal trial. The Tribunal should form its opinion on all the points in controversy after assessing 
for itself the credibility of the material relating to it, even though it may not be disclosed to the 
association, if the public interest so requires.” 


25. Before assessing the credibility of material and analyzing evidence adduced, it is apposite to take 
note of sections 25, 26 and 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, as well as sections 6] and 62 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 973. The same are reproduced hereunder: 


[भाग W—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण |] 


Indian Evidence Act, 872 


25. Confession to police-officer not to be proved.—No confession made to a police-officer, shall be 
proved as against a person accused of any offence. 


26. Confession by accused while in custody of police not to be proved against him.—No confession 
made by any person whilst he is in the custody of a police-officer, unless it be made in the immediate 
presence of a Magistrate , shall be proved as against such person. 


Explanation.—In this section “Magistrate” does not include the head of a village discharging 
magisterial functions in the Presidency of Fort St. George 6 *** or elsewhere, unless such headman 
is a Magistrate exercising the powers of a Magistrate under the Code of Criminal Procedure, /662 
(20० /882.. 


27. How much of information received from accused may be proved.—Provided that, when any 
fact is deposed to as discovered inconsequence of information received from a person accused of any 
offence, in the custody of a police-officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a 
confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved. 


Code of Criminal Procedure, 973 


“I6l. Examination of witnesses by police.—{I) Any police officer making an investigation under 
this Chapter, or any police officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general or 
special order, prescribe in this behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine orally 
any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case. 


(2) Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put to him by 
such officer, other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him 
to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture. 


(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course of an 
examination under this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and true record of 
the statement of each such person whose statement he records. 


Provided that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded by audio-video 
electronic means: 


Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under section 354, 
section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 376, 3 section 376A, section 376AB, 
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB], section 376E or section 
509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 76860) is alleged to have been committed or attempted shall be 
recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer. 


462. Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements in evidence.—(l) No statement made 
by any person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under this Chapter, shall, if 
reduced to writing, be signed by the person making it; nor shall any such statement or any record 
thereof, whether in a police diary or otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for 
any purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made: 


Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose 
statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved, may 
be used by the accused, and with the permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to contradict such 
witness in the manner provided by section /43 of the Indian Evidence Act, 76722 (I of 78722), and 
when any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be used in the re-examination 
of such witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross- 
examination. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the provisions of 
clause (7) of section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, /6572 (7 of 7672), or to affect the provisions of 
section 27 of that Act. 


Explanation.—An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement referred to in 
sub-section (2) may amount to contradiction if the same appears to be significant and otherwise 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


relevant having regard to the context in which such omission occurs and whether any omission 
amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be a question of fact.” 


26. As per sections 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act, confessions made to a police officer or while in 
custody shall not be proved against a person accused of any offense during the trial of that offense. As per 
section 62 of the Cr.P.C., no statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an 
investigation under Chapter XII (which includes Section 6] Cr.P.C.) can be used, at any inquiry or trial in 
respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made. However, these 
sections do not prohibit the use of such statements in proceedings where the accused is not being tried for 
the specific offense in question, or in civil proceedings or ancillary proceedings. 


27. The Supreme Court in Mahesh Kumar 7. State of Rajasthan, 990 Supp SCC 54 (2), noted the 
possible use of statement made to the police by the accused persons for being used as evidence against the 
accused in an “enquiry” although inadmissible as evidence against them at the trial for the offence with 
which they were charged. Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“3. In Queen Empress v. Tribhovan Manekchand a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court laid 
down that the statement made to the police by the accused persons as to the ownership of property 
which was the subject matter of the proceedings against them although inadmissible as evidence 
against them at the trial for the offence with which they were charged, were admissible as evidence 
with regard to the ownership of the property in an enquiry held by the Criminal Procedure Code. 
The same view was reiterated in Pohlu v. Emperor where it was pointed out that though there is a 
bar in Section 25 of the Evidence Act, or in Section 762 CrPC for being made use of as evidence 
against the accused, this statement could be made use of in an enquiry under Section 377 CrPC 
when determining the question of return of property. These two decisions have been followed by the 
Rajasthan High Court in Dhanraj Baldeokishan v. State and the Mysore High Court 
in Veerabhadrappa v. Govinda. ” 


28. The Supreme Court in Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar, ((98) 2 SCC 493 with reference to the bar 
under section 62 of the Cr.P.C viz. against use in evidence of statement made before a police officer in the 
course of investigation, held, the same would not apply where court calls for such statement in a civil 
proceeding provided the statement is otherwise relevant under the Evidence Act, 872. Relevant extract of 
the said judgment is as under: 


“3. Before we refer to the provisions of Sections /62 and 772 of the Criminal Procedure Code, it 
would be convenient to set out briefly a few relevant provisions of that Code. Section 2 is the 
definition section and clause (g) of that section defines “inquiry” to mean “every inquiry, other 
than a trial conducted under this Code by a Magistrate or court”. Clause (a) of Section 2 gives the 
definition of “investigation” and it says that investigation includes “all the proceedings under this 
Code for the collection of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person (other than a 
Magistrate) who is authorised by a Magistrate in this behalf”. Section 4 provides: 


“4, (4) All offences under the Penal Code, /660 shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, 
and otherwise dealt with according to the provisions hereinafter contained. 


(2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and 
otherwise dealt with according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the 
time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring into, trying 
or otherwise dealing with such offences.” 


It is apparent from this section that the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code are applicable 
where an offence under the Penal Code, 7/669 or under any other law is being investigated, 
inquired into, tried or otherwise dealt with. Then we come straight to Section 762 which occurs in 
Chapter XII dealing with the powers of the police to investigate into offences. That section, so far 
as material, reads as under: 


ढ“॥62., (7) No statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an 
investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed by the person 
making it; nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or 
otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any purpose, save as 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at 
the time when such statement was made: 


Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose 
statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly 
proved, may be used by the accused, and with the permission of the court, by the 
prosecution, to contradict such witness in the manner provided by Section /435 of the 
Indian Evidence Act, /672, and when any part of such statement is so used, any part 
thereof may also be used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only of 
explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the 
provisions of clause (/) of Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, /6/2, or to affect the 
provisions of Section 27 of that Act.” 


It bars the use of any statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under 
Chapter XII, whether recorded in a police diary or otherwise, but, by the express terms of the 
section, this bar is applicable only where such statement is sought to be used “at any inquiry or 
trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made”’. If 
the statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII is 
sought to be used in any proceeding other than an inquiry or trial or even at an inquiry or trial but 
in respect of an offence other than that which was under investigation at the time when such 
statement was made, the bar of Section 762 would not be attracted. This section has been enacted 
for the benefit of the accused, as pointed out by this Court in Tahsildar Singh v. State of U.P., it is 
intended “to protect the accused against the user of statements of witnesses made before the police 
during investigation, at the trial presumably on the assumption that the said statements were not 
made under circumstances inspiring confidence”. This Court, in Tahsildar Singh case approved 
the following observations of Braund, J. in Emperor v. Aftab Mohd. Khan: 


“As it seems to us it is to protect accused persons from being prejudiced by statements 
made to police officers who by reason of the fact that an investigation is known to be on 
foot at the time the statement is made, may be in a position to influence the maker of it, 
and, on the other hand, to protect accused persons from the prejudice at the hands of 
persons who in the knowledge that an investigation has already started, are prepared to 
tell untruths”’ 


and expressed its agreement with the view taken by the Division Bench of the Nagpur High Court 
in Baliram Tikaram Marathe v. Emperor that “the object of the section is to protect the accused 
both against overzealous police officers and untruthful witnesses”. Protection against the use of 
statement made before the police during investigation is, therefore, granted to the accused by 
providing that such statement shall not be allowed to be used except for the limited purpose set out 
in the proviso to the section, at any inquiry or trial in respect of the offence which was under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made. But, this protection is unnecessary in any 
proceeding other than an inquiry or trial in respect of the offence under investigation and hence 
the bar created by the section is a limited bar. It has no application, for example in a civil 
proceeding or in a proceeding under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution and a statement made 
before a police officer in the course of investigation can be used as evidence in such proceeding, 
provided it is otherwise relevant under the Indian Evidence Act. There are a number of decisions of 
various High Courts which have taken this view and amongst them may be mentioned the decision 
of Jaganmohan Reddy, J. in Malakala Surya Rao v. G. Janakamma. The present proceeding before 
us is a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution filed by the petitioners for enforcing their 
Fundamental Rights under Article 27 and it is neither an “inquiry” nor a “trial” in respect of any 
offence and hence it is difficult to see how Section 762 can be invoked by the State in the present 
case. The procedure to be followed in a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution is 
prescribed in Order XXXV of the Supreme Court Rules, /966, and sub-rule (9) of Rule I0 lays 
down that at the hearing of the rule nisi, if the court is of the opinion that an opportunity be given 
to the parties to establish their respective cases by leading further evidence, the court may take 
such evidence or cause such evidence to be taken in such manner as it may deem fit and proper and 
obviously the reception of such evidence will be governed by the provisions of the Indian Evidence 


4 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


29. 


Act. It is obvious, therefore, that even a statement made before, a police officer during 
investigation can be produced and used in evidence in a writ petition under Article 32 provided it 
is relevant under the Indian Evidence Act and Section 762 cannot be urged as a bar against its 
production or use. The reports submitted by Shri L.V. Singh setting forth the result of his 
investigation cannot, in the circumstances, be shut out from being produced and considered in 
evidence under Section /62, even if they refer to any statements made before him and his 
associates during investigation, provided they are otherwise relevant under some provision of the 
Indian Evidence Act.” 


With reference to police diaries and Section 72 of the Cr.P.C., the Supreme Court in Khatri 


(supra) held as under: 


“... These reports are clearly relevant under Section 35 of the Indian Evidence Act which reads as 
follows: 


“35. An entry in any public or other official book, register or record, stating a fact in issue 
or relevant fact, and made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by 
any other person in performance of a duty specially enjoined by the law of the country in 
which such book, register or record is kept, is itself a relevant fact.” 


These reports are part of official record and they relate to the fact in issue as to how, and by whom 
the twenty-four under-trial prisoners were blinded and they are admittedly made by Sh L.V. Singh, 
a public servant, in the discharge of his official duty and hence they are plainly and indubitably 
covered by Section 35. The language of Section 35 is so clear that it is not necessary to refer to any 
decided cases on the interpretation of that section, but we may cite two decisions to illustrate the 
applicability of this section in the present case. The first is the decision of this Court in Kanwar Lal 
Gupta v. Amar Nath Chawla. There the question was whether reports made by officers of the CID 
(Special Branch) relating to public meetings covered by them at the time of the election were 
relevant under Section 35 and this Court held that they were, on the ground that they were (SCC p. 
667) “made by public servants in discharge of their official duty and they were relevant under the 
first part of Section 35 of the Evidence Act, since they contained statements showing what were the 
public meetings held by the first respondent”. This Court in fact followed an earlier decision of the 
Court in P.C.P. Reddiar v. S. Perumal. So also in Jagdat v. Sheopal, Wazirhasan, J. held that the 
result of an inquiry by a Kanungo under Section 202 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, /696 
embodied in the report is an entry in a public record stating a fact in issue and made by a public 
servant in the discharge of his official duties and the report is therefore admissible in evidence 
under Section 35. We find that a similar view was taken by a Division Bench of the Nagpur High 
Court in Chandulal 7. Pushkar Raj where the learned Judges held that reports made by Revenue 
Officers, though not regarded as having judicial authority, where they express opinions on the 
private rights of the parties are relevant under Section 35 as reports made by public officers in the 
discharge of their official duties, insofar as they supply information of official proceedings and 
historical facts. The Calcutta High Court also held in Lionell Edwards Limited v. State of W.B. that 
official correspondence from the Forest Officer to his superior, the Conservator of Forests, carried 
on by the Forest Officer in the discharge of his official duty would be admissible in evidence under 
Section 35. There is therefore no doubt in our mind that the reports made by Sh. L.V. Singh setting 
forth the result of the investigation carried on by him and his associates are clearly relevant under 
Section 35 since they relate to a fact in issue and are made by a public servant in the discharge of 
his official duty. It is indeed difficult to see how in a writ petition against the State Government 
where the complaint is that the police officials of the State Government blinded the petitioners at 
the time of arrest or whilst in police custody, the State Government can resist production of a 
report in regard to the truth or otherwise of the complaint, made by a highly placed officer 
pursuant to the direction issued by the State Government. We are clearly of the view that the 
reports made by Shri L.V. Singh as a result of the investigation carried out by him and his 
associates are relevant under Section 35 and they are liable to be produced by the State 
Government and used in evidence in the present writ petition. Of course, what evidentiary value 
must attach to the statements contained in these reports is a matter which would have to be decided 
by the court after considering these reports. It may ultimately be found that these reports have not 
much evidentiary value and even if they contain any statements adverse to the State Government, it 
may be possible for the State Government to dispute their correctness or to explain them away, but 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


it cannot be said that these reports are not relevant. These reports must therefore be produced by 
the State and taken on record of the present writ petition. We may point out that though in our 
order dated February 76, 7/967 we have referred to these reports as having been made by Shri L.V. 
Singh and his associates between January 709 and January 20, /987 it seems that there has been 
some error on our part in mentioning the outer date as January 20, 7967 for we find that some of 
these reports were submitted by Shri L.V. Singh even after January 20, 7967 and the last of them 
was submitted on January 27, 7/967, All these reports including the report submitted on December 
9, 79809 must therefore be filed by the State and taken as forming part of the record to be 
considered by the court in deciding the question at issue between the parties.” 


30. The Supreme Court in Vinay D. Nagar v. State of Rajasthan, (2008) 5 SCC 597, again held that 
bar of Section 62 of the Cr.P.C. is with regard to the admissibility of the statement recorded of a person by 
the police officer under Section 6] Cr.P.C. and by virtue of Section 62 Cr.P.C. would be applicable only 
where such statement is sought to be used at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made. The relevant extract of the said decision is as 
under: 


ढ॥4, On account of Section 762 CrPC, a statement made by any person to a police officer in the 
course of investigation under Chapter XII, if reduced into writing, will not be signed by the person 
making it, nor such statement recorded or any part thereof be used for any purpose at any inquiry 
or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made. 
Such statement may be used by an accused and with the permission of the court by the prosecution 
to contradict the witness whose statement was recorded by the police in the manner provided under 
Section ॥43 of the Evidence Act and can also be used for re-examination of such witness for the 
purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination. Bar of Section 762 
CrPC of proving the statement recorded by the police officer of any person during investigation 
however shall not apply to any statement falling within the provision of Clause (7) of Section 32 of 
the Evidence Act, nor shall it affect Section 27 of the Evidence Act. Bar of Section 762 CrPC is in 
regard to the admissibility of the statement recorded of a person by the police officer under Section 
4647 CrPC and by virtue of Section 762 CrPC would be applicable only where such statement is 
sought to be used at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time 
when such statement was made. 


I5. In Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar this Court has held that Section 762 CrPC bars the use of any 
statement made before the police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII, 
whether recorded in the police diary or otherwise. However, by the express terms of Section 762, 
this bar is applicable only where such statement is sought to be used “at any inquiry or trial” in 
respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made. If the 
statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII is sought 
to be used in any proceeding, inquiry or trial in respect of an offence other than which was under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made, the bar of Section 762 will not be 
attracted.” 


3. After examining the aforementioned provisions, as well as the legal principles established in a 
catena of judgments, and considering that the inquiry before this Tribunal does not entail adjudicating the 
guilt of the accused but rather assessing the adequacy of material before the Central Government to 
designate JKPFL as an unlawful association, the statement of witnesses record by the police officers, the 
statements made by the accused before police officers, along with the lists of items seized and seizure 
memos, are deemed admissible before this Tribunal. They can be utilized to ascertain the sufficiency of 
material before the Central Government for making the declaration under section 3() of the UA(P)A. 


V. PROCEDURE FOLLOWED BY THIS TRIBUNAL 


32. Consequently, upon due consideration of the aforesaid Notification no. S.O. 629(E) dated 
05" April, 2024 and Notification no. 5.0. 44(E) dated 5" March, 2024, this Tribunal held a preliminary 
hearing on 6.04.2024, whereupon on a consideration of the material placed on record by the Central 
Government, notice under section 4(2) of the UA(P) Act was issued to the JKPFL/its office bearers, leaders 
etc. to show cause, within a period of 30 days, as to why JKPFL ought not to be declared as an unlawful 
association. The notices issued were given due publicity as is required under section 3(4) of the UA(P) Act. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


33. The Gazette Notification dated 5.03.2024 was also published in two National Newspapers (all 
India Edition), out of which one was in English while the other was in Hindi. The said notification was also 
published in two local newspapers out of which one was in vernacular language and the other was in 
English, both having wide circulation in Kashmir where the activities of the JKPFL were or are believed to 
be ordinarily carried out. The method of affixation and proclamation by beating of drums, as well as 
loudspeakers, was also adopted. 


34. The notice issued by the Tribunal along with the Gazette Notification dated 5.03.2024 was 
displayed on the notice boards of the Deputy Commissioner/ District Magistrate/Tehsildar of Kashmir Zone 
where the activities of the association were or are believed to be ordinarily carried on. Help of All-India 
Radio and Electronic Media of the Kashmir Division was also taken. Announcements were made through 
Radio / Electronic Media at prime time. 


35. Apart from the above, notice was also issued to the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
through its Chief Secretary. 

36. The Registrar attached to the Tribunal was directed to ensure the compliance of the service of 
notice issued to the JKPFL in the manner indicated. The Registrar was directed to file an independent 
report in that behalf before the next date of hearing i.e. 20.05.2024. 


37. Accordingly, the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir filed its affidavit of service dt. 
8.05.2024, affirming that service had been effected as directed by the Tribunal. The Registrar, vide his 
report dated 8.05.2024, also confirmed service of notice issued by the Tribunal. 


38. On 20.5.2024, this Tribunal having satisfied itself that service had been effected on JKPFL/ts 
leaders/office bearers etc. as per the directions contained in the order dated 6.04.2024, coupled with the 
fact that no appearance was entered into by or on behalf of JKPFL, was constrained to proceed further with 
the inquiry without the participation of the concerned association. 


39. In order to afford an opportunity to both the Central Govt. and the Union Territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir to lead evidence in support of the respective averments, allegations and grounds set out in the 
Notification dt. 5.03.2024, as also to give another opportunity to JKPFL to rebut the material placed on 
record by the Central Govt. and the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, by the same order i.e. order 
dated 20.05.2024, proceedings of the Tribunal were scheduled for 20.06.2024, 2.06.2024 and 24.06.2024 
at Srinagar with consent of the counsels appearing for the UOI and the Union Territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir, for recording of evidence. Accordingly, a public notice was issued for the hearings at Srinagar, 
which were to take place in the premises of High Court of Jammu & Kashmir, and Ladakh. However, prior 
to the proceedings to be held in Srinagar, further proceedings were directed to be held in High Court of 
Delhi for necessary directions, on 05.06.2024. 


40. On 05.06.2024, Id. Counsel for Central Government sought some more time for filing affidavits in 
evidence and time was granted to file the affidavits before the next date of hearing. On that day also, no 
appearance was put in on behalf of the organization. On the same day, directions were also given to the 
Central Government to file a list of witnesses. The proceedings were further adjourned to 3.06.2024, to be 
held in High Court of Delhi, for compliance. On 3.06.2024, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of Union 
of India and Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir informed the Tribunal that affidavit by way of 
evidence of the witness from the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir shall be filed by 5.06.2024. 
Further, it was also submitted that the list of witnesses which has been filed may be read as having two 
witnesses only i.e. one from Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the other from Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Government of India. 


4l. On 20.06.2024, proceedings of the Tribunal were held at Srinagar, in the premises of High Court of 
J&K and Ladakh. Statement of the following witness was recorded at Srinagar on 20.06.2024: 


S. Name of Witness Details of Affidavit along Affidavits kept in File no. 
No. with date 


l. Sh. Shafat Mohd., DSP, HQ. | Ex. PW-I/A dated .06.2024 | File - Vol. IV 
Bandipura, Kashmir 


Affidavit from pages | to 9; and 
exhibits from pages 0 to 57 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण ]7 


42. It needs a highlight that for the Tribunal’s proceedings at Srinagar, Union of India was directed to 
ensure that any interested party/person who desires to appear physically before the Tribunal on any of the 
dates scheduled for hearing, should be duly assisted for the said purpose. For the said purpose, ASI Mohd. 
Niyaz ARP: Q5324/XI-SEC was deputed at Srinagar, in the High Court premises, for facilitating the 
appearance of any interested party who desired to appear before this Tribunal, on all three dates. 


43. It also needs a highlight that for the hearings of the Tribunal at Srinagar, no one appeared to attend 
or join the Tribunal proceedings from or on behalf of JKPFL, or from the general public. On 20.06.2024, 
proceedings were adjourned to 24.06.2024 for directions. 


44. Vide order dt. 24.06.2024 passed in Srinagar, further proceedings were directed to be held at High 
Court of Delhi, on 03.07.2024 on which date Id. Counsel for the UOI informed the Tribunal that affidavit in 
evidence of the witness from MHA, GOI, on behalf of the Union of India has been filed with the Registrar 
of the Tribunal on 0.07.2024. The proceedings were thereafter adjourned further to 5.07.2024 for which 
date the said witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt. of India was directed to be present for 
recording of his deposition. 


45. Accordingly, on 5.07.2024, statement of the following witness on behalf of the Union of India 
was recorded: 


S. | Name of Witness Details of Affidavit along Affidavits kept in File no. 
No with date 
2. | Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gupta Ex. PW-2/A dated 0.07.2024 | File - Vol. IV 


Director (Counter Terrorism), GOI, 
Ministry of Home Affairs, New 


Delhi Affidavit from pages | to 7; 


and exhibits from pages 8 to 
25 along with documents/ 
confidential material in a 
sealed cover 


No other witness was examined on behalf of the Union of India and the evidence was concluded. 


VI. NON-APPEARANCE/NO REPLY ON BEHALF OF THE JKPFL IN THESE 
PROCEEDINGS 


46. Despite service of statutory notice upon JKPFL, its offices and leaders, the concerned association 
has not entered appearance to contest the notification under Section 3(l) of the UA(P)A. Despite 
opportunities afforded, no reply has been filed on behalf of the concerned association, as contemplated 
under section 4(2) of the Act. This Tribunal has also not received any intimation from any interested party 
seeking to depose before this Tribunal. 


47. Ample opportunity has been afforded by this Tribunal to the concerned association/ its office 
bearers to appear before this Tribunal and give their written version/ adduce evidence, in opposition to the 
factual version of the Central government as regards the activities of the concerned association. Apart from 
effecting service on the association and its office bearers in the manner aforesaid, this Tribunal even held 
public hearing/s in Srinagar to enable members of the concerned association and/ or members of the public, 
to participate in the proceedings of the Tribunal. However, the association or any of its office bearers did 
not avail the said opportunity. 


48. This Tribunal is conscious that despite non-appearance of the concerned organization, the Tribunal 
is still required to make an “objective determination” as mandated in the judgment of the Supreme Court in 
Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). The credibility of the material/evidence placed on record by the Central 
Government is still required to be tested. It needs a highlight that the Hon’ble Supreme Court has cautioned 
that the procedure to be adopted must achieve this purpose and must not be reduced to mere acceptance of 
the “ipse dixit of the Central Government”. 


49. Thus, notwithstanding the non-appearance on behalf of the concerned association, this Tribunal is 
required to independently assess the credibility of the material / evidence placed on record by the Central 
Government, and on that basis, come to a conclusion as to whether or not there is sufficient cause for 
declaring the association as unlawful. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


शा. EVIDENCE ADDUCED BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL 
PW-I 


50. Mr. Shafat Mohammad (PW-I) tendered his affidavit as Ex. PW I/A and deposed that he is 
currently posted as Deputy Superintendent of Police, Bandipora, Kashmir and is the supervisory officer of 
the cases bearing FIR no. 95/20] and FIR no. 33/2022. Witness stated that in the course of discharge of 
duties as a supervisory officer, he had gone through the records of the case files of FIR No. 95/20] and 
33/2022. Witness further stated that he had been duly authorized by the competent authority to depose 
before this Tribunal. The said authorisation was relied upon by PW | as Ex. PW /A-I. 


2.4 7 79४-] deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section () of 
Section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 967, vide Notification no. S.O. 4l4(E) published 
in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, on I5" March, 2024, has declared the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples 
Freedom League (JKPFL), as an ‘unlawful association’. Witness further deposed that he had read the brief 
Background Note on JKPFL prepared by the Central Government and had gone through the details of cases 
registered against the said organization and its leaders, and based on the same he could testify that JKPFL 
and its leaders were involved in the secessionist activities. 


52. PW-] further deposed that it is borne out from the records of the cases, other materials available in 
police stations and on the basis of the knowledge gathered by him during the course of his service that 
JKPFL is a separatist and secessionist organization which was formed in the year 2003 by a separatist 
leader Mohammad Farooq Shah @ Farooq Rehmani who had also been member of the Proscribed 
Organizations Jammat-E-Islami (JEI) and ‘Jammu and Kashmir Peoples League’. Witness further deposed 
that it was also borne out from the records that in 989, Farooq Rehmani crossed over to Pakistan and had 
been carrying out separatist activities from Pakistan. In 992, Jammu and Kashmir Peoples League (JKPL) 
faced split into Rehmani and Sheikh Aziz factions. Al-Fatha Force was the terrorist wing of Rehmani 
faction of JKPL. On 22nd April, 2023, Rehmani renamed his faction as Jammu and Kashmir Peoples 
Freedom League (Rehmani) and became its chairman with its headquarters in Pakistan. PW | testified that 
it is borne out from records that the main objective of JKPFL has been to carry out anti-India propaganda 
for secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India and to radicalize the youth into secessionist 
and terrorist activities. Witness further stated that JKPFL and its members had been involved in anti- 
national activities and had also given ‘Muzaffarabad Chalo’ call and incited people of Jammu & Kashmir 
to cross the border, causing law-and-order problem in the erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir which 
resulted in various separate violent acts. JKPFL is still continuing with its agenda in the UT of Jammu & 
Kashmir and is backed by Pakistan and other terrorist and separatist organizations. 


53% PW-|! also deposed that as per the records, most prominent faces of JKPFL are () Farooq Ahmad 
Shah @ Faroog Rehmani (Chairman), (ii) Mohammad Ramzan Khan @ Altaf (Chairman, Kashmir 
Chapter) and (iii) Dr. Atta-ur-Rehman Tantray (Member) all of whom set a narrative of portraying a 
negative image of the Indian Army and Govt. administration in the minds of the youth of Kashmir. 


FIR No. 95/20: 


54. PW-I further testified that on 03.09.20I], reliable information was received at PS Bandipore that 
persons associated with the banned organization are instigating the general public for pelting stones on 
police and security forces with an intent to cause threat to the unity, integrity and sovereignty of the Union 
of India. It was also disclosed that the said persons have also delivered a speech inciting hatred in the 
hearts and minds of the general public which was detrimental for the internal security of the State. Witness 
stated that leading to the said incident, FIR No. 95/20I was registered on 03.09.20Il at PS Bandipore 
u/s 3 of the UA(P) Act. A true copy of FIR No. 95/20Il in vernacular along with its true English 
translation was relied upon by PW | as Ex. PW I/I. 


33. PW-I! deposed that the investigation of the case was conducted during which the accused was 
arrested and interrogated who admitted his involvement in the commission of the offence and involvement 
of other persons also who were leaders of the Hurriyat conference and hence, his disclosure statement was 
recorded. Witness further stated that statements of witnesses were also recorded in whose presence 
disclosure was made and who also corroborated the veracity of the information. Based on the incriminating 
material collected against the accused person, Chargesheet bearing Challan No. 77/207 was filed before 
the concerned court on 04.07.207, trial of which is still pending. A true copy of the chargesheet no. 
77/20(7 filed in FIR No. 95/20, in vernacular, along with its true English translation has been relied 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9 


upon by PW | as Ex. PW ॥/2. True copies of the statements of witnesses recorded under section !6] 
Cr.P.C during the course of investigation were relied upon by PW | as Ex. PW ॥/3 to Ex. PW ॥/0. 
Disclosure memo of Mohd. Ramzan was relied upon as Ex. PW I/II. 


FIR No. 33 of 2022: 


56. PW-I deposed that on 26.02.2022, an information was received at PS Bandipore through reliable 
sources that [4 persons who have been named as accused in the above FIR, have ex-filtrated to Pakistan 
Occupied Kashmir (POK) for obtaining training in illegal arms/ ammunitions for causing threat to the 
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the nation. Witness also disclosed that the said accused had joined 
different terrorist training camps under the command and control of Syed Salaudin, Mohd. Hafiz, Azhar 
Masood etc. and after obtaining training, they had infiltrated to Kashmir from different places falling within 
jurisdiction of this Police Station and are carrying out terrorist activities. Witness further stated that leading 
to the said incident, FIR no. 33/2022 was registered on 26.02.2022 at PS Bandipore u/s 2/3 of EMICO Act, 
u/s [2] of IPC and u/s 8, 20 & 39 of UA (P) Act. A true copy of FIR no. 33/2022 in vernacular along 
with its true English translation was relied upon by PW | as Ex. PW ]/2. 


57. PW-] further deposed that the investigation of the case was conducted and statement of various 
family members of the accused terrorists were recorded who admitted the involvement of accused persons 
in the terrorist activities and have also corroborated the veracity of the information received with regard to 
them on the basis of which aforesaid FIR was registered. Witness stated that during investigation, search 
had been conducted into the forest areas and wherefrom in one of the hideouts of the accused persons, 
various material was seized vide separate seizure memos. True copies of the seizure memos prepared 
during investigation of FIR no. 33 of 2022 in vernacular along with their true English translations were 
relied upon by PW | as Ex. PW ॥3 and Ex. PW ]/4. True copies of the statements of witnesses 
recorded under section 6] Cr.P.C during investigation were relied upon as Ex. PW /5 to Ex. PW /9. 


58. PW-I further testified that the case is still under investigation as the accused persons are still 
absconding and as per the latest information, they have ex-filtrated to POK. However, search for the said 
accused persons is being conducted. An English translation of the case diary highlighting the status of the 
investigation conducted till date was relied upon as Ex. PW ॥/20. 


59. PW-] also deposed that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of service and the 
records of the cases, it is manifest that JKPFL and its leaders and members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and advocating secession of the territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
from the Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of 
India; 

c) indulging in acts of commission and omissions which are part of the above FIR’s which are 
intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and have been aimed at inciting individuals 
and groups of local Muslim community to bring about cession of lawful constitutional 
authority of Government of India in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir; 


d)  spearheading/conspiring/ masterminding/ facilitating/escalating secessionist movement and 
unlawful activities inside the country and especially in the Kashmir valley; and 


e) exploited the situation in the valley intensely and actively provoked, incited and lured the 
youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in order to 
keep the anti-India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars, leading to 
riots which resulted in the injuries and death of several civilians, police and Security Forces. 


60. PW-I further deposed that sufficient material has been brought on record which manifests that 
JKPFL, its leaders and members of the said organization who had support from across the border, have 
been actively and continuously supporting the separatist and banned organizations and have been openly 
inciting the people to bring about a secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. Witness 
affirmed further that it is also established that the activities of JKPFL are aimed at causing disaffection, 
disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and 
the members of JKPFL are indulging and acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity 
and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance on behalf of 
JKPFL. 


PW-2 


6l. Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gupta (PW-2) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-2/A and deposed that he is 
posted as Director (Counter Terrorism) in the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi, 
and has been duly authorized by the Ministry of Home Affairs to depose before this Tribunal. A photocopy 
of the relevant office noting vide which he was authorized to depose was relied upon as Ex. PW-2/A-I'. 
PW 2 deposed that he has been dealing with all the relevant files/records concerning JKPFL in his official 
capacity. Witness stated that the notification no. 5.0. 44 (8) dated 5"™ March, 2024, issued by the 
Central Government is based on the information and material received from the central intelligence agency 
and Criminal Investigation Department of Government of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, with 
regard to the unlawful activities of the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League (JKPFL). On the 
basis of information received from the intelligence and investigation agencies of the Central Government 
and the UT of J&K regarding unlawful activities of JKPFL, a note was prepared for the consideration of the 
Cabinet Committee on Security, as is reflected in the official records. PW 2 further deposed that thereafter, 
the Cabinet Committee on Security took the decision and approved the proposal contained in the above 
note, in its meeting held on 3" March, 2024. Accordingly, the declaration concerning JKPFL being an 
‘unlawful association’ was made and published vide notification dated 5 March, 2024, bearing no. S.O. 
44 (E). A copy of the said notification published in the official gazette dated 5.03.2024 has been relied 
upon by PW 2 as Ex. PW 2/. 


62. PW-2 testified that in terms of sub-section () of Section 5 read with sub-section () of the Section 
4 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 967 and vide notification dated 5" April, 2024, bearing no. S. 
O. 629 (E), this Tribunal was constituted and a Background Note was submitted to this Tribunal vide 
letter dated 2 April, 2024 in terms of Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules 968, based 
upon the material/ information as contained in the concerned file. Copy of the said Background Note 
concerning JKPFL, supplied vide letter dt. 2.04.2024 addressed to the Registrar of the Tribunal, was relied 
upon by the Witness as Ex. PW 2/2. Witness further testified that the cases registered by the Jammu and 
Kashmir Police throw light on the unlawful, subversive and secessionist activities of the chairman and 
members of JKPFL. 


63. PW-2 deposed that the officer concerned of the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir has filed 
his affidavit before this Tribunal in respect of cases registered in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir against the 
chairman and members of JKPFL under various provisions of law including the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, !967, Indian Penal Code, 860 etc. Witness further deposed that the concerned witness 
has already adduced evidence during the course of proceedings before this Tribunal in support of the 
declaration as contained in Notification no. 5.0. 44 (E) dated 5" March, 2024 which clearly establishes 
that JKPFL is continuously indulging in unlawful activities which pose a serious threat to the internal 
security of the country. Witness stated that in addition to the above adduced evidence, various intelligence 
inputs show that JKPFL is continuing its unlawful activities which are prejudicial to the security of the 
country. Witness further affirmed that inputs received from central intelligence agency clearly bring out that 
the JKPFL is indulging in activities for separation of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India and 
considering all these facts, circumstances and evidence adduced before this Tribunal, JKPFL has been 
banned under the UA(P)A, 967 which ban may be affirmed by this Tribunal. PW-2 further deposed that 
the banning of JKPFL is necessary in the interest of national security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of 
India since the chairman and members of the JKPFL have been indulging in radicalizing, brainwashing and 
indoctrinating the minds of Kashmiri youth through provocative speeches for separation of Jammu and 
Kashmir from Union of India. 


64. PW-2 submitted the duly indexed original file in a sealed cover containing above mentioned central 
intelligence reports/inputs for the perusal of this Tribunal and the same was, subject to the claim of 
privilege raised by the Central Govt. in respect thereof u/s 23 of Indian Evidence Act 872 read with Rule 
3(2) and proviso to Rule 5 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules of 968, was taken on record as Ex. 


' The original file containing the noting was submitted by the Witness in a sealed cover for which privilege was 
claimed. 


[भाग W—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 2] 


PW 2/3. In regard to the claim for privilege, PW-2 deposed that the contents of Ex. PW 2/3 are confidential 
in nature and the same cannot be made available to the banned association or to any third party as the 
Government considers it against the public interest to disclose the same either to the banned association or 
to any third-party inter-alia in terms of the provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 968. 
PW-2 further deposed that the documents for which claim of privilege is being sought cannot be supplied 
as a public document as dissemination of the same to public at large may impede/impeach the ongoing 
investigations/prosecutions against the banned organization or its members and can also entail cross border 
national security concerns. Therefore, the said documents can be verified by the Tribunal only. 


65. PW-2 further deposed that from the cogent and irrefutable evidence which has emerged till now, it 
is clear that JKPFL is continuously encouraging veiled armed terrorist activities and is openly advocating 
and inciting people to bring about a secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union, and the 
activities of JKPFL are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feeling of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government, and accordingly, the members of JKPFL are indulging 
and acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of India. 


66. PW-2 further deposed that on the basis of material adduced for the consideration of this Tribunal, it 
is evident that if the JKPFL is not banned, the activists and sympathizers of JKPFL will pose a serious 
threat to the communal harmony, internal security & integrity of the country. PW-2 concluded his 
testimony by deposing that in view of the submissions, the declaration made by the Central Government 
vide Notification no. 5. 0. 44(E) dated 5 March, 2024 be upheld in the national interest. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance on behalf of 
JKPFL. 


No other witness was examined on behalf of the Union of India. The matter was thereafter posted for 
27.07.2024 for addressing final submissions on behalf of the Union of India. 


VIII. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE UOI 


67. On 27.07.2024, Id. Additional Solicitor General for the Union of India, put forth submissions on 
the merits of the Notification dt. 5.03.2024 as also on the claim for privilege for the documents, which had 
been submitted by PW 2 in a sealed cover. In regard to the claim for privilege, ld. Additional S.G. referred 
to section 23 of the Evidence Act read with Rule 3(2) of the UAP Rules, 968, which are reproduced as 
under: 


Indian Evidence Act, 872 


“23. Evidence as to affairs of State — No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived 

from unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the 
officer at the head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he 
thinks fit.” 


The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 968 


“3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence.- 


(/) In holding an inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 4 or disposing of any application 
under sub-section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section 8, the Tribunal or the 
District Judge, as the case may be, shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), follow, 
as far as practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 7622 (7 
०4622, 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 7672 (। of 78722), where 
any books of account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal or the 
Court of the District Judge by the Central Government and such books of account or other 
documents are claimed by that Government to be of a confidential nature then, the 
Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall not,- 


(a) Make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the 
proceedings before it; or 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(b) Allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books of 
account or other documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings 
before it.” 


68. Ld. Addl. Solicitor General submitted that the claim of privilege by the Union of India for the 
documents placed in sealed cover is made as the documents are of such a nature that the non-disclosure of 
which would be in the interest of the public. It was submitted that this concept of public interest is taken 
into account even in the criminal proceedings qua the accused, whereas in juxtaposition, the present matter 
stands at a much higher pedestal and involves the issue of sovereignty and integrity of the country. Ld. 
Addl. SG submitted that in the cases concerning national security, sovereignty and integrity, the Tribunal 
has to interpret and analyze the material differently as the decisions taken by the Central Government in 
such manner are based on highly sensitive information and inputs; and the effects of such decisions are not 
confined to the boundaries of the nation. 


69. To support her submission, Id. Addl. SG has relied upon the judgment delivered in a case of 
preventive detention i.e. Raj Kumar Singh vs. State of Bihar (\986) 4 SCC 407 wherein the 
Supreme Court, inter alia, held as under: 


“The executive authority is not the sole judge of what is required for national security or public order. 
But the court cannot substitute its decision if the executive authority or the appropriate authority acts 
on proper materials and reasonably and rationally comes to that conclusion even though a conclusion 
with which the court might not be in agreement. It is not for the court to put itself in the position of the 
detaining authority and to satisfy itself that untested facts reveal a path of crime provided these facts 
are relevant. See in this connection the observations of O. Chinnappa Reddy, J. in Vijay Narain Singh 
case (964) 3 SCC ॥4. /964 SCC (Cri) 367. AIR 79864 SC 334: (/984) 3 SCR 435 ] at p. 440 and 
447. (SCC p. 79, para I) 346. Similarly, in the case of Union of India vs. Rajasthan High Court, 
(20772) 2 SCC 59;: 20I6 SCC Online SC 7466, it was held that it was not for the court in the exercise of 
its power of judicial review to suggest a policy which it considered fit. The formulation of suggestions 
by the High Court for framing a National Security Policy travelled far beyond legitimate domain of 
judicial review. Formulation of such a policy is based on information and inputs which are not 
available to the court. The court is not an expert in such matters. Judicial review is concerned with the 
legality of executive action and the court can interfere only where there is a breach of law or a 
violation of the Constitution.” 


70. The Id. Addl. SG has also placed reliance upon the judgment delivered in Ex-Armymen's 
Protection Services (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (204) 5 SCC 409, wherein it has been inter alia held as 
under: 


ढ॥5, It is difficult to define in exact terms as to what is “national security”. However, the same 
would generally include socio-political stability, territorial integrity, economic solidarity and 
strength, ecological balance, cultural cohesiveness, external peace, etc. 


36, What is in the interest of national security is not a question of law. It is a matter of policy. It is 
not for the court to decide whether something is in the interest of the State or not. It should be left 
to the executive.” 


7i. The ld. Addl. SG further submitted that the UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder provide for a 
mechanism to claim privilege and withhold certain facts/documents to seek non-disclosure of the same. The 
Id. Addl. SG then placed reliance on the judgment delivered in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), wherein the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court has held as under: 


#॥9, ...the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Act itself permits the Central Government to 
withhold the disclosure of acts which it considers to be against the public interest to disclose. 
Similarly, Rule 3(2) and the proviso to Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, /966 
also permit non-disclosure of confidential documents and information which the Government 
considers against the public interest to disclose... 


20... 


[भाग ars 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 23 


72. 


24. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine in 
nature and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued 
confidentiality in public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such information, 
and, may be, also full particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. The scheme of 
the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder provide for 
maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in public interest. 


22....in such cases where the Tribunal is satisfied that non-disclosure of such information to the 
association or its office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non-disclosure to the 
association or its office-bearers, but in order to perform its task of adjudication as required by the 
Act, the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the 
information and satisfying itself that it can safely act on the same. In such a situation, the Tribunal 
can devise a suitable procedure whereby it can itself examine and test the credibility of such 
material before it decides to accept the same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for 
declaring the association to be unlawful. The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence 
in the strict sense. 


23: 


24. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its source, in 
public interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the confidential 
information for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the conflicting evidence of 
the other side. This modified procedure satisfies the minimum requirements of natural justice and 
also retains the basic element of an adjudicatory process which involves objective determination of 
the factual basis of the action taken." 


The Id. Addl. SG also relied on the judgment delivered in People’s Union for Civil Liberties vs. 


Union of India, (2004) 2 SCC 476, where it was, inter alia, held as under: 


73. 


“69. The legislative policy behind the aforementioned provisions is no longer res integra. The State 
must have the prerogative of preventing evidence being given on matters that would be contrary to 
public interest. 


70. For determining a question when a claim of privilege is made, the Court is required to pose the 
following questions: 


(7) whether the document in respect of which privilege is claimed, is really a document 
(unpublished) relating to any affairs of State; and 


(2) whether disclosure of the contents of the document would be against public interest? 


77. When any claim of privilege is made by the State in respect of any document, the question 
whether the document belongs to the privileged class has first to be decided by the court. The court 
cannot hold an enquiry into the possible injury to public interest which may result from the 
disclosure of the document in question. The claim of immunity and privilege has to be based on 
public interest. 


72. The section does not say who is to decide the preliminary question viz. whether the document is 
one that relates to any affairs of State, or how it is to be decided, but the clue in respect thereof can 
be found in Section 762, Under Section /62 a person summoned to produce a document is bound to 
bring it to the court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its production or to its 
admissibility. The validity of any such objection shall be decided on by the courtl. It further says 
that the court, if it deems fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of State, or take 
other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility 


73. In order to claim immunity from disclosure of unpublished State documents, the documents 
must relate to affairs of the State and disclosure thereof must be against interest of the State or 
public interest.” 


The Id. Addl. SG, thus, submitted that from a bare reading of the aforesaid judgment of the 


Supreme Court, it is clear that an enquiry contemplated under the UA(P)A gives a right to the government 
to claim privilege of sensitive documents in public interest/national interest which right has been duly 
upheld by the Supreme Court; and that in the present case, the documents for which claim of privilege, by 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


their very nature, are confidential and sensitive in nature and, therefore, cannot be supplied as a public 
document. 


74. The ld. Addl. SG further submitted that the document forms part of the evidence collected by the 
intelligence agencies which pertains to secessionist and unlawful activities of the JKPFL and those 
associated with it and the said documents are confidential and secret in nature and the same can be verified 
by the Tribunal only. The learned ASG further submitted that the nature of material placed in the sealed 
cover by the Central Government is in the form of intelligence reports, secret information collected from 
time to time by the investigating and intelligence agencies, communications between the intelligence 
agencies, information which may lead to further recoveries, discoveries of facts as also unearth 
conspiracies, the disclosure whereof would be clearly detrimental to the larger public interest and the 
security of the State. The learned ASG submitted that the material filed by the Central Government 
contains the note then put up to the Cabinet Committee on Security along with documents supporting the 
note and the grounds on which the notification was issued besides intelligence inputs and correspondence 
in relation thereto. Hence, the claim of privilege of the documents by the Central Government is in 
accordance with law and the documents submitted in sealed cover are not required to be disclosed in the 
public interest. 


75. Learned Addl. SG further submitted that the sealed cover documents form a part of the evidence 
which dehors being part of the evidence of the present proceeding, are of a confidential nature, disclosure 
of which would be contrary, not only to the public interest but also to national interest. In the same breath, 
the Id. Addl. SG submitted that privilege for the said documents is claimed based on the nature of 
documents which impinge upon national security. The disclosure of these documents to the other side 
would jeopardize not only the interest and safety of certain individuals but would also compromise national 
security. 


70. Learned Addl. SG has also placed reliance in this regard on the following judgments of the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court:- 


(a) S.P. Gupta Vs. Union of India (98) Supp SCC 87 
(b) Iqbal Singh Marwah Vs. Meenakshi Marwah (2005) 4 SCC 370 


77. Learned Addl. SG has submitted that with regard to the claim of privilege for non-disclosure of 
sealed documents, the Supreme Court in $.P. Gupta (supra), has held as under: 


“73. We have already pointed out that whenever an objection to the disclosure of a document 
under Section 723 is raised, two questions fall for the determination of the court, namely, whether 
the document relates to affairs of State and whether its disclosure would, in the particular case 
before the court, be injurious to public interest. The court in reaching its decision on these two 
questions has to balance two competing aspects of public interest, because the document being one 
relating to affairs of State, its disclosure would cause some injury to the interest of the State or the 
proper functioning of the public service and on the other hand if it is not disclosed, the non- 
disclosure would thwart the administration of justice by keeping back from the court a material 
document. There are two aspects of public interest clashing with each other out of which the court 
has to decide which predominates. The approach to this problem is admirably set out in a passage 
from the judgment of Lord Reid in Conway v. Rimmer ((/966) AC 979, 952, 973, 979, 987, 993 : 
(9668) I All ER 874 (HL)] : 


“It is universally recognized that there are two kinds of public interest which may clash. 
There is the public interest that harm shall not be done to the nation or the public service by 
disclosure of certain documents, and there is the public interest that the administration of 
justice shall not be frustrated by the withholding of documents which must be produced if 
justice is to be done. There are many cases where the nature of the injury which would or 
might be done to the nation or the public service is of so grave a character that no other 
interest, public or private, can be allowed to prevail over it. With regard to such cases it 
would be proper to say, as Lord Simon did, that to order production of the document in 
question would put the interest of the State in jeopardy. But there are many other cases 
where the possible injury to the public service is much less and there one would think that it 
would be proper to balance the public interests involved.” 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 25 


78. Learned Addl. SG, therefore, submitted that the rigors of S.P Gupta (supra) for claiming privilege 
have to be read in context of the provisions of UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder which provide that 
document, disclosure whereof may not be in the public interest, be not disclosed. She further submitted that 
the UA(P) Rules, as quoted above, start with a non obstante clause and thus an inbuilt mechanism has been 
provided under the UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder. Accordingly, the Tribunal is mandated to 
grant privilege forbidding disclosure where the claim of the Government is that the disclosure of such 
documents could affect the larger public interest of the nation by jeopardizing the safety and sovereignty of 
the country and also finds that the public interest outweighs the interest of the association/members/office 
bearers. 


79. Learned Addl. SG submitted that the claim of confidentiality has to satisfy the test of character of 
the document and if on an objective satisfaction it is concluded that the document is of such a character that 
its disclosure will injure public interest, the contents thereof cannot be permitted to be disclosed to the other 
side. Thus, the foundation of immunity from non-disclosure stems from the character of the document. 


80. The Id. Addl. SG submitted that the statement of objects and reasons of the UA(P)A itself 
underlines the purpose of the enactment to provide for a more effective prevention of certain unlawful 
activities of individuals and associations and for matters connected therewith. She submitted that the statute 
empowers the Parliament to impose by a due process of law reasonable restrictions in the interest of 
sovereignty and integrity of India on the right to form an association and incidentally a restriction on the 
freedom of speech and expression, to assemble peacefully and with arms. Learned Addl. SG submitted that 
further, section 48 of the UA(P)A itself provides that the provisions of the UA(P)A and the Rules made 
thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment 
other than this Act or any instrument having effect by virtue of an enactment other than this Act giving it a 
clear over-riding position. 


8l. The Id. Addl. SG also submitted that the decision of the previous Tribunals constituted under 
Section 4 of the UA(P)A, in which the claim of privilege by the Central Government had been allowed 
holding that the same satisfied the requirement of Section 23 of the Evidence Act, are binding on this 
Tribunal in view of the provisions of section 5(7) of the UA(P)A which provide that the proceedings before 
this Tribunal are judicial proceedings and, therefore, reliance has been placed on the Extraordinary Gazette 
Notification bearing no CG-DL-E-27032023-24472 published in Part II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 
having no. 382 dated Monday, March 27, 2023/CHAITRA 6, 945 whereby, Tribunal comprising of 
Hon'ble Mr Justice Dinesh Kumar Sharma, Judge, Delhi High Court, in exercise of the powers conferred by 
sub-section (3) of section 4 of the said Act, passed an order on the 2I* March, 2023, confirming the 
declaration vide Notification no. 8.0. 4559 (E) dt. 27.9.2022 made by the Central Government declaring 
the Popular Front of India (PFI) and its associates or affiliates or fronts including Rehab India Foundation 
(RIF), Campus Front of India (CFI), All India Imams Council (AIIC), National Confederation of Human 
Rights Organization (NCHRO), National Women‘s Front, Junior Front, Empower India Foundation and 
Rehab Foundation, Kerala as being unlawful. In view of the aforesaid position, the ld. Addl. SG submitted 
that the Central Government respectfully claims privilege on the documents contained in the sealed cover, 
as mentioned in the affidavit filed by PW 2. 


82. Addressing submissions on the sufficiency of the reasons and basis for declaring JKPFL as an 
unlawful association vide notification no. S.O. 44 (E) dt. 5.03.2024, Id. Addl. SG submitted that the 
exception to the freedom of speech and expression, and to form associations and union, under Article 9() 
of the Constitution of India, was inserted in the form of “sovereignty and integrity of India” in Article 9(2) 
and 9(4), after the National Integration Council appointed a Committee on National Integration and 
Regionalization. The said Committee was to look into the aspect of putting reasonable restrictions in the 
interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. Learned Addl. SG submitted that pursuant to the 
acceptance of recommendations of the Committee, the Constitutional Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 963 
was enacted to impose reasonable restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. 
Further, in order to implement the provisions of the 963 Act, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill was 
introduced in the Parliament. The main objective of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act is to make 
powers available for dealing with activities directed against the integrity and sovereignty of India. Learned 
Addl. SG further submitted that after Independence, Parliament has passed many laws to regulate national 
security and in order to protect sovereignty of India. The UA(P)A, 967 is an Act to provide for the more 
effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and associations and for dealing with 
terrorist activities and other matters connected therewith. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


83. Learned Addl. SG further submitted that to achieve the aforesaid purpose of tackling the menace of 
activities inimical to the sovereignty and integrity of India, the legislature in its wisdom decided to create 
two species of the offence i.e. 


i. Unlawful Activity & Unlawful Association [S-2(0) r/w Chapter 2 & 3 (Sections 3-4)]; 
and 


li. Terrorist Act & Terrorist Organization [S-2 (k), 0), (m) r/w Chapter 4-6 (Sections 5-40)]. 


Learned Addl. SG submitted that the growing threat of terrorism posed immediate harm to the lives of the 
Indian citizens and the security of the State led to the enactments of special deterrent laws from time to 
time. Learned Addl. SG also submitted that notably, the repeal of the Prevention of Terrorist Activities Act, 
2002 entailed an absence of a legal framework to address the menace of terrorism. Accordingly, as a 
consequence, the UA(P)A was amended to include a definition of the term ‘terrorism’ and to give 
substantive powers to the Indian State to address the same. The amendments made therein were made also 
keeping in mind India's commitments under the Security Council Resolution dated 28" September, 200], 
which enjoined to fight both terrorism as well as terror funding, which was to be treated as a genus of 
terrorism. The amendments were in furtherance of the global fight against terrorism. 


84. In view of the aforesaid, learned Addl. SG submitted that it is evident that the provisions of 
UA(P)A have been enacted by the Parliament which had the legislative competence to enact the same and 
that once it is clear that the Parliament had the legislative competence to enact the law, there is a 
presumption of constitutionality in favour of the statute. It is further submitted that there is always 
presumption of constitutional validity of the statute and it is presumed that the Legislature understands the 
needs of the people. Learned Addl. SG submitted that an organization can be banned solely based on the 
opinion of the Central Government and, therefore, the challenge to Chapter II of UA(P)A has already been 
repelled by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in paras 84 -92 of Arup Bhuyan v. State of Assam (2023) 8 SCC 
745. In para 90 of this judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under: 


“90. Thus from the aforesaid it can be seen that before any organization is declared unlawful a 
detailed procedure is required to be followed including the wide publicity and even the right to a 
member of such association to represent before the Tribunal. As observed hereinabove the 
notification issued by the Central Government declaring a particular association unlawful, the 
same is subject to inquiry and approval by the Tribunal as per Section 4. Once that is done and 
despite that a person who is a member of such unlawful association continues to be a member of 
such unlawful association then he has to face the consequences and is subjected to the penal 
provisions as provided under Section ]0 more particularly Section 7/0(9)/() of the UAPA, /967. ? 


85. Learned Addl. SG submitted that from the aforesaid discussion of the Supreme Court, it is clear 
that an organization can be banned solely on the basis of the opinion of the Central Government and 
through the process duly established by the law enacted by the Parliament. On the aspect of standard of 
proof required for the present proceedings, learned Addl. SG submitted that the proceedings before this 
Tribunal are civil in nature and the standard of proof is the standard prescribed by the Supreme Court in 
Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra) and the matter has to be decided by objectively examining which version is 
more acceptable and credible. In this regard, learned Addl. SG has referred to the observation made in para 
30 of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). Learned Addl. SG also argued that the procedure to be followed by 
the Tribunals can be read from the law enacted under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 985. Learned 
Addl. SG then submitted that similarly the Tribunal established under the UA(P)A has been bestowed with 
certain powers and the procedure to be adopted by it under Section 5 read with Section 9 of the said Act. 


86. Learned Addl. SG has also submitted that as per the mandate of section 4 of the UA(P)A, the 
jurisdiction of this Tribunal is to adjudicate whether or not there is sufficient cause available with the 
Central Government to ban the organization in question. Ld. Addl. SG further submitted that any 
procedural irregularities or defects in material adduced before this Tribunal are to be tested by the 
concerned trial court within the parameters of the relevant Evidence Act, 76722 and other relevant laws. 
Learned Addl. SG also submitted that the jurisdiction of this Tribunal is to satisfy itself whether these 
documents can be relied upon to ascertain ‘sufficiency of cause’ and whether the agencies responsible for 
the enforcement of law and order could or could not have ignored the same for recommending suitable 
action under the UA(P)A. 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 27 


87. Learned Addl. SG further submitted that for the purpose of assessing the sufficiency of the cause, 
this Tribunal has to holistically look into the entire materials / incidents and if the material / incidents are 
relatable acts of commission of ‘unlawful activity’, ‘secession’ or ‘cession of a part of the territory of 
India’, on the anvil of preponderance of probability, then the ban is justified and is required to be 
confirmed. Learned Addl. SG submitted that the Central Government has led cogent material and evidence 
to demonstrate that there was sufficient material available with the Central Government to form an opinion 
that JKPFL and its associates were indulging in unlawful activities. Learned Addl. SG submitted that the 
law does not require that the cases which should form the basis of opinion formed by the Central 
Government should be proximate to the date of the decision or there should be ‘X’ number of cases to 
prove an association to be an unlawful association; and that even one case may be sufficient to arrive at a 
conclusion. Learned Addl. SG has submitted that the delay in the investigation will have no bearing in the 
present proceedings as the degree of evidence required before this Tribunal and the adjudication thereon is 
to be based on the principles of preponderance of probabilities. As regards the hostile environment 
prevailing in the territory of Jammu & Kashmir creating hurdles in conclusion of cases against the 
separatist and militants, the learned Addl. SG submitted that as has been stated in the testimony of witness, 
the delay in the investigation and trial has occurred due to extremely hostile environment which prevailed 
in the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir. Learned Addl. SG submitted that from 989 to 206 the 
situation in the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir remained volatile and disturbed due to the 
circumstances created by terrorist groups camouflaged as Separatist Groups/Political Parties or self-styled 
political leaders who instigated and provoked the general public at large against the lawfully established 
governments with the help of foreign state and non-state actors having interests inimical to the interest of 
the country. Learned Addl. SG has submitted that these facts have been referred to in the concurring 
opinion of Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul in para-3 and Epilogue recorded in para 3-35 in the judgment 
Re: Article 370 of the Constitution, reported in 2023 INSC 058 : 2023 SCC Online SC 647. 


88. Learned Addl. SG submitted that the separatist leaders and their activists had created such terror in 
the minds of public that the general public, which even did not support their cause, feared to oppose them 
or to report to the police against various incidents and even feared to depose or give evidence against the 
said separatist leaders, thus, leading to a non-cooperative atmosphere for the police investigating agencies 
in the cases registered against the said separatist organizations or its leaders. Learned Addl. SG also 
submitted that the investigation was further slowed thereafter due to COVID which had brought all the 
routine activities to a standstill and a complete lockdown in the entire nation was imposed. Hence, the 
investigation in the cases registered against the JKPFL in the State of Jammu & Kashmir could not be 
processed at the pace it should have been. 


89. Learned Addl. SG has further submitted that the evidence adduced by the Central Government has 
not been refuted on any ground whatsoever, and as such, in view of non-rebuttal of the evidence adduced 
by the Central Government by any member / erstwhile member of JKPFL opposing the ban, the 
Notification no. 8.0. 44 (E) published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, dated 5 March, 2024, 
declaring the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League (JKPFL) as an ‘unlawful association’ under 
sub-Section () of Section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 967 is liable to be confirmed. 


X. ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION 


90. The Tribunal shall first deal with the claim of privilege raised by the Union of India in view of the 
fact that the documents submitted in a sealed cover by PW 2 have a great bearing on the fundamental 
question as to whether the Central Govt. had sufficient basis/ reasons to declare JKPFL as an unlawful 
association vide Notification no. 44 (E) dt. 5 March 2024. The issue regarding claim of privilege by 
the Central Government in respect of the documents, disclosure whereof is injurious to public interest, is 
specifically envisaged in the UA(P) Rules, 968. Rule 3 of the said UA(P) Rules, is in the following terms: 


53, Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence.—(I) In holding an enquiry under 
sub-section (3) of Section 4 or disposing of any application under sub-section (4) of Section 7 or 
sub-section (8) of Section 8, the Tribunal or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall, subject 
to the provisions of sub-rule (2), follow, as far as practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in 
the Indian Evidence Act, 76/2 (। of 7622, 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, /672 (7 of 7622, 
where any books of account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal or the 
Court of the District Judge by the Central Government and such books of account or other 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


documents are claimed by that Government to be a confidential nature then, the Tribunal or the 
Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall not, -- 


(a) make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the proceedings 
before it; or 


(b) allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books of 
account or other documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings 
before it.” 


9l. It can be seen that the Rule 3 (2) starts with a non-obstante clause providing that notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 872, where any books of account or other documents are 
sought to be produced by the Central Government and these documents are claimed to be of a confidential 
nature, then the Tribunal shall not make such documents a part of the records of the proceedings before it or 
allow inspection of or grant a copy of the same to any person other than the parties to the proceedings 
before it. 


92. Rule 5 of the UA(P) Rules which provides for the documents which should accompany a reference 
to the Tribunal i.e. a copy of the notification and all facts on which grounds specified in the notification are 
based, further provides that nothing in the said Rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any 
fact to the Tribunal which it considers against public interest to disclose. The said rule is in the following 
terms: 


“5. Documents which should accompany a reference to the Tribunal. — Every reference made to 
the Tribunal under sub-section (7) of Section 4 shall be accompanied by — 


(i) a copy of the notification made under sub-section (/) of Section 3, and 
(ii) all the facts on which the grounds specified in the said notification are based: 


Provided that nothing in this rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact 
to the Tribunal which that Government considers against the public interest to disclose.” 


93. The aforementioned provisions and the requirement of maintaining confidentiality of certain 
documents specifically came to be considered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Jamaat-e- 
Islami Hind (supra), wherein it was held as under: 


“22. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine in 
nature and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued 
confidentiality in public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such information, 
and, may be, also full particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. The scheme of 
the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder provide for 
maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in public interest. However, the non-disclosure 
of sensitive information and evidence to the association and its office-bearers, whenever justified in 
public interest, does not necessarily imply its non-disclosure to the Tribunal as well. In such cases 
where the Tribunal is satisfied that non-disclosure of such information to the association or its 
office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non-disclosure to the association or its office- 
bearers, but in order to perform its task of adjudication as required by the Act, the Tribunal can 
look into the same for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and satisfying 
itself that it can safely act on the same. In such a situation, the Tribunal can devise a suitable 
procedure whereby it can itself examine and test the credibility of such material before it decides to 
accept the same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the association to be 
unlawful. The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a 
procedure would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in 
controversy after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without 
abdicating its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a course 
would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each 
case, while protecting the rights of the association and its members, without jeopardising the 
public interest. This would also ensure that the process of adjudication is not denuded of its content 
and the decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by it on all points in controversy 
after adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion already formed by the Central 
Government. 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 29 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer the United States Supreme Court, 
in a case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum requirements to be followed, as under: (L Ed 
pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They include 
(a) written notice of the claimed violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of 
evidence against him; (c) opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and 
documentary evidence; (व) the right to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses 
(unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing confrontation); 
(e) a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a traditional parole board, members of 
which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement by the 
factfinders as to the evidence relied on and reasons for revoking parole. We emphasise 
there is no thought to equate this second stage of parole revocation to a criminal 
prosecution in any sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the process should be flexible enough to 
consider evidence including letters, affidavits, and other material that would not be 
admissible in an adversary criminal trial.” 


24. In Paul Ivan Birzon v. Edward S. King placing reliance on Morrissey, while dealing with a 
similar situation, when confidential information had to be acted on, it was indicated that the 
credibility issue could be resolved by the Board retaining confidentiality of the information but 
assessing the credibility itself, and a modified procedure was indicated as under: 


“ec 


. the board was required to decide whether it would believe the informants or the 
parolee and his witnesses. The infirmity that we see in the hearing and determination by 
the parole board is that it resolved the credibility issue solely on the basis of the State 
report, without itself taking the statements from the informants. Thus the board had no way 
of knowing how reliable the informants were and had no real basis on which to resolve the 
credibility issue against the parolee... 


We do not mean to intimate that the board should have taken testimony from the 
informants at the hearing and given the parolee the opportunity to cross-examine. What we 
do mean is that the board should have received the information directly from the 
informants (although not necessarily in the presence of the parolee), instead of relying 
solely on the State report. The board could then have reached its own conclusions about 
the relative reliability of the informants' statements and those of the parolee and his 
witnesses. 


Similarly, the board could then have made its own decision about how realistic were the 
claims of potential danger to the informants or to State parole officers if their identity was 
disclosed, instead of placing exclusive reliance on the State report. Thus, we hold that, in 
relying exclusively on the written synopsis in the State report, which was the only evidence 
of a parole violation, in the face of the parolee's denial and his presentation of the 
testimony of other witnesses, the revocation of Satz's parole was fundamentally unfair to 
him and was a denial of due process of law.”’ 


25. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its source, in 
public interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the confidential 
information for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the conflicting evidence of 
the other side. This modified procedure satisfies the minimum requirements of natural justice and 
also retains the basic element of an adjudicatory process which involves objective determination of 
the factual basis of the action taken. 


26. An authorised restriction saved by Article 74) का the freedom conferred by 
Article /9(7)(2) of the Constitution has to be reasonable. In this statute, provision is made for the 
notification to become effective on its confirmation by a Tribunal constituted by a sitting High 
Court Judge, on adjudication, after a show-cause notice to the association, that sufficient cause 
exists for declaring it to be unlawful. The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a 
show-cause notice, of existence of sufficient cause to justify the declaration must necessarily imply 
and import into the inquiry, the minimum requirement of natural justice to ensure that the decision 
of the Tribunal is its own opinion, formed on the entire available material, and not a mere 


30 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


94. 


imprimatur of the Tribunal affixed to the opinion of the Central Government. Judicial scrutiny 
implies a fair procedure to prevent the vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure 
in a given case, would depend on the materials constituting the factual foundation of the 
notification and the manner in which the Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to be 
determined by the Tribunal keeping in view the nature of its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of 
natural justice, the fact that the materials in such matters are not confined to legal evidence in the 
strict sense, and that the scrutiny is not a criminal trial. The Tribunal should form its opinion on all 
the points in controversy after assessing for itself the credibility of the material relating to it, even 
though it may not be disclosed to the association, if the public interest so requires. 


27. It follows that, ordinarily, the material on which the Tribunal can place reliance for deciding 
the existence of sufficient cause to support the declaration, must be of the kind which is capable of 
judicial scrutiny. In this context, the claim of privilege on the ground of public interest by the 
Central Government would be permissible and the Tribunal is empowered to devise a procedure by 
which it can satisfy itself of the credibility of the material without disclosing the same to the 
association, when public interest so requires. The requirements of natural justice can be suitably 
modified by the Tribunal to examine the material itself in the manner it considers appropriate, to 
assess its credibility without disclosing the same to the association. This modified procedure would 
satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice and judicial scrutiny. The decision would then 
be that of the Tribunal itself.” 


The High Court of Andhra Pradesh in Deendar Anjuman v. Government of India, 200! SCC 


OnLine AP 663 after applying the test laid down in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), upheld the ban imposed 
and further held that the entire material available on record itself need not be published or made available to 
the aggrieved person but what is required is disclosure of reasons and the grounds. Relevant extract of the 
said judgment is as under: 


#॥9, The expression “for reasons to be stated in writing” did not necessarily mean that the entire 
material available on record itself is to be published or made available to the aggrieved person. 
What is required is disclosure of reasons. The grounds must be disclosed. The notification issued 
under sub-section (7) of Section 3 alone is required to be referred to the Tribunal “for the purpose of 
adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” The 
Tribunal after such reference is required to issue notice to the affected association to show cause, 
why the association should not be declared unlawful. The Tribunal is required to hold an enquiry in 
the manner specified in Section 9 and after calling for such further information as it may consider 
necessary from the Central Government or from the association and then decide whether or not there 
is sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. The Tribunal is require “to 
adjudicate whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” As held 
by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind v. Union of India, the Tribunal is required to weigh 
the material on which the notification under sub-section (/) of Sec. 3 is issued by the Central 
Government after taking into account the cause shown by the Association in reply to the notice 
issued to it and by taking into consideration such further information which it may call for, to decide 
the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the action to be unlawful. The Tribunal is required to 
objectively determine the points in controversy. The Supreme Court further held that subject to non- 
disclosure of information which the Central Government considers to be against the public interest 
to disclose, all information and evidence relied on by the Central Government to support the 
declaration made by it of an association to be unlawful, has to be disclosed to the association to 
enable it to show cause against the same. The Tribunal is entitled to ascertain the credibility of 
conflicting evidence relating to the points in controversy. It is observed by the Supreme Court: 


“To satisfy the minimum requirements of a proper adjudication, it is necessary that the 
Tribunal should have the means to ascertain the credibility of conflicting evidence relating 
to the points in controversy. Unless such a means is available to the Tribunal to determine 
the credibility of the material before it, it cannot choose between conflicting material and 
decide which one to prefer and accept. In such a situation, the only option to it would be to 
accept the opinion of the Central Government, without any means to test the credibility of 
the material on which it is based. The adjudication made would cease to be an objective 
determination and be meaningless, equating the process with mere acceptance of the ipse 
dixit of the Central Government. The requirement of adjudication by the Tribunal 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3] 


95. 


96. 


contemplated under the Act does not permit abdication of its function by the Tribunal to 
the Central Government providing merely its stamp of approval to the opinion of the 
Central Government. The procedure to be followed by the Tribunal must, therefore, be 
such which enables the Tribunal to itself assess the credibility of conflicting material on 
any point in controversy and evolve a process by which it can decide whether to accept the 
version of the Central Government or to reject it in the light of the other view asserted by 
the association. The difficulty in this sphere is likely to arise in relation to the evidence of 
material in respect of which the Central Government claims non-disclosure on the ground 
of public interest.” 


20. It is, therefore, evident that disclosure of all the facts and material available on record subject to 
the claim of any privilege in this regard by the Central Government is only after the reference of the 
notification issued under sub-section (7) of Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal for the purpose of 
adjudication whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful. The 
material available on record may have to be revealed to the association or its members. In a case 
wherever any privilege is claimed, the Tribunal has to examine the material itself in the manner it 
considers appropriate, to assess its credibility without disclosing the same to the association. 
Therefore, there is no requirement to disclose the material itself and publish the same in the 
notification or provide to the association along with the notification issued in exercise of the power 
under proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 3 declaring the association to be unlawful with immediate 
effect. The requirement is disclosure of additional reasons and grounds and not the material. The 
notification issued in exercise of the power under proviso to sub-sec. (3) of Section 3 cannot be set 
aside on the ground that the material relied upon for stating the reasons is not communicated to the 
association concerned declaring it to be an unlawful association with immediate effect. Such 
notification would become vulnerable only when the reasons are not notified: The record should 
contain the reasons in writing and the same is required to be revealed and published in the 
notification or communicated to the association concerned. Such reasons are required to be distinct 
and different and cannot be the same for imposing ban under Section 3 of the Act. The reasons are 
required to be communicated but not the entire material. Disclosure of the material is only after 
reference of the notification issued under Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal.” 


The legal position which thus emerges can be succinctly put in the following terms: 


i. The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed 
thereunder contemplates maintenance of confidentiality whenever required in public 
interest; 


ii. The Tribunal can look into the confidential material without the same being disclosed to 
the association or its office-bearers, for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the 
information and satisfying itself that the same is reliable; 


iii. The Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure for itself for examining and testing the 
credibility of such material; 


iv. The requirement of natural justice can be suitably modified by the Tribunal in the manner 
it considers appropriate for the purpose of assessing/examining the confidential 
material/documents, and arriving at a conclusion based on a perusal thereof. 


Further, the rigors prescribed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of $.P. Gupta (supra) have 


to be read in the context of the provisions of the UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder. In particular, it 
needs to be borne in mind that Rule 3() of the UA(P) Rules, 968 expressly provides that in holding any 
inquiry under Sub-Section (3) of Section 4 of the UA(P)A, the Tribunal shall follow “as far as 
practicable”, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act. Thus, the rigors that have been 
contemplated in the context of Section 23 of the Indian Evidence Act, cannot ipso-facto be made 
applicable to these proceedings. The legislative intent in making the provisions of the Evidence Act 
applicable only “as far as practicable” is evident from the nature of these proceedings. The proceedings 
before this Tribunal do not contemplate a full-fledged trial; rather the proceedings are in the nature of an 
“inquiry” as referred to in section 4(3) of the UA(P)A. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


97. The present proceedings are time-bound and as laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the 
case of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), an appropriate procedure has to be devised/tailored by this Tribunal 
for the purpose of its inquiry. As such, any claim seeking privilege has to be assessed in terms of the in- 
built mechanism as provided under the UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder and the Tribunal is 
mandated to grant privilege from disclosure where it finds that the disclosure would be against/injurious to 
public interest. Thus, the nature of the documents has to be assessed by the Tribunal to see whether it 
contains any sensitive information, disclosure of which would be against public interest. 


98. On perusal of the documents submitted by the Central Government in a sealed cover, it is found 
that the same contains intelligence reports, secret information collected from time to time by the 
investigating and intelligence agencies, notes/memos prepared by the investigating and intelligence 
agencies, information revealed on investigation including information as to the clandestine nature of the 
activities of the concerned association and its office-bearers and linkage of the association and its office- 
bearers with separatist/terror organizations and individuals outside of India. 


99. This Tribunal finds from the perusal of the sealed cover documents that the disclosure of these 
documents would be detrimental to the larger public interest and security of the State. One of the 
documents which is contained in the sealed cover, is a note prepared for consideration of the Cabinet 
Committee on Security, which contains sensitive information about activities of the Association and its 
inimical impact on national security. Clearly, the nature of these documents is such that it would be in 
public interest and in the interest of the security of the State to maintain confidentiality as regard thereto. It 
is also to be noted that the claim for privilege has been expressly stated by the concerned witness from the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (PW - 2) to be based on a specific approval/direction of the Union Home 
Secretary (Head of the Department). The said position is also borne out from the relevant official/noting 
files shared with this Tribunal. In the circumstances, this Tribunal allows the claim for privilege in respect 
of the documents submitted in a sealed cover by the concerned witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Consequently, the Tribunal has proceeded to peruse the said documents, as contemplated in the Judgment 
of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra) and to assess the credibility thereof and the 
implications flowing therefrom for the purpose of the present inquiry. 


00. Adverting now to the aspect of sufficiency of material for declaring JKPFL as an unlawful 
association, on the basis of the material placed on record and the evidence adduced by the Central 
Government, this Tribunal finds sufficient cause for declaring the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom 
League (‘JKPFL’) as an unlawful association, for the reasons contained in the following paras. 


0l. The notification dated 5" March, 2024 issued under Section 3(l) of the Act inter alia mentions 
that (i) the members of the JKPFL have been at the fore-front of the secessionist activities in Jammu and 
Kashmir; (ii) the leaders or members of the JKPFL have scant respect towards the constitutional authority 
and constitutional set-up of the country; (iii) JKPFL and its leaders or members, particularly, its Chairman 
Farooq Rehmani, have been indulging in unlawful activities, which are prejudicial to the integrity, 
sovereignty, security and communal harmony of the country; (iv) there are linkages between JKPFL with 
banned terrorist organizations; and (v) JKPFL and its cadres have been involved in fund mobilisation for 
carrying terrorist and unlawful activities aimed at the sovereignty and integrity of India. 


02. The above grounds/justification cited in the notification issued under section 3() of the UA(P) Act 
is borne out from the extensive evidence adduced by the Central Government. The said evidence can be 
broadly categorized into 2 categories: 


i. Evidence adduced by a senior police officer from the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir; 
and 


ii. Evidence in the form of documents/material submitted in a sealed cover before this Tribunal. 


Evidence adduced by officer from the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 


03. A senior police officer from the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir (79७]) has deposed as 
regards the litany of incidents involving JKPFL. The same clearly brings out that the concerned association 
and its chief protagonist Farooq Rehmani has been relentlessly indulging in “unlawful activities”. The 
incidents with regard to which sufficiently weighty evidence has been adduced, inter alia involves: 


i. raising anti-India and pro-Pakistan slogans (evidence of ?५४-।); 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 33 


li. Carrying out terrorist acts in Jammu & Kashmir (evidence of ?7४७-।); 
iii. undermining the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India (evidence of ?५७४-), 


iv. instigating the general public intending to cause disaffection against India (evidence of 
?५५७-।) 


04. On ३ cumulative consideration of the various incidents/activities which are subject matters of the 
various FIR’s with regard to which the aforesaid evidence has been led, it is evident that JKPFL has been 
indulging in “unlawful activities” and has posed a grave threat to the law and order situation in Jammu and 
Kashmir since the last several decades. Although it is true that the trial and investigation respectively in the 
FIRs (with regard to which PW-I has deposed) has been protracted, learned Addl. SG has sought to 
emphasise that the same was on account of hostile environment prevailing in Jammu and Kashmir over a 
long period of time. However, what is of relevance to this Tribunal is the clear pattern that is discernible as 
regards the nature of activities of the concerned association and its office bearers. The pattern of conduct is 
to incessantly encourage secession of Jammu and Kashmir, questioning or seeking to disrupt the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of India, inciting the people of Jammu and Kashmir to take resort to 
violence and to disrupt peace in the region of Jammu and Kashmir. These activities continued unabated for 
a long period of time and it is only in the last few years (in the aftermath of the Jammu & Kashmir Re- 
organisation Act, 209) that there has been a lull in the activities of the JKPFL, as is evident from the 
reduced instances of violence/disruption of law and order. 


05. This Tribunal also takes note of the fact that the senior police officer from the UT of Jammu and 
Kashmir, who has deposed before this Tribunal as PW |, during the course of his examination, strenuously 
emphasized on his own personal knowledge derived during the course of discharge of his official functions 
that JKPFL and its leaders and members have been: 


lil. incessantly encouraging and advocating claims for secession of Jammu and 
Kashmir from the Union of India and have been inciting the local population; 


iv. promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the integrity and 
security of the country; 


v. tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the 
territory of Jammu and Kashmir on religious lines and have sought to escalate the 
separatist movement. 


06. The compelling testimony of the senior police officer from Jammu and Kashmir cannot be 
disregarded. More importantly, the aforesaid evidence remains unrebutted by the concerned association/ its 
office bearers. At every stage of these proceedings, a right was afforded to the concerned association/its 
members and any other interested party in the matter to appear before this Tribunal and cross-examine the 
concerned officers who have deposed before this Tribunal, or to adduce its own evidence in rebuttal. 
However, the said opportunity has not been availed. 


Evidence in the form of documents/material submitted in a sealed cover before this Tribunal 


07. As noted hereinabove, the documents submitted by PW 2 who has deposed on behalf of the Central 
Government, inter alia, includes reports of intelligence agencies, the note prepared for the Cabinet 
Committee on Security setting out the entire background of JKPFL and its activities based on the 
information collated by the intelligence agencies and also bringing out linkage of JK PFL with cross-border 
agencies/establishments, and inputs received from the Criminal Investigation Department, Jammu and 
Kashmir. 


08. A perusal of the said documents has brought out in vivid detail the terrorist and secessionist 
activities of JKPFL in close coordination with inimical elements in Pakistan. The systematic attempts to 
promote secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the territory of India, to undermine the sovereignty of 
India, to incite the local populace and to promote violence have been brought out in the said 
material/documents. 


CONCLUSION 


09. ‘From the elaborate material/evidence placed on record in these proceedings, this Tribunal finds that 
there is ample justification to declare JKPFL as an unlawful association under the UA(P)A. Moreover, 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


given the nature of activities of the association, the Central Government was justified in taking recourse to 
the proviso to section 3(3) of the UA(P)A. As noticed hereinabove, the activities of the concerned 
association have had a deleterious effect on maintenance of law and order in the region of Jammu and 
Kashmir continuously over the last so many years. The modicum of stability that has come about after 209 
(as is evident from the reduced number of unconducive incidents) cannot be allowed to be jeopardized on 
account of continuing activities of the concerned association. In the framework of the Indian Constitution 
and the UA(P)A, there is no space for an association like the JKPFL which openly propagates 
secessionism, avowedly expresses dis-allegiance to the Constitution of India, and undermines the territorial 
integrity and sovereignty of India. 


l0. Thus, this Tribunal having followed the procedure laid down in the Unlawful Activities Prevention 
Act, 967 and its Rules and having independently and objectively appreciated and evaluated the material 
and evidence on record, is of the firm and considered view that there is sufficient cause for declaring 
JKPFL as an unlawful association under section 3() of the UA(P)A, 967, vide the notification dated 57 
March, 2024. Thus, an order is passed under section 4 (3) of the UA(P)A, 967 confirming the declaration 
made in the notification bearing no. S.O. 44 (E) published in the official gazette on 5™ March, 2024 
issued under section 3 (l) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 967. 


(JUSTICE NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA) 
UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL 


September 4", 2024.” 
[F. No. 407/55/2024-NI-MFO] 
ABHIJIT SINHA, Jt. Secy. 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-0064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-0054.  saavesu kumar’? 


SRIVASTAVA 


