रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल० -(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


JN क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-13082025-265388 
CG-DL-E-13082025-265388 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं" 15] नई दिल्‍ली, मंगलवार, अगस्त 12, 2025/श्रावण 21, 1947 (शक) 
No. 15] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 2025/SRAVANA 21, 1947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 12th August, 2025:— 


Bill No. 107 of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code Short title and 
(Amendment) Act, 2025 commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 


Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this 
Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall 
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Amendment of 
section 5. 


Amendment of 
section 7. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In section 3 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act),— 


(a) in clause (3/), the following Explanation shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


“Explanation —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified 
that the security interest shall exist only if it creates a right, title or 
interest or a claim to a property pursuant to an agreement or 
arrangement, by the act of two or more parties, and shall not include a 
security interest created merely by operation of any law for the time 
being in force;”; 


(b) after clause (31), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(31A) “service provider” means an insolvency professional, 
insolvency professional agency, information utility registered with the 
Board, and any person falling within the category of persons notified by 
the Central Government, for rendering services in relation to insolvency 
and bankruptcy processes under the Code and is registered with the 
Board;’. 


3. In section 5 of the principal Act,— 


(a) clause (2A) shall be re-numbered as clause (22) thereof and before 


clause (2B) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


‘(2A) “avoidance transaction” means a transaction as referred to in 
sections 43, 45, 49 and 50;’; 


(5) after clause (9), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(9A) “fraudulent or wrongful trading” means the fraudulent or 
wrongful trading as referred to in section 66;’; 


(c) in clause (//), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that where multiple applications for initiation of the 
corporate insolvency resolution process in respect of a corporate debtor 
are pending before the Adjudicating Authority on the insolvency 
commencement date, the initiation date shall be the date on which the 
first such application was made before the Adjudicating Authority.”; 


(व) in clause (26), in the Explanation, for the words “merger, 


amalgamation and demerger”, the words “merger, amalgamation, demerger 
and sale of one or more assets of the corporate debtor” shall be substituted; 


(e) in clause (28), after the words “owed by the corporate debtor” 


occurring at the end, the words “to the members of the committee of creditors 
who are eligible to vote” shall be inserted. 


4. In section 7 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (4), the proviso shall be omitted; 


(6) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


“(5) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within fourteen days of the 
receipt of the application under sub-section (2), by an order— 


(a) admit the application, if it is satisfied that a default has 
occurred and the application under sub-section (2) is complete, and 
there is no disciplinary proceeding pending against the proposed 
resolution professional; or 


31 of 2016. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(5) reject the application, if it is satisfied that a default has 
not occurred or the application under sub-section (2) is incomplete 
or a disciplinary proceeding is pending against the proposed 
resolution professional: 


Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before 
rejecting the application under clause (b) of this sub-section, give 
a notice to the applicant to rectify the defect in his application 
within seven days from the date of receipt of such notice from the 
Adjudicating Authority: 


Provided further that if the Adjudicating Authority has not 
passed an order under this sub-section within a period of fourteen 
days from the date of receipt of the application under 
sub-section (2), it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing. 


Explanation \.—For the purposes of this sub-section, it is 
hereby clarified that where the requirements under clause (a) have 
been complied with, no other ground shall be considered to reject 
an application filed under this section. 


Explanation \.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
clarified that where a record of default in respect of a financial debt 
owed to a financial institution recorded with the information utility 
has been furnished along with the application filed by such 
financial institution under this section, such record shall be 
considered sufficient for the Adjudicating Authority to ascertain 
the existence of default under this section.”. 
5. In section 9 of the principal Act,— Amendment of 
section 9. 
(a) in sub-section (3), in clause (e), for the words “such other 
information, as may be prescribed”, the words “any other information, as may 
be specified” shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (5), after the existing proviso, the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided further that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed 
an order under this sub-section within a period of fourteen days from the 
date of receipt of application under sub-section (2), it shall record the 
reasons for such delay in writing.”. 
6. In section 10 of the principal Act,— Sone ला 
section 10. 


(a) in sub-section (3),— 


(i) in clause (a), for the words “for such period as may be 
specified;”’, the words “and any other information, as may be specified; 
and” shall be substituted; 


(ii) clause (0) shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (4),— 


(7) in clause (a), the words “and no disciplinary proceeding is 
pending against the proposed resolution professional” shall be omitted; 


(ii) in clause (0), the words “or any disciplinary proceeding is 
pending against the proposed resolution professional” shall be omitted; 


(iii) after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


Amendment of 
section 11. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 12A. 
Withdrawal of 
application 
admitted under 
section 7, 9 or 
10. 


Amendment of 
section 14. 


Amendment of 
section 16. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


“Provided further that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed 
an order under this sub-section within a period of fourteen days from the 
date of receipt of the application under sub-section (2), it shall record the 
reasons for such delay in writing.” 


7. In section 11 of the principal Act, in clause (ba), after the words, figures 
and letter “under Chapter III-A”, the words, figures and letter “or Chapter IV-A” 
shall be inserted. 


8. For section 12A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“12A. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), the Adjudicating Authority may 
allow the withdrawal of an application admitted under section 7, 9 or 10, on 
an application made by the resolution professional, with the approval of 
ninety per cent. voting share of the committee of creditors in such manner 
as may be specified. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 
force, an application admitted under section 7, 9 or 10 shall not be withdrawn— 


(a) before the constitution of the committee of creditors under 
sub-section (/) of section 21; and 


(6) after the first invitation for submission of a resolution plan has 
been issued by the resolution professional. 


(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (/) 
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the application: 


Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order 
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing.”. 


9. In section 14 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words, brackets and figures “‘sub-sections (2) 
and (3)’, the words, brackets, figures and letter “sub-sections (2), (2A) and (3)” 
shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (3), in clause (0), the following Explanation shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified 
that the provisions of sub-section (/) shall also apply where the surety 
seeks to initiate or continue any action or proceedings against the 
corporate debtor pursuant to a contract of guarantee.”. 


10. In section 16 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) Where the application for corporate insolvency resolution 
process is made by a financial creditor, the resolution professional, as 
proposed in the application under section 7, shall be appointed as the 
interim resolution professional, if no disciplinary proceedings are 
pending against him.”; 


(6) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(3A) Where an application for the corporate insolvency resolution 
process is made under section 10, the Adjudicating Authority shall make 
a reference to the Board for the recommendation of an insolvency 
professional who may act as an interim resolution professional.”’; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(c) in sub-section (4), after the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (3)”, 
the words, brackets, figure and letter “or sub-section (3A), as the case may be,” 
shall be inserted. 
11. In section 18 of the principal Act, in clause (b),— +परालाएगदा। oF 
section 18. 
(a) after the words “submitted by creditors to him’, the words “in such 
manner as may be specified” shall be inserted; 


(b) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified 
that the interim resolution professional, while collating the claims, 
shall verify them, and, if required, determine the value of such 
verified claims.”. 
12. In section 19 of the principal Act,— Seat 
section 19. 
(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “Personnel”, the word 
“Persons” shall be substituted; 


(6) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(1) Any person who is or has been a personnel of the corporate 
debtor or its promoter or associated with the management of the 
corporate debtor, or engaged in a contract for service with the corporate 
debtor, shall extend all assistance and cooperation to the interim 
resolution professional as may be required by him for the purposes of 
managing the affairs of the corporate debtor or performing the duties 
conferred on him under this Chapter.”’; 


(c) in sub-section (2), for the words “any personnel of the corporate 
debtor, its promoter”, the words, brackets and figure “any person referred to 
in sub-section (/)” shall be substituted. 


(d) in sub-section (3)— 


(i) for the words “direct such personnel’, the words, brackets and 
figure “direct such person referred to in sub-section (/)” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) for the words “resolution professional”, the words “interim 
resolution professional” shall be substituted; 


(e) after sub-section (3), the following Explanation shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Explanation —For the purposes of this section, it is hereby 
clarified that references to the interim resolution professional shall also 
include references to the resolution professional.” 


13. In section 21 of the principal Act, after sub-section (/0), the following Amendment of 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely: — ene 


“(11) Where the liquidation process of the corporate debtor is initiated 
under Chapter II, the committee of creditors constituted under this section 
shall also supervise the conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator, 
and the provisions of this section and section 24 shall apply to such liquidation 
process under Chapter II as the context may require: 


Provided that the Board may specify any other class or classes of 
creditors, who may attend the meetings of the committee of creditors during 
liquidation process, but shall not have any right to vote in such meetings. 


Amendment of 
section 22. 


Amendment of 
section 25. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 26. 


Application in 
respect of certain 
transactions or 
trading not to 
affect processes. 


Insertion of new 
section 28A. 


Transfer of 
assets of 
guarantor of 
corporate debtor 
during process. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Explanation —For the purposes of Chapter III, it is hereby declared that 
the provisions of sub-section (//) of this section, section 34A and 
sub-section (2) of section 35, as amended by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall apply to— 


(a) the liquidation process of a corporate debtor initiated after the 
date of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2025; and 


(0) the ongoing liquidation process of a corporate debtor as on such 
date of commencement, where the liquidator has not made an application 
under section 54, for which the committee of creditors shall continue for 
the remainder of the liquidation process.”. 


14. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (a), for the 
words “it shall communicate its decision to the interim resolution professional, the 
corporate debtor and the Adjudicating Authority”, the words “such person shall be 
deemed to be appointed as the resolution professional from the date of such 
resolution, and this decision shall be communicated to the interim resolution 
professional, the corporate debtor, and the Board” shall be substituted. 


15. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (४), the 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Q) file an application to the Adjudicating Authority in respect of 
an avoidance transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading, if any; and”. 


16. For section 26 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“26. The filing of an application in respect of an avoidance transaction 
or fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47, shall not affect the 
proceedings of the corporate insolvency resolution process or the liquidation 
process, as the case may be. 


Explanation —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 
completion of the corporate insolvency resolution process or the liquidation 
process shall not affect the continuation of proceedings in respect of an 
avoidance transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47, 
as the case may be.”. 


17. After section 28 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“28A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or any other 
law for the time being in force, where a creditor of the corporate debtor has 
taken possession of an asset of a personal guarantor or corporate guarantor of 
the corporate debtor by enforcing its security interest over such asset under 
any law for the time being in force which empowers the creditor to transfer 
the asset, the creditor may, during the corporate insolvency resolution process 
of the corporate debtor, permit the transfer of such an asset as part of its 
insolvency resolution with prior approval of the committee of creditors in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified: 


Provided that where the corporate guarantor is undergoing a corporate 
insolvency resolution process or the liquidation process, transfer of the asset 
under this sub-section shall take place upon approval of the committee of 
creditors of the corporate guarantor, by a vote of not less than sixty-six per 
cent. of the voting share, and the amount received pursuant to the transfer shall 
form part of the corporate insolvency resolution process or the liquidation 
estate of the corporate guarantor, as the case may be: 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


Provided further that during the liquidation process of the corporate 
guarantor, the approval of the committee of creditors under the first proviso is 
required only where the creditor has relinquished such asset to the liquidation 
estate under section 52: 


Provided also that where the personal guarantor is undergoing an 
insolvency resolution process or the bankruptcy process and the creditor has 
forfeited or surrendered his right in relation to an asset, the transfer of such 
asset under this sub-section shall take place upon approval by a majority of 
more than three-fourths in value of the creditors of the personal guarantor, and 
the amount received pursuant to the transfer shall form part of the insolvency 
resolution process or the bankruptcy process of the personal guarantor, as the 
case may be. 


(2) The transfer of an asset referred to in sub-section (/) under a 
resolution plan shall vest in the transferee all rights in, or in relation to the 
asset, as if the transfer had been made by the owner of such asset. 


(3) The amount received pursuant to the transfer of the asset shall be 
adjusted towards the amount of debt owed by the guarantor in accordance with 
the applicable law, subject to any costs, charges and expenses incurred in 
respect of the preservation and protection of the asset before its transfer, and 
where such amount is more than the debt owed, the surplus shall be paid to 
the guarantor.” 


18. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— Amendment of 
section 30. 


(a) in clause (6), in the long line, the portion beginning with “, and 
provides for the payment of debts of financial creditors”, and ending with 
“liquidation of the corporate debtor’ shall be omitted. 


(b) after clause (0), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ba) provides for the payment of debts of the financial creditors, 
who do not vote in favour of the resolution plan, in such manner as may 
be specified, which shall not be less than the lower of the amount— 


(7) to be paid to such creditors in the event of a liquidation of 
the corporate debtor under section 53; or 


(zi) that would have been paid to such creditors, if the amount to 
be distributed under the resolution plan had been distributed, in 
accordance with the order of priority in sub-section (/) of section 53, 


as the case may be. 


Explanation 1.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified 
that a distribution in accordance with the provisions of this clause shall 
be fair and equitable to such creditors. 


Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, it is hereby 
declared that the provisions of this sub-section as amended by the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall not 
apply to the corporate insolvency resolution process where any of the 
following acts have first occurred,— 


(i) the committee of creditors has approved a resolution plan 
under sub-section (4) of section 30; 


(ii) the committee of creditors has approved intimation to the 
Adjudicating Authority to initiate the liquidation under 
sub-section (2) of section 33; or 


(iii) the Adjudicating Authority has passed a liquidation 
order under sub-section (/) of section 33, 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


as the case may be, on and before the date of commencement of the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025;”. 


(2) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(d) provides for the implementation and supervision of the 
resolution plan, and provides for the constitution of a committee for this 
purpose, subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be 
specified;”. 


Amendment of 19. In section 31 of the principal Act,— 
section 31. 
(a) in sub-section (/), after the existing proviso, the following proviso 


shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided further that the Adjudicating Authority may, on an 
application made by the resolution professional, with the approval of the 
committee of creditors, by a vote of not less than sixty-six per cent. of 
the voting share, in such form and manner, and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified, first approve the implementation of the 
resolution plan and thereafter approve the manner of distribution 
provided therein within a period of thirty days from the date of approval 
of implementation of such resolution plan.”; 


(5) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the Adjudicating Authority may, before rejecting 
the resolution plan, give notice to the committee of creditors to rectify 
any defects in the resolution plan.”; 


(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(2A) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under 
sub-section (/) or (2), within a period of thirty days from the date of 
receipt of the resolution plan: 


Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order 
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing.”; 


(d) in sub-section (4), in the proviso, for the words “prior to the approval 
of such resolution plan by the committee of creditors”, the words, brackets and 
figures “before the resolution plan is submitted to the Adjudicating Authority 
under sub-section (6) of section 30” shall be substituted; 


(e) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force and subject to sub-section (6), where a resolution 
plan has been approved under sub-section (/), a licence, permit, 
registration, quota, concession, clearances or a similar grant or right 
given by the Central Government, State Government, local authority, 
sectoral regulator or any other authority constituted under any other law 
for the time being in force, associated with such resolution plan, shall 
not be suspended or terminated during the subsistence of the remaining 
period of such grants or rights, if the corporate debtor or, if applicable, 
the person whose resolution plan is approved under sub-section (J), 
complies with the obligations in respect of the remaining period of such 
grants or rights. 


(6) Where the Adjudicating Authority approves the resolution plan 
under sub-section (/),— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(a) unless otherwise provided in the resolution plan, any 
claim, against the corporate debtor and its assets under any other 
law for the time being in force, prior to the date of approval, shall 
be extinguished; and 


(6) no proceedings shall be continued or instituted against 
the corporate debtor or its assets on the basis of such claims, 
including proceedings for assessment of the claims. 


Explanation |—For the purposes of this section, it is hereby 
clarified that nothing in this section shall affect a claim or any 
proceeding in respect of a person who was a promoter or in the 
management or control of the corporate debtor, a guarantor of the 
corporate debtor or any person having a joint liability or a joint and 
several liability with the corporate debtor, as the case may be. 


Explanation I1.—For the purposes of this section, it is hereby 
clarified that if a person has a joint liability or a joint and several 
liability with the corporate debtor for payment of debt owed to a 
creditor before the approval of resolution plan, and such person 
makes a payment for such debt after the approval of the resolution 
plan, then any right of such person to be indemnified by the 
corporate debtor shall be extinguished.” 


20. In section 33 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(7) in clause (a), the words and figures “or the fast-track corporate 


insolvency resolution process under section 56” shall be omitted; 


(ii) in clause (b),— 


(J) in sub-clause (7), after the words “in liquidation,”, the 
word “and” shall be omitted; 


(77) after sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(iv) subject to the provisions of section 52, declare a 
moratorium for the purposes referred to in clauses (a) and (c) 
of sub-section (/) read with sub-section (3) of section 14, 
which shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the proceedings 
under this Chapter: 


Provided that provisions of this sub-clause shall not 
apply to legal proceedings in relation to such transactions as 
may be notified by the Central Government in consultation 
with any financial sector regulator or any other authority; and 


(v) pass an order appointing a liquidator for the 
liquidation process in accordance with section 34.”; 


(6) after sub-section (/), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“([A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (J), 


where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the grounds mentioned 
in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (/) of this section exist, it shall, 
before passing the liquidation order, consider an application made by the 
committee of creditors, in such manner and subject to such conditions as 
may be specified, by not less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, 
for restoring the corporate insolvency resolution process, and after 
considering such application, it may, by an order— 


Amendment of 
section 33. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(a) if the ground mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (/) 
exists, restore the corporate insolvency resolution process to be 
completed within such duration as it deems fit, but not exceeding 
one hundred and twenty days; or 


(0) if the ground mentioned in clause (6) of sub-section (/) 
exists,— 


(i) restore the corporate insolvency resolution process 
to the stage of invitation for submission of a resolution plan, 
which shall be completed in such manner and subject to such 
conditions as specified; and 


(ii) provide the duration for completion of such 
restored corporate insolvency resolution process as it deems 
fit, but not exceeding one hundred and twenty days. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this section, it is 
hereby declared that on and from the date of 
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2025, the provisions of 
sub-sections (/A) and (/B) shall also apply to the corporate 
insolvency resolution process of a corporate debtor initiated 
under Chapter II before such date of commencement, where 
the Adjudicating Authority has not passed a liquidation 
order under sub-section (/) of this section, and shall not 
apply where the liquidation order is passed. 


(1B) The corporate insolvency resolution process of a corporate 
debtor may be restored in accordance with sub-section (JA) only once. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, it is hereby 
clarified that where the Adjudicating Authority does not receive a 
resolution plan under sub-section (6) of section 30 within the period 
provided under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (/A) or rejects the 
resolution plan received by it during such period under sub-section (2) 
of section 31, it shall pass a liquidation order under sub-section (/).”; 


(c) in sub-section (2),— 


(i) after the word “liquidate”, the words “or dissolve” shall be 
inserted; 


(ii) for the brackets, letters and word “(ii) and (iii)”, the brackets, 
letters and word (7), (aii), (iv) and (v)” shall be substituted; 


(iii) for the words, brackets and figure “of sub- 
section (/).”, the words, brackets, figures and letter “of sub-section (/) 
or a dissolution order under sub-section (2A) of section 54, as the case 
may be:” shall be substituted; 


(iv) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the committee of creditors shall, before taking the 
decision to dissolve the corporate debtor, comply with such conditions, 
as may be specified.” 


(v) in the Explanation, after the word “liquidate”, the words “or 
dissolve” shall be inserted; 


(d) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


“(2A) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass a liquidation order 
under this section within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt 
of an intimation or application, as the case may be, to initiate the 
liquidation process under this section: 


Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order 
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing.” 


(e) in sub-section (3), for the brackets, letters and word “(ii) and (iii)”, 


the brackets, letters and word “(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)” shall be substituted; 


(f) in sub-section (4),— 


(i) for the words, brackets, letters and figure “sub-clauses (7), (४) 
and (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section (/)”, the words, brackets, letters and 
figure “sub-clauses (7), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) of clause (b) of sub-section 
(2) and pass any other order as it deems fit” shall be substituted; 


(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that where an application under sub-section (3) is 
made, the Adjudicating Authority may, if it deems fit, reinstate the 
corporate insolvency resolution process and pass appropriate 
orders.”; 


(g) sub-section (5) shall be omitted; 


(A) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


“(6) Where a liquidation order has been passed, no suit or other legal 
proceeding shall be commenced, or if pending at the date of the liquidation 
order, shall be proceeded with by the liquidator, on behalf of the corporate 
debtor, except with the leave of the Adjudicating Authority and subject to 
such terms as the Adjudicating Authority may impose.”. 


21. In section 34 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (/), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


“(1) The committee of creditors may, by a vote of not less than 
sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, either resolve to— 


(a) propose the resolution professional appointed for the 
corporate insolvency resolution process under Chapter II or for the 
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process under Chapter III-A, 
subject to a written consent from the resolution professional in 
such form as may be specified; or 


(0) propose an insolvency professional, other than the 
resolution professional, subject to a written consent from the 
insolvency professional in such form as may be specified, 


to be appointed as the liquidator for the purposes of the liquidation, as 
the case may be and forward his name to the Adjudicating Authority, 
within such period and in such manner as may be specified. 


Amendment of 
section 34. 


Insertion of new 
section 34A. 


Replacement of 
liquidator by 
committee of 
creditors. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(JA) The Adjudicating Authority shall forward the name of the 
proposed liquidator under sub-section (/) to the Board for its 
confirmation and shall make such appointment after confirmation by 
the Board.” 


(6) for sub-sections (3), (4), (5) and (6), the following sub-sections shall 
be substituted, namely:— 


“(3) Any person who is or has been a personnel of the corporate 
debtor, or its promoter, or associated with the management of the 
corporate debtor, or engaged in a contract for service with the corporate 
debtor, shall extend all assistance and cooperation to the liquidator as 
may be required by him for the purposes of managing the affairs of the 
corporate debtor or performing the duties conferred on him under this 
Chapter and the provisions of section 19 shall apply in relation to 
liquidation and voluntary liquidation process as they apply in relation to 
corporate insolvency resolution process with the substitution of 
references to the liquidator for references to the interim resolution 
professional and resolution professional and references to the corporate 
insolvency resolution process with liquidation and voluntary liquidation 
process, respectively. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section and 
section 34A, the resolution professional appointed for the corporate 
insolvency resolution process under Chapter II or pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process under Chapter III-A for a corporate 
debtor, as the case may be, shall be disqualified from being appointed as 
the liquidator, where the resolution plan submitted by the resolution 
professional under sub-section (6) of section 30 was rejected for failure 
to meet the requirements mentioned in sub-section (2) of section 30. 


(5) Where the committee of creditors does not forward the name 
of the proposed liquidator or the Board does not confirm the name of the 
proposed liquidator, the Adjudicating Authority shall make a reference 
to the Board for recommendation of an insolvency professional to be 
appointed as the liquidator. 


(6) The Board shall propose the name of an insolvency 
professional along with written consent from the insolvency 
professional, in such form as may be specified, within ten days of receipt 
of a reference from the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (5).”; 


(c) in sub-section (7), the words “by an order” shall be omitted. 


22. After section 34 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“34A. (1) Where, at any time during the liquidation process, the 
committee of creditors is of the opinion that a liquidator appointed under 
section 34 or this section is required to be replaced, it may, by a vote of not 
less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, resolve to replace the 
liquidator with another insolvency professional, subject to a written consent 
from such proposed liquidator in such form as may be specified. 


(2) Where the committee of creditors resolves under sub-section (/) to 
replace a liquidator, it shall apply to the Adjudicating Authority for the 
appointment of the proposed liquidator, and if no disciplinary proceedings are 
pending against him, the Adjudicating Authority shall, by an order, replace the 
liquidator appointed under section 34 or this section and appoint the proposed 
liquidator as the liquidator.”’. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


23. In section 35 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(a) to maintain an updated list of claims of creditors in such 
manner as may be specified;”; 


(ii) in clause (/), the words “invite and” shall be omitted; 


(iii) for clause (/), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“() continue or institute proceedings in respect of an 
avoidance transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading;”; 


(iv) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter, it is hereby 
declared that the provisions of clauses (a) and () of this 
sub-section and sections 38 to 42 as amended by the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall not apply to 
the liquidation process and voluntary liquidation process initiated 
on and before the date of commencement of the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025.”; 


(6) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) The committee of creditors shall supervise the conduct of the 
liquidation process by the liquidator under Chapter III in such manner 
as may be specified.”. 


24. In section 36 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (f), for the 
words “proceedings for avoidance of transactions in accordance with this Chapter”, 
the words and figures “proceedings in respect of an avoidance transaction or 
fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47” shall be substituted. 


25. Sections 38, 39, 40, 41, and 42 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


26. In section 43 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), in clauses (a) and (b),— 


(i) for the words “period of”, the words “period starting from” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) for the words “insolvency commencement date”, the words “initiation 
date and ending on the insolvency commencement date” shall be substituted. 


27. In section 46 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “avoidable”, the word 
“undervalued” shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (/),— 
(i) for the words “avoiding a transaction at undervalue”, the words 
“avoidance of an undervalued transaction” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clauses (7) and (ii),— 
(A) for the words “period of’, the words “period starting 
from” shall be substituted; 


(B) for the words “insolvency commencement date’, the 
words “initiation date and ending on the _ insolvency 
commencement date” shall be substituted. 


Amendment of 
section 35. 


Amendment of 
section 36. 


Omission of 
sections 38 to 42. 


Amendment of 
section 43. 


Amendment of 
section 46. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 47. 


Application by 
creditors, 
member or 
partner in case 
of certain 
transactions or 
trading. 


Amendment of 
section 49. 


Amendment of 
section 50. 


Amendment of 
section 52. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


28. For section 47 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“47. (1) Where— 
(a) a preferential transaction under section 43; 
(6) an undervalued transaction under section 45; 
(c) an extortionate credit transaction under section 50; or 
(d) fraudulent trading or wrongful trading under section 66, 


has occurred and the liquidator or the resolution professional, as the case may 
be, has not reported it to the Adjudicating Authority, a creditor, either by itself 
or jointly with other creditors, a member, or a partner of the corporate debtor, 
as the case may be, may make an application to the Adjudicating Authority to 
pass orders in accordance with the respective provisions of this Chapter or 
Chapter VI, as the case may be. 


(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority, after examination of the 
application made under sub-section (/), is satisfied that the relevant 
transaction or trading under clause (a) or (b) or (c) or (d) of sub-section (/) 
has occurred, it shall pass an order, for the avoidance of such transaction or 
trading, as the case may be, as if such an application had been filed by a 
liquidator or a resolution professional in accordance with the relevant 
provisions of this Chapter or Chapter VI. 


(3) After passing an order under sub-section (2), where Adjudicating 
Authority is satisfied that the liquidator or the resolution professional, as the 
case may be, after having sufficient information or opportunity to avail 
information of such transaction or trading, did not report such transaction or 
trading to the Adjudicating Authority, it shall pass an order requiring the 
Board to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the liquidator or the 
resolution professional, as the case may be.”. 


29. In section 49 of the principal Act, in the proviso, in clause (a), after the 


words “corporate debtor”, the words “or a related party of the corporate debtor, as 
the case may be,” shall be inserted. 


30. In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the portion 


beginning with “period within” and ending with “preceding”, the words “period 
starting from two years preceding the initiation date and ending on” shall be 
substituted. 


31. In section 52 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) Where the secured creditor intends to realise the security 
interest under clause (0) of sub-section (/), he shall inform the liquidator 
of such security interest and identify the asset subject to such security 
interest to be realised within a period of fourteen days from the 
liquidation commencement date, and if he fails to do so, such security 
interest shall be deemed to be relinquished to the liquidation estate: 


Provided that where more than one secured creditor has any 
security interest over an asset of the corporate debtor, no secured 
creditor shall be entitled to realise its security interest, unless the 
realisation is agreed upon by the secured creditors representing not less 
than sixty-six per cent. of the value of all claims that are secured by 
such security interests.”’; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


(6) for sub-section (8), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(8) The amount of insolvency resolution process, costs and the 
liquidation costs, and workmen’s dues as referred to in clause (a) and 
sub-clause (i) of clause (0) of sub-section (/) of section 53, 
respectively, shall be deducted from the proceeds of any realisation by 
the secured creditors who realise their security interests in the manner 
provided in this section, and they shall transfer such amounts to the 
liquidator to be included in the liquidation estate in such manner, 
within such period and subject to such conditions to secure the 
payment as may be specified.”; 


(c) after sub-section (9), the following Explanation shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Explanation —For the purposes of this section, it is hereby 
declared that the provisions of sub-section (2) as amended by the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall not 
apply to the liquidation process initiated on and before the date of 
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) 
Act, 2025.”. 


32. In section 53 of the principal Act,— Amendment of 
section 53. 


(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(i) in clause (6), in sub-clause (ii), the following Explanation 
shall be inserted, namely: — 


“Explanation —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
clarified that where the value of the security interest relinquished 
by the secured creditor is less than the total debt owed to such 
secured creditor by the corporate debtor, he shall be a secured 
creditor to the extent of the value of such security interest, 
determined in such manner as may be specified, and for the 
remaining value of such debt, he shall be considered to be an 
unsecured creditor;”; 


(ii) in clause (e), in sub-clause (7), the following Explanation 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
clarified that any amount, whether or not a security interest is 
created to secure such amount, due to the Central Government 
and the State Government, in respect of the whole or any part of 
the period of two years preceding the liquidation commencement 
date, shall be distributed under this sub-clause, and any 
remaining amount, whether or not a security interest is created to 
secure such amount, due to the Central Government and the State 
Government, shall be distributed under clause (f);”; 


(6) in sub-section (2), the following ///ustrations shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“TIlustration 1.—The workmen and the secured creditors of the 
corporate debtor have a contractual arrangement which provides that 
in the event of insolvency or liquidation of the corporate debtor, all 
debt owed to the secured creditors shall be cleared before clearing any 
debt owed to the workmen. Such a contractual arrangement shall be 
disregarded. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Illustration 11—*‘X”’, a secured creditor of the corporate debtor, 
has a contractual arrangement with “Y”, another secured creditor of the 
corporate debtor. As per the contractual arrangement, in the event of 
insolvency or liquidation of the corporate debtor, the debt owed to “X” 
shall be cleared before clearing any debt owed to 7५४०, Such a contractual 
arrangement shall not be disregarded.”’. 

Amendment of 33. In section 54 of the principal Act,— 
section 54. 
(a) for sub-section (/), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(1) The liquidator shall completely liquidate the assets of the 
corporate debtor and make an application for its dissolution to the 
Adjudicating Authority within a period of one hundred and eighty days 
from the liquidation commencement date in such manner as may be 
specified: 


Provided that the Adjudicating Authority may, on an application 
by the liquidator along with sufficient reasons, extend the stipulated time 
by such period as it deems fit, but not exceeding a period of ninety days. 


(1A) Where a proceeding in respect of an avoidance transaction or 
fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47 is pending before an 
application is made under sub-section (/) or a decision is made to 
dissolve the corporate debtor under sub-section (2) of section 33, the 
committee of creditors shall determine the manner of pursuing such 
proceedings and the distribution of the proceeds arising out of such 
proceedings, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be 
specified. 


(1B) Where any suit or other legal proceeding against the corporate 
debtor in respect of any proceeds to be distributed under section 53 is 
pending before application is made under sub-section (/) or a decision 
is made to dissolve the corporate debtor under sub-section (2) of 
section 33, the committee of creditors shall make appropriate 
arrangements for pursuing such suit or proceeding, and distribution of 
proceeds to the parties in such suit or proceedings, in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be specified.” 


(6) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(2A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the 
Adjudicating Authority may, on receipt of the decision of the committee 
of creditors to dissolve the corporate debtor under sub-section (2) of 
section 33, order that the corporate debtor shall be dissolved from the 
date of that order and the corporate debtor shall be dissolved 
accordingly: 


Provided that if, on the passing of an order under this sub-section, 
any asset of the corporate debtor remains with it, such asset may be 
disposed of in such manner as may be specified, and the proceeds thereof 
shall be distributed for payment of the insolvency resolution process 
costs and any surplus remaining after payment of such costs shall be 
credited to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund formed under 
section 224. 


(2B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) and 
sub-section (2A), the passing of the dissolution order shall not affect the 
continuation of proceedings referred to in sub-section (/A) and (/B).”; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


(c) in sub-section (3), after the words, brackets and figure 
“sub-section (2)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter “or sub-section (24)” 
shall be inserted; 


(d) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass a dissolution order 
under this section within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt 
of the application under sub-section (/) or the intimation of the decision 
of the committee of creditors to dissolve the corporate debtor under 
sub-section (2) of section 33: 


Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order 
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing.” 


34. In section 54A of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— Amendment of 
section 54A. 


(a) in clause (a), for the words “pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process or’, the words “pre-packaged insolvency resolution process or 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, or” shall be substituted; 


(5) in clause (5), after the words “resolution process”, the words “or a 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process” shall be inserted. 


35. In section 54C of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following Amendment of 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely: — 20020 at 


“(3) The corporate applicant shall, along with the application, furnish 
such information as may be specified.” 


36. In section 54F of the principal Act, for sub-section (5), the following Amendment of 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely: — 120 


“(5) Any person who is or has been a personnel of the corporate debtor, 
or its promoter, or associated with the management of the corporate debtor, or 
engaged in a contract for service with the corporate debtor, shall extend all 
assistance and cooperation to the resolution professional as may be required 
by him to perform his duties and exercise his powers, and for such purposes, 
the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 19 shall, mutatis mutandis, 
apply in relation to the proceedings under this Chapter.” 


Amendment of 


37. In section 54L of the principal Act,— व वी. 


(a) in sub-section (2), for the word, brackets and figure “and (4)”, the 
brackets, figures and word “, (4), (5) and (6)” shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the Adjudicating Authority may, before rejecting 
the resolution plan, give notice to the committee of creditors to rectify 
any defects in the resolution plan.”; 


(2) in sub-section (4), in clause (0), for the brackets, letters and word 
“(ii) and (iii)”, the brackets, letters and word “(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)” shall be 


substituted. 
38. In section 54N of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), in clause (a), for ३7० of 
the brackets, letters and word “(ii) and (iii), the brackets, letters and word “‘(ii), ७723 
(iii), (iv) and (v)” shall be substituted. 
39. In Part I of the principal Act, Chapter IV shall be omitted. सह कि 
Chapter IV of 


Part II. 


Insertion of new 
Chapter IV-A in 
Part II. 


Corporate 
debtors eligible 
for creditor- 
initiated 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 


Initiation of 
creditor-initiated 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


40. After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“CHAPTER IV-A 
CREDITOR-INITIATED INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION PROCESS 


58A. (J) A creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process may be 
initiated in respect of the following corporate debtors under this Chapter, 
namely:— 


(a) a corporate debtor with assets or income or both, below such 
levels; 


(6) a corporate debtor with such class of creditors or such amount 
of debt; or 


(c) such other category of corporate debtors, 
as may be notified by the Central Government. 


(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (/), a creditor-initiated insolvency 
resolution process shall not be initiated in respect of a corporate debtor— 


(a) for which an insolvency resolution or liquidation proceeding 
has been commenced and is still undergoing under the provisions of 
Part I; and 


(6) that has undergone a creditor-initiated insolvency resolution 
process, pre-packaged insolvency resolution process or completed a 
corporate insolvency resolution process, during the period of three years 
preceding the creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date. 


58B. (J) A financial creditor, belonging to such class of financial 
institutions as may be notified by the Central Government, in respect of which 
a default is committed by a corporate debtor, may initiate the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process for such corporate debtor by appointing a 
resolution professional in accordance with the provisions of this section, and 
subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The financial creditor seeking to initiate the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process shall, before appointing the resolution 
professional,— 


(a) obtain the approval of the financial creditors of the corporate 
debtor belonging to the class of financial institutions notified under 
sub-section (/), who represent not less than fifty-one per cent. in value 
of the debt due to such financial creditors, in such manner as may be 
specified; 


(6) inform the corporate debtor of its intention to initiate the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process and give it a period of at 
least thirty days to make any representation in such form and manner as 
may be specified; and 


(c) after consideration of the representation received under 
clause (b), if any, where the financial creditor continues to pursue the 
initiation of the process, it shall obtain approval of the financial creditors 
of the corporate debtor belonging to such class as notified under 
sub-section (/), who represent not less than fifty-one per cent. in value 
of the debt due to such financial creditors, within a period of thirty days 
from the date of receipt of the representation, in such manner as may 
be specified: 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


Provided that where no approval is obtained under clause (c) 
within the stipulated period of thirty days, the financial creditor shall, if 
it seeks to initiate the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, 
obtain fresh approval under clause (a) and comply with the procedure 
under this sub-section. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified 
that where the corporate debtor does not make a representation within the 
period given by the financial creditor under clause (0), the financial creditor 
may, after the expiry of such period proceed to appoint the resolution 
professional in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3). 


(3) Where the financial creditor, who seeks to initiate the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, meets the requirements under 
sub-sections (/) and (2), it may appoint an insolvency professional as the 
resolution professional, if no disciplinary proceedings are pending against 
him, immediately after fulfilling all the requirements under sub-section (2). 


(4) Where the resolution professional is appointed under sub-section (3), 
he shall— 


(a) make a public announcement of the initiation of the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process; and 


(b) communicate the same along with a report confirming whether 
the financial creditor meets the requirements under sections 58A and 
58B, to the Adjudicating Authority and the Board, 


within such period and in such form and manner as may be specified, and the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process shall be deemed to have 
commenced from the date of such public announcement. 


(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 7, 9, 10 and 54C, no 
application for initiation of the corporate insolvency resolution process or the 
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process in respect of the corporate debtor 
shall be filed or admitted during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution 
process period. 


Explanation —F or the purposes of this Chapter,— 


(i) “creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date” means the date 
of the public announcement referred to in sub-section (4) of section 58B; and 


(ii) “creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period” means 
the period beginning from the  creditor-initiated insolvency 
commencement date and ending on the date on which an order is passed 
under sub-section (/) of section 58H or under sub-section (/) of 
section 58-I or under section 58J read with section 31. 


58C. (/) If the corporate debtor has any objection to the commencement 
of the process under section 58B, it may file an application to the Adjudicating 
Authority within a period of thirty days from the creditor-initiated insolvency 
commencement date in such form and manner as may be specified, 
accompanied with such fee as may be prescribed. 


(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority, pursuant to an application under 
sub-section (/) is satisfied that— 


(a) a default has not occurred or both a default has not occurred 
and the initiation of the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process 
was in contravention of section 58A or 58B, it may, by order, declare 
the commencement of the process to be void ab-initio; 


Objections to 
commencement 
of process. 


20 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Period for 
completion of 
creditor-initiated 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 


Duties and 
powers of 
resolution 
professional. 


(b) a default has occurred, however, the initiation of the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process was in contravention 
of sections 58A or 58B, it shall, convert the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process to corporate insolvency resolution 
process and pass an order as referred to in sub-clauses (7) to (v) of 
sub-section (/) of section 58H. 


(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (2), 
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the application under 
sub-section (/): 


Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order 
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing. 


58D. (7) Subject to sub-section (2), the creditor-initiated insolvency 
resolution process shall be completed within a period of one hundred and fifty 
days from the creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date. 


(2) The Adjudicating Authority may, on the application made by the 
resolution professional, with the approval of the committee of creditors, by a 
vote of not less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, extend the period 
under sub-section (/), by a period of not more than forty-five days: 


Provided that any extension of the period of the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process under this section shall not be granted more 
than once. 


(3) Where no resolution plan is approved by the committee of creditors 
within the period stipulated in sub-section (/) or the extended period under 
sub-section (2), the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under 
sub-section (/) of section 58H. 


58E. (J) The resolution professional, shall exercise and perform the 
following powers and duties during the creditor-initiated insolvency 
resolution process period, in such manner and subject to such conditions as 
may be specified, namely:— 


(a) call for the submission of claims; 
(6) prepare the information memorandum; 


(c) prepare a report in such form as may be specified, confirming 
whether the conduct of the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution 
process is in accordance with the procedural requirements and that the 
resolution plan, filed along with it, complies with the requirements of 
sections 29A and 30 which shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the 
proceedings under this Chapter; 


(d) duties referred to in clauses (a) to (c) of section 18 and 
clauses (e) to (/) of sub-section (2) of section 25 which shall, mutatis 
mutandis, apply to the proceedings under this Chapter; 


(e) powers as referred to in sub-sections (3) and (4) of 
section 54F which shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the proceedings 
under this Chapter; 


(f) file such report and documents with the Board, as may be 
specified; and 


(g) perform such other duties, as may be specified. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


(2) Any person who is or has been a personnel of the corporate debtor, 
or its promoter, or associated with the management of the corporate debtor, or 
engaged in a contract for service with the corporate debtor, shall extend all 
assistance and cooperation to the resolution professional, as may be required 
by him to perform his duties and exercise his powers, and for such purposes, 
the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 19 shall, mutatis mutandis, 
apply in relation to the proceedings under this Chapter. 


58F. (J) Subject to the provisions of this section, during the Management of 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period, the management of the हल 
affairs of the corporate debtor shall continue to vest in the Board of Directors or debtors and 
the partners, of the corporate debtor as the case may be, and the provisions of cooperation of 


section 54H shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the proceedings under this Chapter. its personnel: 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, from the 

creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date, the resolution professional 

shall attend meetings of members, Board of Directors and committee of 

directors, or partners, of the corporate debtor, and he shall have the right to 

reject any resolutions passed in these meetings, subject to such conditions and 

in such manner as may be specified, and once he rejects a resolution, it shall 

not be approved. 


(3) The promoter and personnel of the corporate debtor shall provide 
relevant information related to the corporate debtor for preparing the 
information memorandum to the resolution professional in such form and 
manner and within such period as may be specified, and where any person has 
sustained loss or damage as a consequence of the omission of any material 
information or inclusion of any misleading information or false information 
provided by such persons, they shall be liable and in this regard, the provisions 
of sub-sections (2) to (4) of section 54G and section 77A, shall, mutatis 
mutandis, apply to the proceedings under this Chapter. 


58G. (/) During the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process Moratorium. 
period, the resolution professional may, after obtaining the approval of the 
committee of creditors, make an application to the Adjudicating Authority for 
a moratorium for the purposes referred to in sub-section (/) read with 
sub-section (3) of section 14, which shall, mutatis mutandis apply, to the 
proceedings under this Chapter: 


Provided that the resolution professional may file such application 
before the constitution of the committee of creditors, after obtaining approval 
of the financial creditors of the corporate debtor belonging to the class of 
financial institutions notified under sub-section (/) of section 58B, who 
represent not less than fifty-one per cent. in value of the debt due to such 
financial creditors, in such manner as may be specified. 


(2) Where an application has been made in sub-section (/), a moratorium 
for the purposes referred to in sub-section (/) read with sub-section (3) of 
section 14 shall commence from the date of the application and continue to be 
in operation during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period, 
and the Adjudicating Authority may confirm the moratorium, if it is satisfied 
that the moratorium is required for the proper and efficient conduct of the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, or reject the application. 


(3) The resolution professional shall make public announcement of the 
following, in such form and manner as may be specified, namely:— 


(a) filing of application under sub-section (/); and 


(b) order of the Adjudicating Authority rejecting the application 
under sub-section (2), if any. 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Conversion of 
creditor- 
initiated 
insolvency 
resolution 
process to 
corporate 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 


Withdrawal of 
public 
announcement 
made under 
section 58B. 


58H. (/) Where the Adjudicating Authority,— 


(a) does not receive a resolution plan for approval, within the 
period stipulated under section 58D; 


(0) is satisfied that the corporate debtor or its personnel have failed 
to assist or cooperate with the resolution professional; or 


(c) rejects the resolution plan under sub-section (2) of section 58J 
read with sub-section (2) of section 31, 


it shall, by an order,— 


(i) convert the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process to 
corporate insolvency resolution process under Chapter II and provisions 
of such Chapter shall apply; 


(ii) decide the stage from which the corporate insolvency 
resolution process shall commence, after considering any 
recommendation of the committee of creditors, made in such manner as 
may be specified; 


(iii) appoint the resolution professional for the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process, as the interim resolution professional or 
the resolution professional for the corporate insolvency resolution 
process, as the case may be; 


(iv) declare a moratorium for the purposes referred to in section 14; and 


(v) declare that the costs incurred during the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process, if any, shall be included as part of 
insolvency resolution process costs for the purposes of the corporate 
insolvency resolution process of the corporate debtor. 


(2) Where the committee of creditors, at any time during the creditor- 
initiated insolvency resolution process period, by a vote of not less than 
sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, resolves to convert the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process to the corporate insolvency resolution process 
in respect of the corporate debtor, the resolution professional shall make an 
application for this purpose to the Adjudicating Authority in such form and 
manner as may be specified, and the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an 
order as referred to in sub-clauses (7) to (v) of sub-section (/). 


(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority passes an order to convert the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process to the corporate insolvency 
resolution process under Chapter II— 


(a) the proceedings initiated for an avoidance transaction or 
fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47, if any, during the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process shall continue during the 
corporate insolvency resolution process; 


(5) such order shall be deemed to be an order of admission of an 
application under section 7 and the financial creditor who initiated the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process under section 58B, shall 
be considered as the applicant for that purpose; and 


(c) for the purposes of sections 43, 46 and 50, the references to 
“initiation date and ending on the insolvency commencement date” shall 
be construed as “creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date and 
ending on the insolvency commencement date.”. 


58-I. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), the Adjudicating Authority may 
allow the withdrawal of the public announcement made under sub-section (4) 
of section 58B and close the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process 
on an application made by the resolution professional with the approval of 
ninety per cent. voting share of the committee of creditors, in such manner as 
may be specified. 


18 of 2013. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 
force, the public announcement made under sub-section (4) of section 58B 
shall not be withdrawn— 


(a) before the constitution of the committee of creditors; and 


(6) after the first invitation for submission of a resolution plan has 
been issued by the resolution professional. 


(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (/), 
within a period of fourteen days from the date of receipt of the application: 


Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order 
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay 
in writing. 

58J. (J) Where the committee of creditors, by a vote of not less than 
sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, approves the resolution plan in 
accordance with the provisions of section 30, the resolution professional shall 
submit such approved resolution plan to the Adjudicating Authority, 
alongwith a report referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 58E. 


(2) On receipt of the resolution plan, the Adjudicating Authority, shall, 
pass an order in accordance with the provisions of section 31, which shall, 
mutatis mutandis apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter. 


58K. (J) Save as provided in this Chapter, the provisions of 
sections 21, 24, 25A, 26, 27, 28, 28A, 29, 32, 32A, 43 to 51, and the 
provisions of Chapters VI and VII of this Part shall, mutatis mutandis apply, 
to the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, subject to the 
modifications that the references to— 


(a) “corporate insolvency resolution process” shall be construed as 
reference to “creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process”; 


(b) “insolvency commencement date” shall be construed as 
reference to “creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date”; 


(c) “insolvency resolution process period” shall be construed as 
reference to “creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period”’; and 


(d) the references to “period starting from” shall be construed as 
“period of’ and “initiation date and ending on the insolvency 
commencement date” shall be construed as “creditor-initiated 
insolvency commencement date” under sections 43, 46 and 50. 


(2) The creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process of a corporate 
person under this Chapter shall meet such conditions and procedural 
requirements as may be specified.’. 


41. In section 59 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2), for the words “procedural requirements as may 
be specified by the Board”, the words “procedural requirements, and be 
completed within such period which shall not be more than one year, as may 
be specified” shall be substituted; 


(0) in sub-section (3), in clause (0), in sub-clause (ii), for the words “a 
registered valuer”, the words and figures “a valuer registered under 
section 247 of the Companies Act, 2013” shall be substituted; 


(c) in sub-section (4), for the word “notify”, the word “inform” shall be 
substituted; 


(d) after sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


Application for 
approval of 
resolution plan. 


Application of 
provisions of 
Chapters II, III, 
Vi and VI to 
this Chapter. 


Amendment of 
section 59. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


“(5A) Any time after the commencement of a voluntary liquidation 
proceeding under sub-section (5) but before an application under 
sub-section (7) is filed, the voluntary liquidation proceeding shall be 
terminated if the following conditions are satisfied, namely:— 


(a) the members of the company have passed a special 
resolution for terminating the voluntary liquidation proceeding; 


(0) where the company owes debt to any person on the date 
of the resolution under clause (a), creditors representing two-thirds 
in value of such debt have approved the resolution passed under 
clause (a) within a period of seven days of such resolution; and 


(c) such other conditions as may be specified. 


(5B) The liquidator shall intimate the Board and the Registrar of 
Companies regarding the special resolution under clause (a) of 
sub-section (5A) within a period of seven days of passing the resolution 
or subsequent approval of the creditors under clause (b) thereof, as the 
case may be. 


(5C) A voluntary liquidation proceeding shall be deemed to have 
been terminated from the date on which the liquidator intimates the 
Registrar of Companies under sub-section (58), and such termination 
shall bring the term of the liquidator to an end and have such other 
consequences as may be specified.” 


(e) in sub-section (6), after the words “provisions of’, the words, brackets, 
letter and figures “clause (b) of section 18 of Chapter II,” shall be inserted. 


Insertion of new 42. In the principal Act, in Part II, after Chapter V, the following Chapter shall 
Chapter VA. be inserted, namely:— 


“CHAPTER VA 


GROUP INSOLVENCY 


Power to make 59A. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this 
oe Code, the Central Government may, prescribe the manner and conditions for 
proceedings for conducting insolvency proceedings under Part II, where these proceedings are 
coordination and initiated against two or more corporate debtors that form part of a group. 
cooperation of 

corporate (2) Without prejudice to the generality of foregoing provision, such rules 
debtors of group. 


may, provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) a common Bench for the insolvency proceedings of the 
corporate debtors that form part of a group and the manner of the transfer 
of pending proceedings of such corporate debtors to such Bench, and for 
proceedings under the rules made under this section; 


(b) coordination between the insolvency proceedings of the 
corporate debtors that form part of a group, including the coordination 
between their committee of creditors and interim resolution professionals, 
resolution professionals, or liquidators; 


(c) appointment and replacement of a common insolvency 
professional to facilitate coordination between the insolvency 
proceedings of the corporate debtors that form part of a group; 


(d) formation of a committee comprising of the committee of 
creditors of the corporate debtors that form part of a group; 


18 of 2013. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


(e) making of an agreement that provides measures to 
coordinate and synchronise different aspects of the insolvency 
proceedings of the corporate debtors that form part of a group, which 
shall be binding on the corporate debtors approving the same including 
their committees of creditors, and the Adjudicating Authority may issue 
necessary orders to implement the approved agreement; and 


(f) treatment of the costs incurred for taking measures to coordinate 
the insolvency proceedings of the corporate debtors that form part of a 


group. 


(3) The rules made by the Central Government under this section may 
provide that any of the provisions of the Code shall apply with such 
modifications, as may be required to administer and implement the provisions 
of this section. 


Explanation —F or the purposes of this Chapter, the expressions— 


(a) “control” includes the right to appoint majority of the directors 
or other key managerial personnel entitled to manage the affairs of the 
corporate person or to control the management or policy decisions 
exercisable by a person or persons acting individually or in concert, 
directly or indirectly, including by virtue of their shareholding, 
management rights, ownership interest, shareholders agreements, voting 
agreements, articles of association, limited liability partnership 
agreements or in any other manner; 


(0) “group” means two or more corporate debtors that are 
interconnected by control or significant ownership, and include a 
holding company, a subsidiary company and an associate company of a 
corporate debtor, as defined under the Companies Act, 2013; 


(c) “insolvency proceedings” means the corporate insolvency 
resolution process and liquidation process under Part II of this Code; 


(d) “significant ownership” includes the right to exercise 
twenty-six per cent. or more voting rights.’ 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 241, a draft of 
every rule proposed to be issued under this section, shall be laid before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if both Houses agree in disapproving the 
issue of rule or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
tule, the rule shall not be notified or shall be notified only in such 
modified form, as may be agreed upon by both the Houses of Parliament. 


(5) The period of thirty days referred to in sub-section (4) shall not 
include any period during which the House referred to in sub-section (4) is 
prorogued or adjourned for more than four consecutive days. 


(6) Every rule notified under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.’. 


43. After section 64 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


Insertion of 
new section 
64A. 


Penalty for 
initiating 
frivolous or 
vexatious 
proceedings 
under Part II. 


Amendment of 
section 65. 


Amendment of 
section 66. 


Amendment of 
section 67A. 


Amendment of 
section 96. 


Amendment of 
section 99. 


Amendment of 
section 106. 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


“64A. If any person has initiated a frivolous or vexatious proceeding 
before the Adjudicating Authority under this Part, it may impose upon such 
person a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend 
to two crore rupees.”. 


44. In section 65 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words 


“pre-packaged insolvency resolution process” the words “pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process or creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process” shall be substituted. 


45. In section 66 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), after the words “resolution professional”, the 
words “or the liquidator,” shall be inserted; 


(5) in sub-section (2), after the words “during the corporate insolvency 
resolution process”, the words “or by a liquidator’ shall be inserted. 


46. In section 67A of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process”, the words “pre-packaged insolvency resolution process or 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process” shall be substituted; 


(6) for the words “pre-packaged insolvency commencement date”, the 
words “pre-packaged insolvency commencement date or creditor-initiated 
insolvency commencement date” shall be substituted. 


47. In section 96 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply where an application 
is filed for initiating an insolvency resolution process in respect of a personal 
guarantor to a corporate debtor.”. 


48. In section 99 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “ten days”, the words “twenty-one 
days” shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (/0), for the words “or the creditor, as the case may 
be”, the words “and the creditor” shall be substituted. 


49. In section 106 of the principal Act,— 


(a) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(1A) Where no repayment plan is submitted within the period 
stipulated under sub-section (/), the resolution professional shall submit 
a report to the Adjudicating Authority, and the Adjudicating Authority 
shall pass an order terminating the insolvency resolution process of the 
debtor and the debtor or the creditors shall be entitled to file an 
application for bankruptcy under Chapter IV.”; 


(6) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(3A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the 
provisions of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3), where the repayment 
plan is in respect of the debtor who is a personal guarantor to a corporate 
debtor, the resolution professional shall summon the meeting of the 
creditors by issuing a notice in writing specifying therein the date, time 
and place of such meeting.”; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


(c) in sub-section (4), after the words, brackets and figure “For the 
purposes of sub-section (3)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter ‘“‘and 
sub-section (3A)” shall be inserted. 


50. In section 121 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(a) in clause (c), for the word and figures “section 118.”, the words and 
figures “section 118; or” shall be substituted; 


(b) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(d) where an order has been passed by an Adjudicating Authority 
under sub-section (/A) of section 106.”. 


51. In section 124 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply where an application 
is filed for initiating a bankruptcy process in respect of a personal guarantor to 
a corporate debtor.”. 


52. After section 164 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“164A. Where the debtor has entered into an undervalued transaction as 
referred to in sub-section (6) of section 164 and the Adjudicating Authority is 
satisfied that such transaction was deliberately entered into by such debtor— 


(a) for keeping its assets beyond the reach of any person who is 
entitled to make a claim against the debtor; or 


(b) in order to adversely affect the interests of such a person in 
relation to the claim, 


the Adjudicating Authority shall make an order,— 


(i) restoring the position as it existed before such transaction, as if the 
transaction had not been entered into; and 


(ii) protecting the interests of persons who are victims of such transactions: 
Provided that an order under this section— 


(a) shall not affect any interest in property which was acquired 
from a person other than the debtor or his associate, as the case may be, 
and was acquired in good faith, for value and without notice of the 
relevant circumstances, or affect any interest deriving from such an 
interest; and 


(0) shall not require a person who received a benefit from the 
transaction in good faith, for value and without notice of the relevant 
circumstances to pay any sum, unless he was a party to the transaction.”. 


53. In section 178 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in clause (d), the 
following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that any 
amount, whether or not a security interest is created to secure such amount, 
due to the Central Government and the State Government, in respect of the 
whole or any part of the period of two years preceding the bankruptcy 
commencement date, shall be distributed under this clause, and any remaining 
amount, whether or not a security interest is created to secure such amount, 
due to the Central Government and the State Government, shall be distributed 
under clause (e);”. 


Amendment of 
section 121. 


Amendment of 
section 124. 


Insertion of new 
section 164A. 


Transactions 
defrauding 
creditors. 


Amendment of 
section 178. 


Insertion of new 
section 183A. 


Penalty for 
initiating 
frivolous or 
vexatious 
proceedings 
under Part III. 
Amendment of 
section 196. 


Amendment of 
section 208. 


Amendment of 
section 214. 


Amendment of 
section 215. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


54. After section 183 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“183A. If, any person has initiated a frivolous or vexatious proceeding 
before the Adjudicating Authority under this Part, it may impose upon such 
person a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may 
extend to two crore rupees.” 


55. In section 196 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(a) for the words “insolvency professional agencies, insolvency 
professionals and information utilities”, wherever they occur, the words 
“service providers” shall be substituted; 


(b) for the words “insolvency professionals, insolvency professional 
agencies and information utilities”, wherever they occur, the words “service 
providers” shall be substituted; 


(c) in clause (2), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation —For removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 
levy of fee or other charges under this clause also includes any fee or other 
charges levied by the Board in relation to the processes under this Code.”; 


(d) after clause (s), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(sa) specify the standards of conduct of the committee of creditors 
and its members while acting under Part II and Part III of this Code, as 
the case may be;”; 


(e) in clause (7), for the words “under this Code”, the words “for the 
purposes of this Code” shall be substituted. 


56. In section 208 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after clause (ca), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(cb) creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process under Chapter IVA 
of Part II;”. 


57. In section 214 of the principal Act, in clause (e), after the words “such 
information’, the words “in such manner as may be specified” shall be inserted. 


58. In section 215 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“Submission and authentication of financial information to 
information utilities.”; 


(6) in sub-section (3), for the words “An operational creditor may”, the 
words and figure “An operational creditor shall, before filing an application 
under section 9 of the Code,” shall be substituted; 


(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(4) The corporate debtor or debtor, as the case may be, in respect 
of whom any information is submitted under this section, shall 
authenticate the information in such manner and within such period, as 
may be specified: 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


Provided that where the corporate debtor or debtor does not 
respond to the information submitted to the information utility in the 
manner and period as has been specified, such information shall be 
deemed to be authenticated.” 


59. In section 217 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the marginal heading, the marginal heading “Complaints against 
service providers.” shall be substituted; 


(b) for the words “an insolvency professional agency or insolvency 
professional or an information utility”, the words “‘a service provider” shall be 
substituted. 


60. In section 218 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the marginal heading, the marginal heading “Investigation of 
service providers.” shall be substituted; 


(5) in sub-section (/), for the words “insolvency professional agency or 
insolvency professional or an information utility”, occurring at both the places, 
the words “service provider” shall be substituted. 


61. For section 219 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“219. Where the Board, upon completion of an inspection or 
investigation under section 218 or on the basis of material available on record, 
is of the prima facie opinion that sufficient cause exists to take action under 
section 220, it may issue a show cause notice to a service provider in such 
manner, providing such period for giving reply, as may be specified.”. 


62. In section 220 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(1) The Board shall constitute one or more disciplinary 
committees consisting of one or more persons from amongst its 
Chairperson, whole-time members or officers not below the rank of 
the Executive Director for the purposes of this section.”; 


(6) after sub-section (/) as so substituted, the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(1A) The show cause notice issued under section 219 shall be 
referred to a disciplinary committee constituted under sub-section (/).”; 


(c) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) Where the disciplinary committee, after giving the service 
provider an opportunity of being heard, is satisfied that sufficient cause 
exists, it may, impose a penalty as provided in sub-section (3), or 
suspend or cancel the registration of the service provider, or direct 
disgorgement under sub-section (4).”; 


(d) in sub-section (3),— 


(7) for the opening portion, the following opening portion shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


Amendment of 
section 217. 


Amendment of 
section 218. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 219. 
Show cause 
notice to service 
provider. 


Amendment of 
section 220. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


“Where any service provider has contravened any 
provisions of this Code or rules or regulations made thereunder, 
the disciplinary committee may impose penalty which shall 
be up to—”; 


(ii) in the proviso, for the words “more than one crore rupees”, the 
words “two crore rupees” shall be substituted; 


(e) in sub-sections (4) and (5), for the word “Board”, wherever it 
occurs, the words “disciplinary committee” shall be substituted; 


(f) after sub-section (6), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(7) Any person aggrieved by an order of the disciplinary 
committee, under sub-sections (2) to (5), may prefer an appeal to the 
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal within a period of thirty days 
from the date of receipt of the order. 


(8) The National Company Law Appellate Tribunal may, if it is 
satisfied that a person was prevented by sufficient cause from filing an 
appeal within thirty days, allow the appeal to be filed under 
sub-section (7) within a further period not exceeding fifteen days.”. 


Amendment of 


Renee rs 63. In section 224 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2),— 


(a) in clause (c), after the words “any other source;”, the word 
“and” shall be omitted; 


(b) in clause (d), for the word “Fund.” the words “Fund; and” shall 
be substituted; 


(c) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely— 


“(e) amounts from such other sources as may be prescribed.” 


(6) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The sums credited to the Fund may be utilised— 


(a) by a person who has contributed any amount to the 
Fund under clause (6) of sub-section (2), in the event of 
proceedings initiated in respect of such person under this Code 
before an Adjudicating Authority, by making an application to 
such Adjudicating Authority for withdrawal of funds not 
exceeding the amount contributed by it, for making payment to 
workmen, protecting the assets of such persons, meeting the 
incidental cost during the proceedings or such purposes as may be 
prescribed; and 


(0) for such other purposes and in such manner as may be 
prescribed.”. 


Substitution of 64. For section 235A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


new section for substituted, namely:— 
section 235A. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31 


“235A. If a person has contravened any provision of this Code or any 
rules or the regulations made thereunder, the Adjudicating Authority may, on 
an application made by the Board or the Central Government or any person 
authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, impose upon such person, 
a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees for each day during 
which the contravention continues, but which may extend up to— 


(a) three times the amount of loss caused, or likely to have been 
caused, to persons concerned on account of such contravention; 


(b) three times the amount of the unlawful gain made on account 
of such contravention, 


whichever is higher: 


Provided that where such loss or unlawful gain is not quantifiable, the 
total amount of the penalty imposed shall not exceed five crore rupees: 


Provided further that where the Adjudicating Authority is of the opinion 
that sufficient cause exists to do so, it may, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, impose a penalty which may be less than one lakh rupees for each day 
that the failure continues. 


Explanation. \—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 
Adjudicating Authority for the purposes of this section shall be the same as 
referred to in section 60 or section 179, as the case may be. 


Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, it is hereby declared 
that the amendment of this section by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2025 shall not affect:— 


(7) any prosecution instituted under this section on and before the 
date of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2025 and pending immediately before such date of 
commencement before any court, which shall continue to be heard and 
disposed of by the said court as if the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2025 had not been enacted; and 


(ii) any punishment imposed under this section on and before the 
date of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2025.”. 


65. In section 239 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the word “provisions”, the word “purposes” 
shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (2),— 
(7) clause (ea) shall be omitted; 


(ii) after clause (fe), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ff) the conditions under sub-section (/) of section 58B; 


(fg) the fee for filing an objection under sub-section (/) of 
section 58C; 


(fh) the manner and conditions under sub-section (/) of 
section 59A;”; 


(iii) for clause (zi), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


Power of 
Adjudicating 
Authority to 
impose 
penalties. 


Amendment of 
section 239. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


“(zi) the other sources of amounts to be credited to 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund under clause (e) of 
sub-section (2) of section 224;”; 


(iv) after clause (zi) as so substituted, the following clauses shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“(zia) the purposes under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of 
section 224; 


(zib) the other purposes and the manner under clause (0) of 
sub-section (3) of section 224;”; 


(v) after clause (zm), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zma) the manner and conditions under sub-section (/) of 
section 240C;”. 


Amendment of 66. In section 240 of the principal Act,— 
section 240. 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the word “provisions”, the word “purposes” 
shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (2),— 
(7) after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(fa) other information under clause (e) of sub-section (3) of 
section 9;”; 


(ii) for clause (A), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(h) the other document or any other information under 
clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 10;”; 


(iii) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ha) the manner under sub-section (/) of section 12A;”; 


(iv) in clause (0), after the words, brackets and letter “of 
clause (a),” the words, brackets and letter “the manner under clause (5),” 
shall be inserted; 


(v) after clause (0), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(oa) any other class or classes of creditors who may attend 
the meetings of committee of creditors under the proviso to 
sub-section (//) of section 21;”; 


(vi) after clause (४), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ta) the manner and conditions under sub-section (/) of 
section 28A;”; 


(vii) in clause (w), for the words, brackets, letters and figures “116 
manner of payment of debts under clause (9), and the other requirements 
to which a resolution plan shall conform to under clause (d) of 
sub-section (2) of section 30;”, the words, brackets, letters and figures 
“the manner of payment of debts of operational creditors under 
clause (0), the manner of payment of debts of financial creditors who do 
not vote in favour of the resolution plan under clause (ba), the conditions 
and manner for constitution of a committee under clause (d) and the 
other requirements to which a resolution plan shall conform to under 
clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 30;” shall be substituted; 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


(viii) after clause (wa), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(wb) the form, manner and the conditions under the second 
proviso to sub-section (/) of section 31; 


(wc) the manner and conditions for making an application 
by the committee of creditors for restoring the corporate 
insolvency resolution process and manner and conditions for 
completing the restored corporate insolvency resolution process 
under sub-section (/A) of section 33; 


(wd) the conditions under the proviso to sub-section (2) of 
section 33;”; 


(ix) for clause (x), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(x) the period within which and the manner in which the 
committee of creditors shall forward the name of the proposed 
resolution professional or the proposed insolvency professional to 
be appointed as the liquidator to the Adjudicating Authority, the 
form of written consent from the resolution professional under 
clause (a) and the form of written consent from the insolvency 
professional under clause (b) of sub-section (/) of section 34;”; 


(x) after clause (x) as so substituted, the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(xa) the form of written consent from insolvency 
professional under sub-section (6) of section 34; 


(xb) the fee for the conduct of the liquidation proceedings and 
proportion to the value of the liquidation estate assets under 
sub-section (8) of section 34; 


(xc) the form for giving written consent under sub-section (/) 
of section 34A;”; 


(x7) in clause (9), for the words, brackets and letter “the manner of 
evaluating the assets and property of the corporate debtor under 
clause (c)’, the words, brackets and letters “the manner of maintaining 
an updated list of claims of creditors under clause (a), the manner of 
evaluating the assets and property of the corporate debtor under 
clause (c)” shall be substituted; 


(xii) for clause (z), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(z) the manner in which the committee of creditors shall 
supervise the conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator 
under sub-section (2) of section 35;”; 


(xiii) clauses (ze), (zf) and (zg) shall be omitted; 


(xiv) after clause (zi), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zia) the manner, period and _ conditions under 
sub-section (8) of section 52;”; 


(xv) after clause (2), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zja) the period and the manner of distribution of proceeds 
of sale under sub-section (/) of section 53; 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(zjb) the manner of determining the value of security interest 
under the Explanation to sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of 
sub-section (/) of section 53; 


(zjc) the manner in which the liquidator shall make an 
application to the Adjudicating Authority for the dissolution of the 
corporate debtor under sub-section (/) of section 54; 


(zjd) the manner and conditions under sub-section (JA) of 
section 54; 


(zje) the manner and conditions under sub-section (JB) of 
section 54;”; 


(xvi) for clause (zk), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(zk) the manner under the proviso to sub-section (2A) of 
section 54;”; 


(xvii) for clause (zke), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(zke) the information to be furnished under sub-section (3) 
of section 54C;”; 


(xviii) clause (z/) shall be omitted; 


(xix) after clause (z/) as so omitted, the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(zla) the manner under clause (a), the form and manner 
under clause (0), and the manner under clause (c) of sub-section 
(2) of section 58B; 


(z/b) the period, form and manner under sub-section (4) of 
section 58B; 


(zic) the form and manner under sub-section (/) of 
section 58C; 


(zid) the manner and conditions for exercising the 
powers and performing duties by the resolution professional 
under section 58E; 


(zle) the form in which the report to be prepared under 
clause (c), the report and documents to be filed with the Board 
under clause (f), and such other duties to be performed under clause 
(g) of section 58E; 


(z/f) the conditions and manner for the resolution 
professional to attend the meetings and exercise the right to 
reject under sub-section (2) and the form, manner and period under 
sub-section (3) of section 58F; 


(28) the manner under the proviso to sub-section (/) of 
section 58G; 


(207) the form and manner in which the resolution 
professional shall make public announcement under 
sub-section (3) of section 58G; 


(21) the manner under sub-clause (7) of sub-section (/) of 
section 58H; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


(20) the form and manner under sub-section (2) of 
section 58H; 


(z/k) the manner under sub-section (/) of section 58-I; 


(217 the conditions and procedural requirements under 
sub-section (2) of section 58K;”; 


(xx) in clause (zm), for the words “conditions and procedural 
requirements”, the words “conditions, procedural requirements, and 
period” shall be substituted; 


(xxi) after clause (zm), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zma) the other conditions under clause (c) of 
sub-section (5A) of section 59; 


(zmb) the other consequences under sub-section (5C) of 
section 59;”; 


(xxii) in clause (zv), after the words, brackets and letter “utilities 
under clause (r),” the words, brackets and letters “standards of conduct 
of the committee of creditors and its members under clause (sa),” shall 
be inserted; 


(xxiii) after clause (zzs), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zzsa) the manner under clause (e) of section 214;”; 


(xxiv) after clause (zzw), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zzwa) the manner and period under sub-section (4) of 
section 215;”; 


(xxv) for clause (zzza), the following clause shall be substituted 
namely:— 


“(zzza) the manner and period under section 219;”. 


67. After section 240A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“240B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code, 
the Central Government may, by notification, provide an electronic portal and 
the procedures related to the insolvency and bankruptcy processes under this 
Code, which shall be carried out on such electronic portal. 


240C. (J) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this 
18 of 2013. Code and the Companies Act, 2013, the Central Government may prescribe 
the manner and conditions for administering and conducting cross-border 
insolvency proceedings under the Code, for such class or classes of debtors 
and corporate debtors as may be notified by the Central Government. 


(2) The rules made under this section may provide that any of the 
18 of 2013. provisions of this Code or the Companies Act, 2013 shall apply with such 
exceptions, modifications and adaptations, as may be required to administer 
and implement the provisions of this section and rules made thereunder, 
including designating one or more Benches for dealing with proceedings under 
this section. 


(3) A draft of every rule proposed under this section shall be laid before 
each House of Parliament in such manner as provided under sub-sections (4) 
to (6) of section 59A, which shall, mutatis mutandis apply, to the rules made 
under this section.”. 


Insertion of new 
sections 240B 
and 240C. 
Electronic portal 
for facilitating 
procedures. 


Power to make 
rules for cross- 
border 
insolvency. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Amendment of 68. In section 242 of the principal Act, after sub-section (/), the following 
अत 01276 sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), if any 
difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Code, as amended by 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025, the Central 
Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, as may appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient for removing such difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the 
expiry of a period of five years from the date of commencement of the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025.”. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (the Code) was enacted to 
consolidate and amend the laws relating to reorganisation and insolvency resolution 
of corporate persons, partnership firms and individuals in a time bound manner for 
maximisation of value of assets of such persons, to promote entrepreneurship, 
availability of credit and balance the interests of all the stakeholders including 
alteration in the order of priority of payment of Government dues and to establish 
an Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Board) and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


2. The primary objective of the Code is to resolve insolvency and bankruptcy 
cases in a time bound manner for maximisation of value of assets of individuals, 
partnership firms and corporate persons. The Code, as an economic legislation, 
requires periodic updates to align with changing market needs and lessons learnt 
from practical experience. Over the past three years, extensive stakeholder 
consultations have been undertaken. Issues arising in the implementation of the 
Code and new concepts were discussed in a colloquium with key stakeholders held 
in November, 2022, followed by deliberations in the Insolvency Law Committee in 
January, 2023. Subsequently, the Government issued a discussion paper inviting 
public comments on proposed changes to the Code. The Government examined the 
public and stakeholder comments, as well as recommendations from the colloquium 
and the Committee, and decided to amend the Code to improve its operation, 
enhance its effectiveness, clarify its original intent and incorporate novel concepts. 


3. In view of the above, it has become necessary to amend certain provisions of 
the Code and to insert certain new provisions for effective implementation of the 
Code. The proposed amendments aim to reduce delays, maximise value for all 
stakeholders, and improve governance of all processes under the Code. They seek to 
modify existing provisions to better align with the overall objectives of the Code and 
to introduce new provisions that follow global best practices for resolving insolvency. 


4. Among other measures, the proposed legislation introduces a “creditor- 
initiated insolvency resolution process” with an out-of-court initiation mechanism 
for genuine business failures to facilitate faster and more cost-effective insolvency 
resolution, with minimal business disruption. Once implemented, this will help ease 
the burden on judicial systems, promote ease of doing business and improve access 
to credit. The proposed legislation also introduces provisions for “group 
insolvency” and “cross-border insolvency”. 


5. The group insolvency framework seeks to efficiently resolve insolvencies 
involving complex corporate group structures, minimising value destruction caused 
by fragmented proceedings and maximising value for creditors through coordinated 
decision-making. 

6. The cross-border insolvency framework seeks to lay the foundation for 
protecting stakeholder interests in domestic and foreign proceedings, promoting 
investor confidence and aligning domestic practices with international best 
practices. This will also pave the way for improved recognition of Indian insolvency 
proceedings in other jurisdictions. 


7. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in 
the Bill. 


8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 
The 12th August, 2025. 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Notes on clauses 


Clause 1 provides for the short title and commencement of the proposed 
legislation, and enforcement of the various sections of the proposed legislation on 
different dates. 


Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 3 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2016 (‘Code’). 


It seeks to insert an explanation in clause (3/) of section 3 of the Code to 
clarify that security interest shall exist only when it creates a right, title or interest 
or a claim to a property pursuant to an agreement or arrangement by the act of two 
or more parties and shall not include a security interest created merely by operation 
of any law for the time being in force. Hence, a provision in central or state 
legislation or a subordinate law that states that a charge will be made on the property 
of the corporate debtor for non-payment of tax or a penalty shall not be considered 
a security interest. A security interest shall only exist where the parties to an 
agreement or arrangement agree to create a right, title or interest or a claim to a 
property, whether or not it is in writing. For instance, a charge created over the 
property of the corporate debtor to secure the financial debt under an agreement, or 
an arrangement where a mortgage is created by deposit of title deeds of its property 
between two or more persons. 


It also seeks to insert a definition of the term ‘service provider’ to include an 
insolvency professional, insolvency professional agency, information utility registered 
with the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (‘Board’), and other persons notified 
by the Central Government for rendering services in relation to the insolvency and 
bankruptcy processes under the Code. It enables the Central Government to notify 
additional categories of persons whose services are required for the implementation of 
the Code, thereby empowering the Board to regulate them for the efficient and proper 
conduct of the insolvency and bankruptcy processes. The notified category of persons 
will be required to register with the Board for rendering services in relation to the 
insolvency and bankruptcy processes under the Code, and after registration, they will be 
required to abide by the specifications laid down by the Board concerning the rendition 
of services along with its enforcement and disciplinary processes. 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 of the Code, to insert definitions 
of the phrases ‘avoidance transaction’ and ‘fraudulent or wrongful trading’ for ease 
of reference at multiple places in the Code. 


Further, it seeks to insert a proviso to clause (//) of section 5 of the Code. It 
clarifies that if multiple applications to initiate the corporate insolvency resolution 
process in respect of a corporate debtor are pending before the Adjudicating Authority 
on the insolvency commencement date, and it admits one of them, then the initiation 
date for the corporate insolvency resolution process of such corporate debtor shall be the 
date on which the first such application was made before the Adjudicating Authority. 
The Adjudicating Authority, while passing the order for the commencement of the 
corporate insolvency resolution process, may mention the initiation date in its order in 
the interest of certainty, based on the rightful first application that was made against the 
corporate debtor and pending on the insolvency commencement date. 


Additionally, it seeks to amend the explanation to clause (26) of section 5 to 
clarify that the restructuring of the corporate debtor may also include the sale of one 
or more its assets. It enables the invitation of plans specifically for one or more 
assets of the corporate debtor of complex businesses that can be included in the 
resolution plan providing for the insolvency resolution of the corporate debtor. The 
resolution applicants to whom such assets are being sold will also need to comply 
with the eligibility requirements under the Code. This amendment will allow the 
committee of creditors to adopt the best commercially viable resolution plan for 
resolving the insolvency of a corporate debtor and ensure the value maximisation of 
its assets. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


It also seeks to amend the definition of ‘voting share’ under clause (28) of 
section 5 to clarify that ‘voting share’ will be computed on the basis of financial 
debt owed to only the members of the committee of creditors who are eligible to 
vote as per section 21, which excludes financial creditors that are related parties of 
the corporate debtor from voting. Hence, it is clarified that the financial debt owed 
to the creditors who are not eligible to vote in the committee of creditors shall not 
be included when determining the voting share. 


Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 7 of the Code to clarify that the 
Adjudicating Authority shall mandatorily admit the application to initiate the 
corporate insolvency resolution process once the occurrence of default is 
established, no disciplinary proceedings are pending against the proposed resolution 
professional and other procedural requirements under the section are complied with. 
Additionally, an explanation is inserted to clarify that the Adjudicating Authority 
shall not consider any other grounds to reject the application where the requirements 
of these provisions have been complied with. Where the procedural requirements 
are fulfilled, the Adjudicating Authority must only ascertain whether a default 
exceeding the threshold of section 4 exists and admit the application. Another 
explanation is inserted to clarify that when a financial creditor, which is a financial 
institution, submits a record of default in respect of a financial debt owed to such 
creditor, along with its application under this section, the Adjudicating Authority 
shall consider it sufficient to ascertain the existence of default. Given that financial 
institutions, as a regulated entity, maintain their records and financial information 
with information utilities in a structured and reliable manner, it would be appropriate 
for the Adjudicating Authority to rely on such records to ascertain the occurrence of 
default and promptly admit the application, within fourteen days of receipt of 
application. 


Further, the proviso to sub-section (4) of section 7 is omitted, and the period 
of fourteen days for deciding the application under this section is clearly provided 
in sub-section (5) of section 7, which will also include the period for ascertaining 
the occurrence of default. Where the application is not decided within this period, 
the Adjudicating Authority will record reasons for such delay in writing. Within this 
period, the Adjudicating Authority shall also give notice to rectify any defects in not 
more than seven days before rejecting the application. 


Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (e) of sub-section (3) of section 9 
of the Code to empower the Board to specify by regulation any other type of 
information that the operational creditor must submit along with the application for 
initiation of the corporate insolvency resolution process. It also seeks to insert a 
proviso in sub-section (5) of section 9 to provide that where the application filed 
under this provision is not decided within fourteen days, the Adjudicating Authority 
will record reasons for such delay in writing. 


Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 10 of 
the Code to broaden the powers of the Board to specify any other type of information 
that may be furnished along with the application for commencement of corporate 
insolvency resolution process by a corporate applicant. It also seeks to amend section 
10 to abrogate the right of the corporate debtor to propose an interim resolution 
professional under an application filed under this section. This seeks to eliminate the 
possibility of bias in the appointment of the interim resolution professional, thereby 
ensuring the impartial discharge of duties and maintaining the confidence of creditors in 
the process. It also seeks to insert a proviso in sub-section (4) of section 10, to provide 
that where the application is not decided within fourteen days, the Adjudicating 
Authority will record reasons for such delay in writing. 


Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section 11 of the Code as a consequential 
amendment pursuant to the insertion of the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution 
process under Chapter IV-A of Part II of the Code. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 12A of the Code to provide that 
the Adjudicating Authority may allow an application admitted under section 7, 9, or 
10 to be withdrawn on an application made by the resolution professional with the 
prior approval of ninety per cent. of the voting share of the committee of creditors. 
The consent of the applicant who made these applications will not be required at the 
stage of filing the application for withdrawal, and he shall be provided an 
opportunity for hearing during the adjudication of this application before the 
Adjudicating Authority. Further, it clarifies that the Adjudicating Authority shall 
not allow the application admitted under section 7, 9, or 10 to be withdrawn either 
before the committee of creditors is constituted under section 21 of the Code or after 
the first invitation to submit a resolution plan by the resolution professional under 
any circumstances. Additionally, a period of thirty days is provided for the 
Adjudicating Authority to decide the withdrawal application. If the application is 
not decided within thirty days, the Adjudicating Authority is required to record 
reasons for such delay in writing. 


Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 14 of the Code 
to clarify that the applicability of the moratorium under sub-section (/) shall also be 
subject to sub-section (2A) of section 14. It also seeks to insert an explanation into 
clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 14 to clarify that the moratorium shall apply 
where the surety seeks to initiate or continue any action or proceedings pursuant to 
a contract of guarantee against the corporate debtor undergoing the corporate 
insolvency resolution process. Hence, the moratorium under section 14 will apply 
against the surety where, it seeks to initiate a proceedings against the corporate 
debtor pursuant to its right of subrogation in contravention of sub-section (/) of 
section 14. Ifthe surety has any claims against the corporate debtor, it should submit 
them during the process like other creditors. 


Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to amend section 16 of the Code as a consequence 
of the amendments to section 10, wherein the right of the corporate debtor to propose 
an interim resolution professional is abrogated. In such cases, the Adjudicating 
Authority shall make a reference to the Board for recommending an insolvency 
professional who may act as an interim resolution professional and accordingly 
appoint the interim resolution professional. 


Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (0) of section 18 of the Code to 
clarify that the Board is empowered to specify the manner of collating the claims 
received from the creditors. It also seeks to insert an explanation in clause (b) of 
section 18 to clarify that while collating the claims, the interim resolution 
professional is empowered and obligated to verify the claims and, if required, 
determine the value of such verified claims. While collating claims, the interim 
resolution professional has the duty to verify them. In case the verified claim is not 
precise, the interim resolution professional shall determine the value of the verified 
claim. The amendment seeks to clarify this function, which will be carried out by 
the interim resolution professional, the resolution professional, or the liquidator, as 
applicable, in maintaining or updating the list of claims. The regulations will specify 
the circumstances in which this function should be performed and the manner in 
which it should be carried out. 


Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to amend section 19 of the Code to provide the 
categories of persons required to extend assistance to and cooperate with the interim 
resolution professional. These categories will include any person who is or has been 
(i) personnel of the corporate debtor, (7) its promoter, (iii) associated with the 
management of the corporate debtor, or (79) engaged in a contract for service with 
the corporate debtor. Constructive cooperation from the aforementioned categories 
will enable the interim resolution professional to manage the affairs of the corporate 
debtor and perform his duties effectively, such as collecting information for 
purposes such as the conduct of the corporate insolvency resolution process, filing 
applications for the avoidance of transactions, etc. In case these persons fail to assist 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 41 


or cooperate, an application may be submitted to the Adjudicating Authority to 
direct them, and, if necessary to ensure compliance, any other related persons 
connected to them, to comply with the instructions issued by the resolution 
professional and to cooperate with him. It is also clarified that the provisions of 
section 19 apply to the interim resolution professional as well as the resolution 
professional. 


Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to amend section 21 of the Code to enable the 
committee of creditors constituted during the corporate insolvency resolution 
process to supervise the conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator. The 
committee of creditors would be able to incorporate the learnings acquired during 
the corporate insolvency resolution process regarding the status of the corporate 
debtor into supervising the conduct of the liquidation process thereby directing the 
liquidator in taking efficient commercial decisions to liquidate the assets. It also 
seeks to empower the Board to specify any other class or classes of creditors who 
may attend the meetings of the committee of creditors during the liquidation process 
in addition to its participants during the corporate insolvency resolution process. 
However, such specified creditors will not have a right to vote in the meetings. 


Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to amend section 22 of the Code to provide deemed 
continuation of the interim resolution professional as a resolution professional 
where the committee of creditors resolves to appoint him as a resolution 
professional. The decision regarding the appointment shall be communicated to the 
interim resolution professional, the corporate debtor, and the Board. It will ensure 
that where an interim resolution professional appointed by the Adjudicating 
Authority is continued as a resolution professional, separate intervention by the 
Adjudicating Authority is not required. 


Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to amend section 25 of the Code to clarify that the 
duty of the resolution professional to file an application for avoidance transaction 
under Chapter III also extends to fraudulent or wrongful trading under Chapter VI 
of Part II. 


Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 26 of the Code to clarify that 
the proceedings in respect of avoidance transactions or fraudulent or wrongful 
trading or under section 47 of the Code shall not affect the corporate insolvency 
resolution process, and these proceedings will continue independently and are not 
affected by the completion of the corporate insolvency resolution process. Similarly, 
it is also provided that filing of these proceedings shall not affect the liquidation 
process, and completion of the liquidation process shall not affect the continuation 
of these proceedings. The amendments to section 54 provide how such proceedings 
shall continue after the liquidation process is completed and the corporate debtor is 
dissolved. 


Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 28A in Chapter II of Part II 
in the Code to enable a transfer of an asset of a guarantor (personal or corporate) of 
the corporate debtor as part of the corporate insolvency resolution process of such 
corporate debtor. To transfer such asset as part of the corporate insolvency 
resolution process of the corporate debtor, the creditor must (i) have a security 
interest over an asset of the guarantor of the corporate debtor; (7) have taken 
possession of the asset by enforcing its security interest under any law for the time 
being which should enable the creditor to transfer the asset. Further, such a creditor 
and the committee of creditors of the corporate debtor must agree to transfer the 
asset under this provision. However, where the guarantor is undergoing insolvency 
resolution, liquidation or bankruptcy under the Code, additional approval will be 
required from the committee of creditors or creditors of the guarantor, as the case 
may be. The regulations will specify the process for transferring the assets of the 
guarantor as part of the corporate insolvency resolution, including conditions on the 
types of assets that can be transferred, the eligibility of persons who can purchase 
these assets, and the method for determining their value in the case of a cumulative 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


transfer. After the transfer of the asset of the guarantor as part of the corporate 
insolvency resolution process, the value received for such an asset shall be adjusted 
towards the debt of the guarantor as per the applicable law, subject to any costs, 
charges and expenses. Thereafter, any surplus shall be paid to the guarantor as per 
the applicable law, and if the guarantor is undergoing insolvency resolution or 
bankruptcy process under the Code, it shall be included as part of such process. 


Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 30 of the Code to 
provide that under a resolution plan, the minimum threshold for payment to the financial 
creditors who have not voted in favour of the resolution plan (‘dissenting financial 
creditors’) shall be the amount that would have been paid to them-(/) in the event of 
liquidation under section 53 or (ii) if the amount to be distributed under the resolution plan 
was distributed as per the order of priority under section 53, whichever is lower. 
Accordingly, if the amount payable to dissenting financial creditors under the first scenario 
is lower than that under the second scenario, then the amount under the first scenario shall 
serve as the minimum that must be paid to them for the resolution plan to be considered 
valid. This ensures that the requirement to provide at least a minimum amount to the 
dissenting financial creditors does not obstruct the approval of a feasible and viable 
resolution plan. It also seeks to amend clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 30 of the 
Code to provide that each resolution plans shall provide for the constitution of a committee 
to oversee the implementation and supervision of the plan once it has been approved by 
the Adjudicating Authority. The regulations will provide details such as the composition 
of the committee, the cases in which it should be constituted, and its functions. 


Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to insert a new proviso in sub-section (/) of 
section 31 of the Code to enable the Adjudicating Authority to first approve the 
implementation of the resolution plan, and then, by a separate order, approve the manner 
of distribution provided therein within a period of thirty days. This power shall only be 
exercised by the Adjudicating Authority on an application made by the resolution 
professional with the approval of the committee of creditors. The Board will specify the 
form and manner, and any condition for making such an application. Before approving the 
implementation of the resolution plan, the Adjudicating Authority shall confirm that the 
resolution plan meets the mandatory requirements under section 30 other than the 
requirements concerning the manner of distribution such as the minimum distribution 
related requirements for certain creditors. When the resolution plan is approved without 
the manner of distribution, it shall be binding on all stakeholders as provided under 
section 31. In the meantime, the moratorium imposed under section 14 will continue to 
apply against the creditors and other stakeholders as the process is still in progress, subject 
to the implementation of the resolution plan. When the manner of distribution is 
subsequently approved, it shall also be binding and the process shall stand completed. 


Additionally, it seeks to insert a proviso in sub-section (2) to empower the 
Adjudicating Authority to provide an opportunity to the committee of creditors to 
rectify any defects in the resolution plan before rejecting it, where the defects are 
procedural, non-material and can be rectified by the committee of creditors. It also 
seeks to insert sub-section (2A) to provide that the Adjudicating Authority must give 
its order regarding approval or rejection within thirty days. In addition to the above, 
it seeks to amend the proviso to sub-section (4) of section 31 to provide that if a 
resolution plan provides for a combination which requires prior approval of the 
Competition Commission of India under the Competition Act, 2002, then such 
approval shall be obtained by the resolution applicant before the resolution plan is 
submitted to the Adjudicating Authority for approval. 


It further seeks to insert sub-sections (5) and (6) to clarify and acknowledge 
the concept of the clean-slate principle recognised by judicial pronouncements. 
Once a resolution plan is approved, claims are settled according to the plan, and 
unless otherwise specified, they are extinguished. Therefore, such a resolution 
should be recognised by and binding on all parties, and past liabilities should not 
serve as a basis for suspending or terminating any grant or right, or for any 
proceedings against the resolved corporate debtor. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


Sub-section (5) clarifies that where the Adjudicating Authority has approved 
a resolution plan, the grant or right given by the Central Government, State 
Government, local authority, sectoral regulator, or any other authority constituted 
under any other law for the time being in force that is associated with such a 
resolution plan shall not be suspended or terminated during the subsistence of the 
remaining period of such grants or rights. The resolution plan will specify the grants 
or rights of the corporate debtor that are meant to be continued. To seek this 
protection, the corporate debtor must comply with the obligations associated with 
such grants or rights for the remainder of the period. It will also apply when the 
assets of the corporate debtor, along with any grants or rights associated with the 
corporate debtor, are sold to a resolution applicant who complies with the 
obligations linked to such grants or rights for the remaining period. However, the 
obligations in respect of the debts arising prior to the date of approval of the 
resolution plan, which were resolved during the corporate insolvency resolution 
process, shall be governed as per sub-section (6) of section 31. The provider of such 
grants and rights cannot take non-payment of such debt as a ground for suspension 
or termination. 


Furthermore, sub-section (6) to clarifies that after the approval of the 
resolution plan under sub-section (/), all claims against the corporate debtor or its 
assets not covered by the resolution plan will be deemed to have extinguished, and 
no proceedings shall be continued or instituted against the corporate debtor or its 
assets in connection with such claims. It is clarified that this provision does not 
affect any claim or proceedings against a former promoter or management or 
guarantor of the corporate debtor. It is also clarified that if a person with joint 
liability or a joint and several liability with the corporate debtor settles a debt that 
was owed to a creditor before the approval of the resolution plan, then the right of 
such a person to be indemnified by the corporate debtor shall also be extinguished 
after the approval of the resolution plan. 


Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to amend section 33 of the Code to extend the 
moratorium declared during the corporate insolvency resolution process to the 
liquidation process to the extent it is provided under clauses (a) and (b) of sub- 
section (/) read with sub-section (3) of section 14. It is provided that the suits or 
other legal proceedings on behalf of the corporate debtor shall not be commenced 
or continued without the leave of the Adjudicating Authority. This will ensure that 
the moratorium during the corporate insolvency resolution process also extends to 
the liquidation process. As a result, all pending and future legal proceedings against 
the corporate debtor will be prohibited, preventing multiple actions that could 
deplete resources and cause delays. It significantly reduces the financial and 
administrative burden on the liquidator, who would otherwise need to pursue or 
defend numerous claims across various forums. It is also clarified that the 
Adjudicating Authority, when issuing an order to initiate the liquidation process, 
shall also appoint the liquidator in accordance with section 34. 


Further, it seeks to insert new sub-sections (/A) and (/B) to section 33 to 
restore the corporate insolvency resolution process in exceptional cases, provided 
that the committee of creditors makes such a request by an application. The 
Adjudicating Authority can only restore the process if it is satisfied that the 
following circumstances under sub-section (/) exist-first, no resolution plan has 
been approved within the period stipulated under the Code, or second, the resolution 
plan approved by the committee of creditors has been rejected under section 31. 
After considering the application, the Adjudicating Authority will determine if the 
application demonstrates that there is still some potential to resolve the insolvency 
of the corporate debtor and may, by an order, restore the process. This ensures that 
errors, which cause either the process not to be completed on time or the resolution 
plan to be rejected, do not prevent a corporate debtor from successfully resolving 
insolvency and avoid forcing it into liquidation. In the first scenario, the 
Adjudicating Authority will restore the process and provide an appropriate duration 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


within which the process must be completed, not exceeding one hundred twenty 
days. In the second scenario, it shall restore the process to the stage of invitation of 
the resolution plan and specify a duration within which the restored process should 
be completed, not exceeding one hundred twenty days. The regulation will specify 
the procedures and conditions for completing the restored process to ensure 
effective outcomes and prevent abuse. This option to restore the process shall be 
available only once, irrespective of which of the two scenarios it is exercised under. 


It also enables the committee of creditors to seek dissolution of the corporate 
debtor at any time during the corporate insolvency resolution process, but before 
confirmation of the resolution plan and after complying with such conditions as may 
be specified by the Board. Such a request may be made where the corporate debtor 
does not have any meaningful or recoverable assets and undergoing the entire 
process will be cumbersome and costly. It further seeks to provide a thirty-day 
period within which the Adjudicating Authority shall pass a liquidation order. 


Additionally, when an application is made for a liquidation order due to the 
contravention of an approved resolution plan, the Adjudicating Authority may, in 
exceptional cases, reinstate the corporate insolvency resolution process instead, if it 
is viable for maximising the value of the corporate debtor. While reinstating the 
process, it may determine the stage from which the process will commence and pass 
any other orders to facilitate the process. Similarly, in such cases where the 
Adjudicating Authority decides to make a liquidation order, it can also pass any 
other orders it deems fit for efficient conduct of the process. 


Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to amend section 34 of the Code to provide that 
the liquidator shall be appointed on the proposal of the committee of creditors, and 
the resolution professional shall not automatically be appointed as a liquidator. It 
can either propose the existing resolution professional or propose another 
insolvency professional, subject to their written consent to be appointed as the 
liquidator. Where the committee of creditors does not forward the name of the 
proposed liquidator or the Board does not confirm the name of the proposed 
liquidator, the Adjudicating Authority shall appoint the liquidator on reference from 
the Board. The existing resolution professional shall be disqualified from being 
appointed as a liquidator at the initiation or during the process where the resolution 
plan submitted by it was rejected for failure to meet the requirements of 
sub-section (2) of section 30. It also seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of section 34 
of the Code to apply provisions similar to the amended section 19 to the liquidation 
process and voluntary liquidation process. 


Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 34A in Chapter III of 
Part II of the Code to allow for the replacement of liquidator by the committee of 
creditors during the liquidation process as per this provision. 


Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to amend section 35 of the Code to harmonise 
the powers and duties of the liquidator during the liquidation process with those 
during the corporate insolvency resolution process. This would avoid repetition of 
common activities and ensure faster completion of the liquidation process. The 
claims collated during the corporate insolvency resolution process will be 
maintained and updated during the liquidation process. The Board will specify the 
procedure for maintaining and updating the claims, including the need to verify 
the claims and determine their value, if necessary. However, a fresh process of 
invitation of claims will not be conducted. Further, the liquidator will not be 
obligated to make a fresh investigation to identify avoidable transaction or 
fraudulent or wrongful trading. However, it will be empowered and obligated to 
continue or institute proceedings regarding an avoidance transaction or fraudulent 
or wrongful trading. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


It also seeks to extend the role of the committee of creditors constituted during the 
corporate insolvency resolution process to the liquidation process. The committee of 
creditors will supervise the conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator. During 
the liquidation process, the committee of creditors will advise and guide the liquidator 
on commercial matters. It will act to uphold the interests of all stakeholders entitled to 
distribution under section 53 and perform an oversight function to ensure transparency 
and accountability in the conduct of the liquidation. The Board will specify how the 
committee will supervise the conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator. 
Additionally, the role of the committee of creditors is limited to the liquidation process 
under section 35 and does not extend to voluntary liquidation. When this provision 
applies to voluntary liquidation pursuant to sub-section (6) of section 59, the Board will 
establish a separate procedure for consulting stakeholders. 


Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to amend section 36 of the Code as a consequential 
change pursuant to the insertion of the definitions of “avoidance transaction” and 
“fraudulent or wrongful trading” to clarify that assets recovered from all types of 
proceedings in respect of avoidance transactions, fraudulent or wrongful trading, or 
under section 47 of the Code shall be part of the liquidation estate. 


Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to omit sections 38, 39, 40, 41, and 42 of the Code 
to prevent duplication of processes in the corporate insolvency resolution process 
and liquidation process. However, as provided under amendments made to 
section 35, the liquidator will have the power and duty to maintain an updated list 
of claims of creditors against the corporate debtor, as per the procedure specified in 
the regulations. 


Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 43 of the Code to 
make two modifications to the look-back period for determining preferential 
transactions. Firstly, it changes the threshold for the look-back period from the 
insolvency commencement date to the initiation date (the date of filing of the application 
for initiation of the corporate insolvency resolution process). Secondly, it includes the 
period between the initiation date and the insolvency commencement date in the look- 
back period for such transactions. Currently, the threshold for the look-back period in 
section 43 is the insolvency commencement date (date on which the application for 
initiation of the corporate insolvency resolution process is admitted). Where the 
admission of an application takes longer than fourteen days, the look-back period for 
preferential transactions may not be able to capture a significant portion of transactions 
that occurred before the filing of an application. This may also give corporate debtors a 
perverse incentive to delay admission of the application for the commencement of the 
insolvency resolution process to reduce the scope of an avoidable transaction. Therefore, 
the threshold for the look-back period for preferential transactions has been adjusted to 
more effectively capture a broader range of pre-filing transactions, particularly those 
undertaken in anticipation of the commencement of the insolvency resolution process 
to exclude assets from the process. 


Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to amend the marginal heading of section 46, to 
substitute the word “avoidable” for the word “undervalued”. Similar to amendments 
to section 43, it seeks to amend the threshold for the look-back period for 
undervalued transactions to more effectively capture a broader range of pre-filing 
transactions, particularly those undertaken in anticipation of the commencement of 
the insolvency resolution process to exclude assets from the process. 


Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 47 of the Code to enable 
creditors (individually or jointly with other creditors) or a member or partner of the 
corporate debtor, as the case may be, to apply to the Adjudicating Authority for the 
avoidance of an avoidable transaction under sections 43, 45, or 50 of the Code or 
fraudulent or wrongful trading under section 66 of the Code if the liquidator or 
resolution professional has not reported such transaction or trading to the 
Adjudicating Authority. The Adjudicating Authority is empowered to pass an order 
for the avoidance of such transactions or fraudulent or wrongful trading as if such 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


an application had been filed by the liquidator or resolution professional in 
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Code. Following the passing of such 
an order, the Adjudicating Authority is also empowered to pass an order requiring 
the Board to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the liquidator or the resolution 
professional, if it is satisfied that the liquidator or the resolution professional did not 
report the transaction or trading to the Adjudicating Authority even after having 
sufficient information or opportunity to obtain information regarding the same. 


Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (a) of the proviso to section 49 of the 
Code to also exclude the property acquired from a related party of the corporate debtor 
from the exception under this proviso. It prevents the transactions wherein the asset of 
the corporate debtor is transferred to its related party, and consequently, such an asset is 
transferred from the related party to a third party, from being exempted as “transactions 
defrauding creditors”. However, if the asset is further transferred from the third party to 
another person, it can still be exempted if the other requirements are met. This ensures 
that the transfer of the property through a related party does not gain protection under 
clause (a) of the proviso to section 49, which should apply to transactions taken in good 
faith between the sellers and buyers of the property that belonged to the corporate debtor. 


Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 50 of the Code to 
make changes to the look-back period for determining extortionate credit transactions. 
Similar to amendments to section 43, it seeks to amend the threshold for the look-back 
period for extortionate credit transactions to more effectively capture a broader range of 
pre-filing transactions, particularly those undertaken in anticipation of the 
commencement of the insolvency resolution process to exclude assets from the process. 


Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 52 of the Code to 
include a mandatory timeline of fourteen days from the liquidation commencement date 
for a secured creditor to convey its decision of whether it intends to realise the security 
interest outside the liquidation process. If they fail to do so, such security interest will 
be considered to be relinquished to the liquidation estate. This is to ensure the prompt 
completion of the liquidation process and prevent any delays in liquidating the corporate 
debtor. It also seeks to insert a proviso in sub-section (2) to clarify that in the event that 
more than one secured creditor has any security interest over an asset of the corporate 
debtor, no secured creditor shall be entitled to realise its security interest unless the 
realisation is agreed upon by the secured creditors representing not less than sixty-six 
per cent. of the value of all claims that are secured by such security interests. In cases 
where multiple secured creditors have claims secured by a security interest over a 
specific asset of the corporate debtor, only those secured claims related to that asset are 
considered. This is regardless of whether the value of the asset is enough to cover all 
claims or the priority of the security interest. These claims are combined, and secured 
creditors representing at least sixty per cent. in value of this total secured claim must 
agree to realisation outside the liquidation process. 


It further seeks to amend sub-section (8) of section 52 to clarify that the 
contribution of the amount towards the insolvency resolution process costs, liquidation 
costs and workmen’s dues under clause (a) and sub-clause (7) of clause (b) of sub-section 
(2) of section 53 shall be deducted from the proceeds of any realisation by the secured 
creditors, when the secured creditor decides to realise its security interest outside the 
liquidation process. This will ensure that a secured creditor who chooses to realise its 
security interest outside the liquidation process contributes towards the insolvency 
resolution costs, liquidation costs, and workmen’s dues, as these would have been 
distributed if the secured creditor had relinquished their security interest to the 
liquidation estate. The Board will specify the period and conditions for transferring the 
amount to the liquidator and securing the payment. It also ensures that workmen do not 
receive any lesser amount than the portion of dues accorded priority under 
sub-clause (7) of clause (b) of sub-section (/) of section 53 in the liquidation process if 
the secured creditors choose to stand outside the collective liquidation process to realise 
their security interests. The requirement of contribution by secured creditors in such a 
case will ensure the protection of the interests of the workmen. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to insert an explanation in sub-clause (7) of clause (6) 
of sub-section (/) of section 53 of the Code to clarify that in cases where the value of 
the security interest that the secured creditor has relinquished to the liquidation estate is 
less than the total debt that the corporate debtor owes to that secured creditor, such 
secured creditor will be considered a secured creditor to the extent of the value of such 
security interest. The Board will specify the manner of determining the value of the 
security interest. For the remaining value of such debt, it shall be considered an 
unsecured creditor. 


It further seeks to insert an explanation in sub-clause (7) of clause (e) of 
sub-section (/) of section 53 to clarify that the dues of the Central and State 
Governments, whether or not a security interest is created to secure such amounts, shall 
not receive a higher order of priority under sub-section (/) of section 53. The Central 
and State Government dues for the period of two years preceding the liquidation 
commencement date shall be distributed as per the order of priority under sub-clause (7) 
of clause (e) of sub-section (/) of section 53, whether or not a security interest is created 
to secure such amount. Such dues shall not be distributed as per the higher order of 
priority under sub-clause (7) of clause (8) of sub-section (/) of section 53 along with the 
secured creditors even though a security interest is created to secure these dues. Beyond 
the period of two years preceding the liquidation commencement date, any remaining 
dues of the Central and State Government will be distributed as per the lower order of 
priority under clause (f) of sub-section (/) of section 53. 


Additionally, the clause seeks to insert illustrations after sub-section (2) to clarify 
the scope and application of sub-section (2) of section 53. 


Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (/) of section 54 of the Code 
to provide timelines for completing the liquidation process within a period of one 
hundred and eighty days from the liquidation commencement date. This period can be 
extended by the Adjudicating Authority, on an application by the liquidator, by such a 
period as it deems fit, provided that such period does not exceed ninety days. 


It further seeks to insert sub-sections (JA) and (/B) to enable the committee of 
creditors to determine the manner of pursuing proceedings in respect of an avoidance 
transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47 and any suit or other 
legal proceedings against the corporate debtor concerning any proceeds to be distributed 
under section 53 after the dissolution of the corporate debtor, respectively. It will be the 
duty of the committee of creditors to make suitable arrangements to pursue such 
proceedings and distribute the proceeds recovered from such proceedings as per the 
procedure specified by the Board, before the liquidator or the resolution professional 
applies to dissolve the corporate debtor to the Adjudicating Authority. 


It also seeks to insert sub-section (24) to empower the Adjudicating Authority to 
pass an order of dissolution of the corporate debtor on receipt of the decision of the 
committee of creditors to dissolve the corporate debtor under sub-section (2) of 
section 33 of the Code without completing corporate insolvency resolution process or 
undergoing liquidation process. It may be considered by the Adjudicating Authority 
whether the corporate debtor has any meaningful or recoverable assets, or if the entire 
process will be cumbersome and costly when passing the dissolution order. 


It also seeks to insert sub-section (2B), to provide that the passing of the 
dissolution order shall not affect the continuation of proceedings in respect of avoidance 
transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47 and any suit or other 
legal proceedings against the corporate debtor concerning any proceeds to be distributed 
under section 53. Before passing the dissolution order, the Adjudicating Authority 
should confirm whether such proceedings are pending and if the committee of creditors 
has made appropriate arrangements for their continuation post-dissolution. Further, the 
forums conducting these proceedings should acknowledge the arrangements made by 
the committee of creditors under sub-sections (/A) and (/B) and the dissolution order 
passed by the Adjudicating Authority confirming them and proceed with those 
proceedings accordingly. 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Further, it seeks to insert sub-section (4) to provide a period of thirty days for the 
Adjudicating Authority to pass a dissolution order. 


Clause 34 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 54A of the Code as a 
consequential change pursuant to the insertion of Chapter IV-A titled “Creditor-Initiated 
Insolvency Resolution Process”. 


Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of section 54C of the Code 
to enable the Board to specify the information to be furnished by the corporate applicant 
along with the application to initiate the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process to 
ensure efficiency. 


Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (5) of section 54F of the Code 
to apply provisions similar to the amended section 19 to the pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process to ensure assistance and cooperation with the resolution professional. 


Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to amend section 54L of the Code to apply certain 
changes made to sections 31 and 33 to the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process 
under Chapter III-A of Part II of the Code. 


Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to amend section 54N of the Code to apply changes 
made to section 33 dealing with the initiation of the liquidation process to the pre- 
packaged insolvency resolution process. 


Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to omit Chapter IV of Part II of the Code comprising 
of sections 55 to 58, which deal with the fast track corporate insolvency resolution 
process. Consequential amendments are made to the Code for the omission of the 
provisions related to the fast track corporate insolvency resolution process. 


Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter IV-A titled Creditor-Initiated 
Insolvency Resolution Process comprising new sections 58A to 58K in Part II of the 
Code, which provide for:— 


(7) Section 58A seeks to provide the types of corporate debtors who shall be 
eligible for the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process. Sub-section (/) 
empowers the Central Government to notify the types of corporate debtors in 
respect of whom the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process may be 
initiated. Additionally, sub-section (2) stipulates specific types of corporate 
debtors for whom, despite eligibility under sub-section (/), the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process shall not be initiated. For instance, the corporate 
debtors for whom either an insolvency resolution or liquidation process has been 
commenced and is still undergoing, are excluded from being an eligible corporate 
debtors in respect of whom the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process 
may be initiated. Also, the corporate debtors for whom any insolvency resolution 
process has taken place three years preceding the creditor-initiated insolvency 
commencement date will not be eligible for this process. To determine this 
eligibility, three years will be calculated from the date of the public announcement 
from which the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process commences. 


(ii) Section 58B seeks to provide the procedure for initiating the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process. Sub-section (/) provides that a 
financial creditor of the corporate debtor in respect of whom default is committed 
may initiate the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, should belong to 
the class of financial institutions notified by the Central Government. Only these 
notified financial creditors shall have the right to initiate the process. Additionally, 
since this is an insolvency process under Part II, the minimum default threshold 
specified in section 4 of the Code must be satisfied. Also, the Central Government 
may prescribe other conditions for initiation of the process, which will be required 
to be complied with for initiating the process. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


Sub-section (2) lists the mandatory requirements that must be complied with 
by the financial creditor seeking to initiate the process under this Chapter. First, the 
financial creditor must obtain approval to initiate the process from the financial 
creditors belonging to the notified class of financial institutions representing not less 
than fifty-one per cent. of the total value of the debt due to such financial creditors. 
After that, the financial creditor shall inform the corporate debtor about its intent to 
initiate the process and give it at least thirty days to make any representation. Within 
this period, the corporate debtor can either repay the default amount or make a 
representation to the financial creditor for not initiating the process. If the default 
continues to exist, the financial creditor may consider the representation of the 
corporate debtor and decide whether to proceed with initiating the process. Since the 
default still exists, it will be up to the subjective satisfaction of the financial creditor 
whether or not to initiate the process. Where the financial creditor decides to pursue 
the initiation of the process, it shall again seek the approval of the financial creditors 
belonging to such notified class of financial institutions, representing not less than 
fifty-one per cent. in value of the debt due to such financial creditors, to initiate the 
process. If the financial creditor fails to obtain approval within thirty days, it will 
need to start the procedure again under sub-section (2) if it intends to initiate the 
process. This ensures that the financial creditor does not delay the initiation of the 
process and promptly considers the representation. 


Sub-section (3) provides that if requirements under sub-section (2) are 
fulfilled, the financial creditor may appoint an insolvency professional as the 
resolution professional. No disciplinary proceedings should be pending 
against such insolvency professional. The financial creditor (after considering 
the representation of the corporate debtor) can appoint the resolution 
professional immediately after obtaining the approval of the notified class of 
financial institutions. If no representation is received, implying that the 
corporate debtor has no objection to initiating the process, the financial 
creditor may immediately appoint the resolution professional after the 
completion of the period for making the representation. 


Sub-section (4) provides that the resolution professional, after its 
appointment, shall make a public announcement of the initiation of the process 
and communicate the same to the Adjudicating Authority and the Board. The 
resolution professional shall also submit a report based on its own evaluation, 
along with such communication, confirming whether the requirements under 
sections 58A and 58B are met. The Board shall specify the period within which 
the public announcement should be made and its form and manner. The creditor- 
initiated insolvency resolution process shall be deemed to have initiated from the 
date of the public announcement, and no order or direction from the Adjudicating 
Authority or the Board shall be required for the same. This will be an out-of-court 
commencement of the process. If the public announcement is not made within the 
specified period, the pre-commencement procedures would expire, and any later 
public announcement shall not be considered valid. The Board shall specify 
appropriate procedure to ensure that the resolution professionals adhere to the 
period and procedures for commencing the process. 


Sub-section (5) provides that after the process under Chapter IV-A is 
commenced, no application for initiation of the corporate insolvency 
resolution process or the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process in 
respect of the corporate debtor shall be filed during the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process period. Since the corporate debtor will be 
undergoing an insolvency resolution process, its creditors will be required to 
participate in this process by submitting claims. Hence, no default of a 
corporate debtor should be the basis for filing or admitting an application to 
initiate another insolvency resolution process. 


50 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(iii) Section 58C seeks to allow the corporate debtor to object to the 
commencement of the process under section 58B by applying to the Adjudicating 
Authority within thirty days from the creditor-initiated insolvency 
commencement date. The right to object to the commencement of the process 
before the Adjudicating Authority, can be exercised only after the process has 
been initiated and not before the public announcement under section 58B. If the 
corporate debtor chooses not to object within the specified period, it will be 
assumed that it has no objection and that the initiation of the process is valid. 


Sub-section (2) of section 58C provides that where the Adjudicating 
Authority is satisfied that a default has not occurred, or both a default has not 
occurred and also the initiation of the process is in contravention of the 
procedure stipulated under sections 58A or 58B, it may, by an order, declare 
the commencement of the process as void ab-initio. The Adjudicating 
Authority will only be required to ascertain whether these two requirements 
are fulfilled, and no other ground or objection shall be considered. However, 
if the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that a default has occurred, but the 
initiation of the process is in contravention of sections 58A or 58B, it shall 
convert the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution to the corporate insolvency 
resolution process and pass an order under sub-section (/) of section 58H. 
When objections are raised solely due to non-compliance with the procedure 
specified under sections 58A or 58B, and not based on the existence of the 
default, the Adjudicating Authority shall assume that a default exists and 
convert the process to the corporate insolvency resolution process if it is 
satisfied that there is material non-compliance with such procedure. 


(iv) Section 58D sets out the period for the completion of the creditor- 
initiated insolvency resolution process. Sub-section (/) provides that the process 
shall be completed within one hundred and fifty days. Sub-section (2) allows this 
period to be extended by period of forty-five days. Any extension to this period 
extension shall not be granted more than once. Sub-section (3) provides that where 
the committee of creditors does not approve any resolution plan within the 
stipulated period in sub-section (/) or under the extended period under sub-section 
(2), the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (/) of section 
58H converting the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process into corporate 
insolvency resolution process. The Board will provide the procedure for the 
resolution professional to inform the Adjudicating Authority, and accordingly, it 
will convert this process into the corporate insolvency resolution process. Such a 
mandatory period will ensure timely resolution of insolvency. It will also ensure 
that protections (like moratorium) during the process with control of the corporate 
debtor by its management do not continue beyond the period mentioned in this 
section to avoid any misuse of the process. 


(v) Section 58E sets out the duties and powers of the resolution 
professional during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution period. The 
resolution professional shall exercise and perform these duties and powers 
only after the commencement of the process by public announcement and not 
before such commencement. He will be required to call for submission of 
claims, prepare the information memorandum, perform the duties referred to 
in clauses (a) to (c) of section 18 and clauses (e) to (/) of sub-section (2) of 
section 25, exercise powers referred to in sub-section (3) and (4) of 
section 547, file such report and documents with the Board and perform such 
other duties specified by the Board. The resolution professional is also 
required prepare a report confirming whether the conduct of the process is in 
accordance with the procedural requirements and that the resolution plan 
complies with the requirements of sections 29A and 30. The provisions similar 
to section 19 apply to the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process to 
ensure assistance and cooperation with the resolution professional. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 51 


(vi) Section 58F states that the management of the affairs of the corporate 
debtor shall continue to vest in the Board of Directors or the partners of the 
corporate debtor, as the case may be, during the creditor-initiated insolvency 
resolution process period. The provisions of section 54H shall, mutatis mutandis 
apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter. However, prior approval from the 
committee of creditors shall be required for certain actions mentioned in section 
28. Additionally, the resolution professional shall, from the creditor-initiated 
insolvency commencement date, attend all meetings of the members, Board of 
directors, and committee of directors, or partners of the corporate debtor. The 
resolution professional can reject any decision or resolution made in these 
meetings, and if rejected, such decision or resolution shall not be approved or 
adopted. The regulations may provide for any condition in the exercise of this right 
and the manner for the same. This will ensure that the management of the 
corporate debtor is conducted in an orderly manner which aligns with the creditor- 
initiated insolvency resolution process. Also, the promoter and personnel of the 
corporate debtor are required to provide relevant information related to the 
corporate debtor to the resolution professional for preparing the information 
memorandum and shall be liable for any non-compliance. 


(vii) Section 58G seeks to allow the resolution professional to make an 
application before the Adjudicating Authority for a moratorium for the 
purpose of sub-section (/) read with sub-section (3) of section 14 after 
obtaining approval of the committee of creditors. This application may also be 
filed before the constitution of the committee of creditors, after obtaining 
approval of the financial creditors of the corporate debtor belonging to the 
class of financial institutions notified under sub-section (/) of section 58B, 
who represent not less than fifty-one per cent. in value of the debt due to such 
financial creditors. Sub-section (2) states that the moratorium shall commence 
from the date of application and shall continue to be in operation during the 
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period. The Adjudicating 
Authority may confirm the moratorium, if it is satisfied that the moratorium is 
required for the proper and efficient conduct of the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process or reject the application. 


While confirming, the Adjudicating Authority may consider factors such as 
the necessity to protect and preserve the assets of the corporate debtor, the conduct 
of the process in a fair and orderly manner, or the non-cooperation by the 
management of the corporate debtor. Further, the scope of its jurisdiction is limited 
to considering the need for the moratorium during the process, and it shall not be 
required to determine the correctness of the initiation of the process or the extent 
of the moratorium. Once the moratorium is imposed under this section, unless it 
is rejected by the Adjudication Authority, it shall have effect until the creditor- 
initiated insolvency resolution process period has concluded. Post confirmation, 
the Adjudicating Authority is not empowered to consider a request to lift or 
modify the moratorium. To inform the public about the imposition of the 
moratorium, the resolution professional must make a public announcement when 
an application for a moratorium is filed and, after that, ifthe application is rejected. 
This will ensure that all stakeholders of the corporate debtor, especially its 
creditors, have information about the imposition of a moratorium. 


(viii) Section 58H provides that the Adjudicating Authority shall 
convert the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process to the corporate 
insolvency resolution process in the following cases: (a) where it does not 
receive a resolution plan for approval within the stipulated period under 
section 58D; (0) where it is satisfied that the corporate debtor or its personnel 
have failed to assist or cooperate with the resolution professional; or (c) 
where it rejected the resolution plan. Clearly outlining the events for the 
conversion of the process ensures that it proceeds promptly and prevents the 
management of the corporate debtor from abusing its protections. While 


52 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


passing an order for conversion, the Adjudicating Authority shall also decide the 
stage from which the corporate insolvency resolution process shall commence. It 
may consider any recommendations made by the committee of creditors in this 
regard and decide on the appropriate stage for commencing the process. Also, it 
shall accordingly appoint the resolution professional for the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process as the interim resolution professional or the 
resolution professional for the corporate insolvency resolution process, declare a 
moratorium for the purposes referred to in section 14, and declare that the costs 
incurred during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process shall be 
included as part of the insolvency resolution process costs. 


Additionally, sub-section (2) provides that the committee of creditors 
may, at any time during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, decide 
to convert the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process to the corporate 
insolvency resolution process, and the resolution professional shall make an 
application to the Adjudicating Authority. On receipt of such application, the 
Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order for conversion of the process to the 
corporate insolvency resolution process. Sub-section (3) clarifies that where any 
order of conversion is passed under this section, it shall be deemed to be an order 
under section 7 of the Code, the proceedings initiated for avoidance transaction or 
fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47 shall continue. The creditor- 
initiated insolvency resolution process period shall be included in the relevant period 
for determining avoidance transactions. Additionally, when passing the conversion 
order, the Adjudicating Authority shall decide the stage at which the corporate 
insolvency resolution process shall commence, based on the procedures that have 
taken place during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process and their 
appropriateness. When making this decision, it may take into account any 
recommendations from the committee of creditors, if they choose to provide them. 


(ix) Section 58-I lays down the procedure for withdrawal of the public 
announcement made under section 58B and closing the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process. Sub-section (/) provides that the Adjudicating 
Authority may allow withdrawal of the public announcement on an application 
made by the resolution professional with the approval of ninety per cent. of the 
voting share of the committee of creditors. Sub-section (2) provides that the public 
announcement shall not be withdrawn before the constitution of the committee of 
creditors and after the first invitation for submission ofa resolution plan issued by 
the resolution professional. Sub-section (3) provides that the Adjudicating 
Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (/) within a period of fourteen 
days from the date of receipt of the application. 


(x) Section 58J provides for the procedure for approval of the resolution plan 
by the Adjudicating Authority. Sub-section (/) provides that where the committee 
of creditors approves a resolution plan by a vote of not less than sixty-six percent 
of the voting share, the resolution professional shall submit such approved 
resolution plan to the Adjudicating Authority, along with the report referred to in 
clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 58E confirming whether the conduct of the 
process is in accordance with the procedural requirements and that the resolution 
plan, filed along with it, complies with the requirements of sections 29A and 30. 
The report shall be given due regard by the Adjudicating Authority when 
approving the resolution plan to ensure prompt adjudication. Sub-section (2) 
provides that the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order in accordance with 
section 31, which shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process, and the resolution plan approved during this 
process have the same effect as approved during the corporate insolvency 
resolution process. While considering the request for approval of the resolution 
plan, the Adjudicating Authority shall have limited jurisdiction to ensure 
procedural compliance, similar to its jurisdiction under section 31 during the 
corporate insolvency resolution process. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


(xi) Section 58K provides that certain provisions of Part II of the Code that 
shall, mutatis mutandis apply, to the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution 
process with suitable modifications. Further, the Board is empowered to specify 
the conditions and procedural requirements for establishing a detailed process for 
creditor-initiate insolvency resolution process to ensure efficient outcomes. 


Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to amend section 59 of the Code to provide for a period 
to be specified by the Board within which the voluntary liquidation is to be completed, 
which shall not be more than one year. It also provides that the report of the valuation 
of the assets of the company, as required under sub-section (3) of section 59, will be 
prepared by a valuer registered under section 247 of the Companies Act, 2013. Further, 
it provides the procedure for termination of the voluntary liquidation in certain 
circumstances. There may be scenarios where such termination may be warranted. For 
instance, business opportunities may emerge that can make the corporate person 
profitable or viable after initiating the voluntary liquidation process. To account for this, 
the amendment has provided a streamlined manner of making such terminations similar 
to commencement procedure of the voluntary liquidation process. 


It also seeks to amend sub-section (6) of section 59 due to the omission of 
sections 38 to 42 of the Code, dealing with the consolidation, verification, admission or 
rejection and determination of claims. A reference to clause (b) of section 18 is inserted, 
which will apply to the voluntary liquidation process with such modifications as 
necessary. It clarifies that the omission of sections 38 to 42 under Chapter III of Part II 
of the Code does not affect the powers and duties of the liquidator to verify the claims 
and determine their value. The regulations may also provide a detailed process for 
claims invitation and consideration. 


Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter VA titled “Group Insolvency” 
in Part II of the Code to enable the Central Government to make rules concerning the 
manner and conditions for conducting insolvency proceedings and _ liquidation 
proceedings under Part II, where these proceedings are initiated against two or more 
corporate debtors that form part of a group. The group insolvency framework will 
facilitate improved coordination between insolvency resolution and liquidation 
processes for corporate debtors that form part of a group to maximise the value. In 
addition to these general powers, an indicative list of subject matters on which the 
Central Government may make rules to guide the implementation of this framework is 
provided. It aims to establish a voluntary procedural coordination framework for group 
insolvency. This will, among other things, seek the appointment of a group coordinator 
to facilitate communication, information sharing, and alignment of proceedings. The 
coordination will be through an agreement among the participating corporate debtors 
and their committees of creditors. Additionally, a common bench may also be 
constituted for further procedural coordination. 


Also, there may be situations where implementation of this framework will 
require alterations to the existing provisions of the Code, and the Central Government 
is suitably empowered to make those modifications. Further, before the rules framed 
under this section are issued, a draft of every rule proposed to be issued shall be laid 
down before each House of Parliament as per the procedure provided in this Chapter. 


Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 64A in Chapter VI of Part II of 
the Code to introduce a penalty for initiating frivolous or vexatious proceedings before 
the Adjudicating Authority under Part II of the Code to deter persons from initiating 
such proceedings and delay the insolvency resolution and liquidation processes. 


Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to amend section 65 of the Code due to the insertion 
of Chapter IV-A titled “Creditor-Initiated Insolvency Resolution Process”. The penalty 
under this section shall also apply to a person who initiates the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process fraudulently or with the intent of malice or to defraud any 
person. 


54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to amend section 66 of the Code relating to 
fraudulent or wrongful trading to clarify that the liquidator is also permitted to file 
applications under this section during the liquidation process. 


Clause 46 of the Bill seeks to amend section 67A of the Code due to the 
insertion of Chapter IV-A under Part II titled “Creditor-Initiated Insolvency 
Resolution Process”. The penalty under this section shall also apply to the officers 
of the corporate debtor during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process. 


Clause 47 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (4) to section 96 of the 
Code to provide that provisions of section 96 of the Code will not apply where an 
application to initiate an insolvency resolution process in respect of a personal 
guarantor to a corporate debtor is filed by a creditor or the debtor itself. 


Clause 48 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 99 of the Code 
to extend the period to twenty-one days within which the resolution professional 
shall examine the application filed under section 94 or section 95 and to submit its 
report to the Adjudicating Authority. Further, it seeks to amend sub-section (/0) of 
section 99 to require the resolution professional to provide a copy of its report to 
both the debtor and the creditor, who are parties to the proceeding. This amendment 
will ensure fairness in the process as both the debtor and creditor in a proceeding 
will be informed of the findings of the report, and it will assist them in presenting 
their submissions before the Adjudicating Authority. 


Clause 49 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (/A) into section 106 of the 
Code to provide that where no repayment plan is submitted within twenty-one days from 
the last date of claim submission as required under section 105 of the Code, the 
resolution professional must submit a report to the Adjudicating Authority. The 
Adjudicating Authority will then terminate the process if it is satisfied that the debtor 
failed to prepare the repayment plan in consultation with the resolution professional 
within the stipulated period. No extension will be granted, and after the termination of 
the process, the debtor or creditor will be entitled to apply for bankruptcy of the debtor. 


It further seeks to insert a new sub-section (3A) into section 106 to provide 
that where the repayment plan is being submitted during the insolvency resolution 
process of a debtor who is a personal guarantor to a corporate debtor, it is mandatory 
for the resolution professional to summon a meeting of the creditors for 
consideration of the repayment plan by issuing a notice. 


Clause 50 of the Bill seeks to amend section 121 of the Code to clarify that once 
the Adjudicating Authority issues an order terminating the insolvency resolution process 
of the debtor due to the non-preparation of the repayment plan in accordance with 
sub-section (/A) of section 106, a creditor individually or jointly with other creditors or 
a debtor, may make an application for bankruptcy of the debtor. 


Clause 51 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (4) to section 124 of 
the Code to provide that provisions of section 124 of the Code will not apply where 
an application to initiate a bankruptcy process in respect of a personal guarantor to 
a corporate debtor is filed by a creditor or the debtor itself. 


Clause 52 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 164A in the Code for the 
insolvency resolution and bankruptcy of individuals and partnership firms under 
Part III of the Code concerning transactions defrauding creditors similar to 
section 49 under Part II of the Code. 


Clause 53 of the Bill seeks to insert an explanation into clause (d) of 
sub-section (/) of section 178 of the Code to clarify that the Central and State 
Government dues for the period of two years preceding the bankruptcy 
commencement date shall be distributed as per the order of priority under clause (d) 
of sub-section (/) of section 178, whether or not a security interest is created to 
secure such amount. Such dues shall not be distributed as per the higher order of 
priority under sub-clause (7) of clause (6) of sub-section (/) of section 178. Beyond 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 55 


the period of two years preceding the bankruptcy commencement date, any 
remaining dues of the Central and State Government will be distributed as per the 
lower order of priority under clause (e) of sub-section (/) of section 178. 


Clause 54 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 183A in Chapter VI of 
Part Il of the Code to introduce a penalty for initiating frivolous or vexatious proceedings 
before the Adjudicating Authority under Part III of the Code to deter persons from 
initiating such proceedings and delay the insolvency and bankruptcy processes. 


Clause 55 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 196 of the Code 
to substitute the references to insolvency professional agencies, insolvency 
professionals, and information utilities, wherever they occur in various clauses of 
this provision, with ‘service providers’, as acommon definition of ‘service provider’ 
is inserted into section 3 of the Code. The Board may provide registration and other 
norms for all persons falling under the definition of service providers. 


It further seeks to insert an explanation into clause (c) of sub-section (/) of 
section 196 to clarify that the Board can also levy fees or other charges in relation 
to all types of insolvency resolution, liquidation, and bankruptcy processes covered 
under the Code. 


It also seeks to insert clause (sa) into sub-section (/) of section 196 to 
empower the Board to specify regulations for the standards of conduct of the 
committee of creditors and its members while acting under Part II and Part II of the 
Code. This will help the committee of creditors and its members to operate 
efficiently and effectively. 


It also seeks to amend clause (/) of sub-section (/) of section 196 to empower 
the Board to make regulations and guidelines relating to insolvency and bankruptcy 
as may be required for carrying out the purposes of the Code. 


Clause 56 of the Bill seeks to insert clause (cb) into sub-section (/) of 
section 208 of the Code consequent to the insertion of the creditor-initiated 
insolvency resolution process under Chapter IV-A of Part II. 


Clause 57 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (e) of section 214 of the Code to 
empower the Board to specify the procedure for the authentication of information 
received by the information utilities. The regulation will specify a suitable procedure 
and timeline for the corporate debtor or debtor to authenticate the information. 


Clause 58 of the Bill seeks to amend section 215 of the Code by substituting 
the previous marginal heading “Procedure for submission, etc. of financial 
information.” with a new marginal heading, “Submission and authentication of 
financial information to information utilities”. 


It further seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 215 so as to require the 
operational creditors to submit financial information to an information utility under 
this provision before filing an application under section 9 of the Code. The Board 
will ensure that the information utility lays down appropriate and convenient 
procedures for different types of operational creditors to submit information under 
this provision. 


It also seeks to insert a new sub-section (4) of section 215 to provide that the 
corporate debtor or debtor, regarding whom information is submitted under 
section 215, will be required to authenticate such information. The corporate debtor 
or the debtor can either agree with the information submitted, add to the same, or 
dispute the submitted information (also provide supporting documents). The 
information submitted by the creditors and the corporate debtors or debtors will be 
stored with the information utility, which can be relied upon by the Adjudicating 
Authority for different processes under the Code. If the corporate debtor or debtor 
does not to respond to such stored information, then the submitted information shall 
be deemed to be authenticated and it will be restricted from disputing the 
information later. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Clause 59 of the Bill seeks to amend sections 217 of the Code to substitute the 
words “insolvency professional agency or insolvency professional or information 
utility”, wherever they occur in the section, with the term “service provider”, as a 
common definition of “service provider” is inserted into section 3 of the Code. 
Therefore, these provisions will apply to all types of persons covered under the 
definition of “service provider”. 


Clause 60 of the Bill seeks to amend section 218 of the Code to substitute the 
words “insolvency professional agency or insolvency professional or information 
utility”, wherever they occur in the section, with the term “service provider”, as a 
common definition of “service provider” is inserted into section 3 of the Code. 
Therefore, these provisions will apply to all types of persons covered under the 
definition of “service provider”. 


Clause 61 of the Bill seeks to substitute Section 219 of the Code to clarify that 
the Board may issue a show cause notice to a service provider if it is of prima facie 
opinion that sufficient cause exists to take action under section 220 of the Code. 
Such action can be taken based on the findings of the inspection or investigation 
upon their completion under section 218 of the Code or on the basis of any material 
on record. 


Clause 62 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (/) of section 220 of the 
Code to clarify that the Board shall constitute one or more than one disciplinary 
committees consisting of one or more persons from amongst its Chairperson, whole- 
time members or officers not below the rank of the Executive Director. Considering 
the increasing number of service providers rendering services in the insolvency and 
bankruptcy ecosystem, it is provided that officers not below the rank of the 
Executive Director may be part of the disciplinary committee. It also seeks to insert 
a new sub-section (/A) into section 220 of the Code to clarify that the show-cause 
notice to a service provider be referred to one of the standing disciplinary 
committees. 


It further seeks to substitute sub-section (2) of section 220 to clarify that the 
disciplinary committee can take one or more actions against the service provider by 
an order, after giving it an opportunity to be heard, if it is satisfied that sufficient 
cause exists for taking these actions based on the material on record. These actions 
may include imposing penalties or suspending or cancelling registration or directing 
disgorgement, as the case may be. It also seeks to amend sub-section (3) of 
section 220 to clarify that the quantum mentioned under this provision is an upper 
limit for the imposition of the penalty within which the disciplinary committee may 
decide the proportionate penalty amount for a contravention. Additionally, the upper 
limit for imposing penalties is increased from one crore rupees to two crore rupees. 


Furthermore, it seeks to amend sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 220 to 
empower the disciplinary committee to issue a direction for disgorgement. The 
disciplinary committee, while undertaking an action under sub-section (3) of 
section 220, may also determine whether to direct disgorgement of an amount 
equivalent to such unlawful gain or aversion of loss, after giving the service provider 
an opportunity to be heard. After a direction for disgorgement is issued by the order 
under sub-section (2), the disciplinary committee shall also take action to provide 
restitution of the disgorged amount in accordance with the procedure specified by 
the Board. 


Moreover, it seeks to insert new sub-sections (7) and (8) into section 220 to 
enable a person to prefer an appeal to the National Company Law Appellate 
Tribunal against the orders of the disciplinary committee. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 57 


Clause 63 of the Bill seeks to amend section 224 of the Code, which provides 
for the formation of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund (‘Fund’) for insolvency 
resolution, liquidation, and bankruptcy of persons under the Code. It seeks to insert 
a new clause (e) into sub-section (2) of section 224, permitting the contribution of 
amounts from other sources to the Fund as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government through rules. It also seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of section 224 
to enable the Central Government to prescribe a detailed framework for utilising the 
Fund. This clarifies that in addition to the funds utilised by the persons who have 
contributed to it, the Central Government can also prescribe other purposes for 
which the funds can be utilised. 


Clause 64 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 235A of the Code with a new 
provision to allow the Adjudicating Authority, on an application made by the Board 
or the Central Government or any person authorised by the Central Government, to 
impose a penalty on any person who has contravened any provision of the Code, or 
any rules or regulations made thereunder. It provides the lower and upper monetary 
thresholds within which the Adjudicating Authority is empowered to impose a 
proportional penalties for these contraventions. 


Clause 65 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 239 of the Code 
to enable the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out the purposes of the 
Code rather than for carrying out the provisions of the Code. It also seeks to amend 
sub-section (2) of section 239 to enable the Central Government to frame rules for 
matters related to amendments made to the provisions of the Code. 


Clause 66 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 240 of the Code 
to enable the Board to frame regulations for carrying out the purposes of the Code 
rather than for carrying out the provisions of the Code. It also seeks to amend 
sub-section (2) of section 240 to enable the Board to frame regulations for matters 
related to amendments made to the provisions of the Code. 


Clause 67 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 240B and 240C in Part V of 
the Code, which provide for: 


Section 240B empowers the Central Government to provide, by way of 
notification, an electronic portal and the procedures related to the insolvency and 
bankruptcy processes under the Code, which shall be carried out on such electronic 
portal. 


Section 240C of the Code empowers the Central Government to prescribe 
tules relating to cross-border insolvency proceedings, for administering and 
conducting cross-border insolvency proceedings under the Code, for such class or 
classes of debtors and corporate debtors as may be notified by the Central 
Government. It also provides that the rules made under this section may provide that 
any of the provisions of the Code or the Companies Act, 2013 shall apply with such 
exceptions, modifications, and adaptations, as may be required to administer, and 
implement the provisions of this section and rules made thereunder, including 
designating one or more Benches for dealing with proceedings under this section. 
Further, before the rules framed under this section are issued, a draft of every rule 
proposed to be issued shall be laid down before each House of Parliament as per the 
procedure provided in this provision. 


Clause 68 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (/A) into section 242 
of the Code to empower the Central Government to remove any difficulty that may 
arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2025, by publishing an order in the Official Gazette, before the 
expiry of five years from the date of commencement of this Act. Every such order 
made by the Central Government shall be laid before each House of Parliament as 
soon as possible under sub-section (2) of section 242. 


58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Bill, 
2025, if enacted, does not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring, 
from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 65 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry 
out the purposes of the Code. It also empowers the Central Government to make 
rules in respect of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the conditions under sub-section (/) of section 588; 
(b) the fee for filing an objection under sub-section (/) of section 58C; 
(c) the manner and conditions under sub-section (/) of section 59A; 


(d) the other sources of amounts to be credited to the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Fund under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 224; 


(e) the purposes under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 224; 


(f) the other purposes and the manner under clause (b) of sub-section (3) 
of section 224; and 


(g) the manner and conditions under sub-section (/) of section 240C. 


2. Clause 66 of the Bill confers power upon the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Board of India (Board) to make regulations to carry out the purposes of the Code. It 
also empowers the Board to make regulations in respect of the following matters, 
namely:— 


(a) other information under clause (e) of sub-section (3) of section 9; 


(6) the other document or any other information under clause (a) of 
sub-section (3) of section 10; 


(c) the manner under sub-section (/) of section 12A; 
(d) the manner under clause (0) of section 18; 


(e) any other class or classes of creditors who may attend the meetings 
of committee of creditors under the proviso to sub-section (//) of section 21; 


(f) the manner and conditions under sub-section (1) of section 28A; 


(g) the manner of payment of debts of financial creditors who do not 
vote in favour of the resolution plan under clause (ba), the conditions and 
manner for constitution of a committee under clause (d) and the other 
requirements to which a resolution plan shall conform to under clause () of 
sub-section (2) of section 30; 


(A) the form, manner and the conditions under the second proviso to 
sub-section (/) of section 31; 


(i) the manner and conditions for making an application by the 
committee of creditors for restoring the corporate insolvency resolution 
process and manner and conditions for completing the restored corporate 
insolvency resolution process under sub-section (/A) of section 33; 


(7) the conditions under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 33; 


(k) the period within which and the manner in which the committee of 
creditors shall forward the name of the proposed resolution professional or the 
proposed insolvency professional to be appointed as the liquidator to the 
Adjudicating Authority, the form of written consent from the resolution 
professional under clause (a) and the form of written consent from the 
insolvency professional under clause (0) of sub-section (/) of section 34; 


(0) the form of written consent from insolvency professional under 
sub-section (6) of section 34; 


60 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(m) the fee for the conduct of the liquidation proceedings and proportion 
to the value of the liquidation estate assets under sub-section (8) of section 34; 


(n) the form for giving written consent under sub-section (/) of section 34A; 


(०) the manner of maintaining an updated list of claims of creditors under 
clause (a) of sub-section (/) of section 35; 


(p) the manner in which the committee of creditors shall supervise the 
conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator under sub-section (2) of 
section 35; 


(q) the manner, period and conditions under sub-section (8) of section 52;”; 


(r) the period and the manner of distribution of proceeds of sale under 
sub-section (/) of section 53; 


(s) the manner of determining the value of security interest under the 
Explanation to sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub-section (/) of section 53; 


(t) the manner in which the liquidator shall make an application to the 
Adjudicating Authority for the dissolution of the corporate debtor under 
sub-section (/) of section 54; 


(४) the manner and conditions under sub-section (1A) of section 54; 
(v) the manner and conditions under sub-section (/8B) of section 54; 
(w) the manner under the proviso to sub-section (2A) of section 54; 
(x) the information to be furnished under sub-section (3) of section 54C; 


(v) the manner under clause (a), the form and manner under clause (8), 
and the manner under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 58B; 


(z) the period, form and manner under sub-section (4) of section 58B; 
(za) the form and manner under sub-section (/) of section 58C; 


(zb) the manner and conditions for exercising the powers and performing 
duties by the resolution professional under section 58E; 


(zc) the form in which the report to be prepared under clause (c), the 
report and documents to be filed with the Board under clause (f), and such 
other duties to be performed under clause (g) of section 58E; 


(zd) the conditions and manner for the resolution professional to attend 
the meetings and exercise the right to reject under sub-section (2) and the form, 
manner and period under sub-section (3) of section 58F; 


(ze) the manner under the proviso to sub-section (/) of section 58G; 


(zf) the form and manner in which the resolution professional shall make 
public announcement under sub-section (3) of section 58G; 


(zg) the manner under sub-clause (7) of sub-section (/) of section 58H; 
(zh) the form and manner under sub-section (2) of section 58H; 
(zi) the manner under sub-section (/) of section 58-I; 


(z/) the conditions and procedural requirements under sub-section (2) of 
section 58K;”; 


(zk) the period under sub-section (2) of section 59 
(20 the other conditions under clause (c) of sub-section (5A) of section 59; 


(zm) the other consequences under sub-section (5C) of section 59;”; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 61 


(zn) standards of conduct of the committee of creditors and its members 
under clause (sa) sub-section (/) of section 196; 


(zo) the manner under clause (e) of section 214; 
(zp)the manner and period under sub-section (4) of section 215; and 
(zq) the manner and period under section 219. 


3. The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made are 
matters of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practical to 
provide for them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary General 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 
MGIPMRND—155GI(S4)—12-08-2025. KSHITIZ cae 
MOHAN मीटर 0815 


00:52:36 +05'30' 


