रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. 0. L.-33004/99 


Vita & राजपत्र 
Che Gazette of Jndia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-04102024-257696 
CG-DL-E-04102024-257696 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग प---खण्ड 3--उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं. 3965] नई दिल्ली, बृहस्पतिवार, अक्तूबर 3, 2024/आश्रविन 11, 1946 
No. 3965] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, OCTOBER 3, 2024/ASVINA 11, 1946 


गृह मंत्रालय 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4324(अ).--केंद्रीय सरकार ने, विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिनियम, 1967 (1967 का 37) 
(जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिनियम कहा गया है) की धारा 3 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते 
हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग Il, खंड 3, उपखंड (ii), तारीख 15 मार्च, 2024 
में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 1416(अ), तारीख 15 मार्च, 2024 (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिसूचना 
कहा गया है) द्वारा जम्मू और कश्मीर लिबरेशन फ्रन्ट (मो ० यासीन मलिक गुट) (जेकेएलएफ-वाई) को विधिविरुद्ध संगम 
के रूप में घोषित किया था; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (1) के साथ पठित धारा 5 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा 
प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग ॥, खंड 3, 
उपखंड (1), तारीख 5 अप्रैल, 2024 में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 1627(अ), तारीख 5 अप्रैल, 2024 द्वारा 
विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिकरण कहा गया है) का गठन किया था, 
जिसमें दिल्‍ली उच्च न्यायालय की न्यायाधीश न्यायमूर्ति नीना बंसल कृष्णा थीं; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, 
इस न्यायनिर्णयन के प्रयोजन के लिए कि क्‍या जम्मू और कश्मीर लिबरेशन Hee (मो० यासीन मलिक गुट) (जेकेएलएफ- 
वाई) को विधिविरुद्ध संगम के रूप में घोषित किए जाने का पर्याप्त कारण था या नहीं, तारीख 9 अप्रैल, 2024 को उक्त 
अधिकरण को उक्त अधिसूचना निर्दिष्ट की थी; 


6422 GI/2024 (1) 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


और, Set अधिकरण ने, उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (3) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, 
उक्त अधिसूचना में की गई घोषणा की पुष्टि करते हुए तारीख 12 सितंबर, 2024 को एक आदेश पारित किया था। 


अतः, अब, केंद्रीय सरकार उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (4) के अनुसरण में, उक्त अधिकरण के आदेश 
को प्रकाशित करती है, अर्थात्‌:- 


---: अधिकरण का आदेश अंग्रेजी भाग में छपा है :--- 
(न्यायमूर्ति नीना बंसल कृष्णा) 
विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण” 


[फा. सं. 14017/57/2024/एन.आई.-एम.एफ.ओ.] 
अभिजीत सिन्हा, संयुक्त सचिव 


MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 30th September, 2024 


S.O. 4324(E).— Whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of 
section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967) (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), 
declared the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (Mohd. Yasin Malik faction) (JKLF-Y) as an unlawful association 
vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, number S.O. 1416(E), dated the 15" 
March, 2024 (hereinafter referred to as the said notification) published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
Section 3, Sub-section (ii), dated the 157 March, 2024; 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 5 
read with sub-section (1) of section 4 of the said Act constituted the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal 
(hereinafter referred to as the said Tribunal) consisting of Justice Neena Bansal Krishna, Judge, High Court of Delhi 
vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, number S.O. 1627(B), dated the 5" 
April, 2024 published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (ii), dated the 5“ April, 
2024; 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 4 of 
the said Act referred the said notification to the said Tribunal on 9" April, 2024 for the purpose of adjudicating 
whether or not there was sufficient cause for declaring the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (Mohd. Yasin Malik 
faction) (JKLF-Y) as an unlawful association; 


And, whereas, the said Tribunal in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of section 4 of the said 
Act, passed an order on 12 September, 2024, confirming the declaration made in the said notification. 


Now, therefore, in pursuance of sub-section (4) of section 4 of the said Act, the Central Government hereby 
publishes the order of the said Tribunal, namely :- 


“UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL, 
HIGH COURT OF DELHI, NEW DELHI 
Date of Decision: 120 September 2024 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
Gazette Notification no. 5.0. 1416 (8) dated 15" March 2024 declaring the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front — 


Md. Yasin Malik faction (JKLF - Y), as an unlawful association under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 
1967. 


AND IN THE MATTER OF: 


Reference under Section 4 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 made to this Tribunal by the Government 
of India through Ministry of Home Affairs vide Gazette Notification no. 5.0. 1627 (E) dated 5" April 2024. 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


Present : Dr. Ajay Gulati, Registrar, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal. 


Ms. Aishwarya Bhati (Addl. SG) along with Mr. Amit Prasad, Mr. Rajat Nair, Ms. Poornima Singh, 
Ms. Manisha Chava and Mr. Abhijeet Singh, Id. Advocates for the Union of India. 


Mr. Parth Awasthi, and Ms. Deepika Gupta Id. Advocates for Union Territory of Jammu & 
Kashmir. 


Mr. Sameer Shukla, Asstt. Section Officer, Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Mr. Arjun Chopra, Law Researcher. 

CORAM: 

HON’BLE Ms. JUSTICE NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA 

ORDER 


1. This order answers Reference under Section 4(3) read with Section 3(3) of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’ or ‘UA(P)A’, for short) made to this Tribunal which has 
been constituted by the Central Government vide Gazette Notification no. 5.0. 1627 (8) dated 5" April, 2024 under 
Section 5(1) of the ‘Act’, for adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the Jammu & Kashmir 
Liberation Front — Md. Yasin Malik faction (‘JKLF - Y’ in short), as an ‘unlawful association’. 


I. THE NOTIFICATION 

2208 The Central Government published Gazette Notification (extra-ordinary) no. 5.0. 1416 (8) dated 157 March 
2024 in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 3(1) of the Act and declared JKLF-Y to be an ‘unlawful 
association’. A copy of the said notification has been sent to this Tribunal, as contemplated under Rule 50) of the 


Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 (“UA(P) Rules” in short). The said notification dt. 15" March 2024 
reads as under: 


S.O. 1416(E).—Whereas the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (Mohd. Yasin Malik faction) 
(hereinafter referred to as the JKLF-Y) has been indulging in activities, which are prejudicial to 
security and public order and have the potential of disrupting the unity and integrity of the country; 


And whereas, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967), the Central Government declared the 
JKLF-Y as an unlawful association, vide, notification number S.O. 1403(E), dated the 22™ March, 
2019; 


And whereas, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal, constituted under section 5 of 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 for the purpose of adjudicating whether or not there 
is sufficient cause for declaring the JKLF-Y as an unlawful association, by its order published, vide, 
notification number S.O. 3460 (E), dated 25" September, 2019 has confirmed the declaration so 
made; 


And whereas, the declaration of ban under sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, ceases on the 217 day of March, 2024; 


And whereas, the Central Government is of the opinion that JKLF-Y is indulging in the 
activities which are prejudicial to the integrity and security of the country, inter alia, on the 
following grounds, namely: - 


1. The Directorate of Enforcement (ED) has registered FIR No. ECIR/03/DLZO-11/2017 
dated 14.06.2017 under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA). After 
Investigation, main prosecution complaint in the case was filed on 24.08.2020. Further, 
supplementary Prosecution Complaint was filed on 09.01.2023, arraigning Yasin Malik as 
accused and cognizance of which was taken on 10.01.2023. Matter is under trial before 
the court; 


2. Case Crime No. 23/2023 has been registered at Kothibagh Police Station under section 
121 A of the Indian Penal Code and section 10 and 13 of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act 1967 against JKLF-Y activists for organizing meeting by Mohd. Yaseen 
Bhat, JKLF-Y activist in Habib Restaurant, Srinagar alongwith other JKLF-Y activists for 
undertaking separatist activities in Jammu and Kashmir. Chargesheet filed in the matter 
before the court; 


3. Case Crime No. 44/2019 has been registered at Pulwama Police Station under section 10, 
11 and 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967 against JKLF-Y activist for use 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of offices of JKLF-Y to provide financial support to the elements inimical to the sovereignty 
and integrity of the nation. The case is under investigation; 


4. Case Crime No. 42/2019 has been registered at Handwara Police Station under section 10 
and 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967 against JKLF-Y activists for 
subversive activities causing threat to the sovereignty and integrity of the nation. The case 
is under investigation; 


5. Case Crime No. 51/2019 has been registered at Ganderbal Police Station under section 10 
of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967 against JKLF-Y activists for planning of 
successful call given for hartal by the JKLF-Y after its declaration as an unlawful 
association. The case is under trial before the court. 


6. Case Crime No. 61/2019 has been registered at Budgam Police Station under section 10, 
11 and 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967 against JKLF-Y activists for 
their illegal activities in order to vitiate the peace of the State and to cause threat to the 
sovereignty and integrity of the nation. The case is under trial before the court. 


7. Case Crime No. 11/2019 has been registered at Hajin Police Station under section 10 and 
13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967 against JKLF-Y activist after 
declaration of JKLF-Y as an unlawful association. The case is under trial before the court. 


&. Mohd. Yasin Malik, Chairman, JKLF-Y has been sentenced with rigorous imprisonment for 
life and fine of rupees ten lakh by the Special NIA Court, New Delhi vide order dated the 
25" May, 2022 in Case Crime No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI dated 30" May, 2017 registered 
under sections 120B, 121, 121A of Indian Penal Code and section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 
and 40 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967 for involvement of JKLF-Y leader 
Yasini Malik for raising, receiving and collecting funds domestically and abroad through 
various illegal channels, including hawala, for funding separatist and terrorist activities in 
Jammu and Kashmir through the funds so collected and as such have entered into larger 
criminal conspiracy for causing disruption in the Kashmir valley by way of pelting stones 
on the security forces, systematically burning of schools, damage to public property and 
waging war against Government; 


And, whereas, on the basis of above grounds the Central Government is of the opinion that — 


(i) JKLF-Y is involved in anti-national and subversive activities intended to disrupt the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of India; 


(ii) JKLF-Y is in close touch with militant outfits and is supporting extremism and militancy in 
Jammu and Kashmir and elsewhere; 


(iii) JKLF-Y is supporting and inciting claims for secession of a part of the Indian territory 
from the Union and supporting terrorist and separatist groups fighting for this purpose by 
indulging in activities and articulations intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India 


3 


And, whereas, the Central Government is of the opinion that if the unlawful activities of the JKLF-Y 
are not curbed and controlled immediately, it will take the opportunity to — 


(i) escalate its subversive activities including attempt to carve out a separate State out of the 
territory of Union of India by destabilising the Government established by law; 


(ii) continue advocating the secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India while 
disputing the accession of State of Jammu and Kashmir with the Union ; 


(iii) propagate anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
security of the country; and 


(iv) escalate secessionist movements, support militancy and incite violence in the country; 


And, whereas, the Central Government for the above-mentioned reasons is firmly of the opinion 
that having regard to the activities of the JKLF-Y, it is necessary to declare the Jammu and Kashmir 
Liberation Front (Mohd. Yasin Malik faction) as an ‘unlawful association’ with immediate effect. 


Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967), the Central Government hereby declares 
the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (Mohd. Yasin Malik faction) as an unlawful association. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


The Central Government, having regard to the above circumstances, is of firm opinion that it is 
necessary to declare the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (Mohd. Yasin Malik faction) as an 
‘unlawful association’ with immediate effect, and accordingly in exercise of the powers conferred by 
the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 3 of the said Act, the Central Government hereby directs 
that this notification shall, subject to any order that may be made under section 4 of the said Act, 
have effect for a period of five years from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette. 


3. As can be seen, the aforesaid notification enumerates the reasons/ circumstances, as contemplated under 
proviso to section 3(3) of the Act, for declaring the JKLF-Y as unlawful with immediate effect. 


Il. THE BACKGROUND NOTE 


4. Along with the Reference to this Tribunal under Section 4 of the UA(P)A, the Central Government has 
submitted and filed before this Tribunal a Background Note, as contemplated under Rule 5(ii) of the UA(P) Rules, 
1968. 


5. The Background Note states that The Jammu and Kashmir National Liberation Front (SKNLF) formed in 
Pakistan in 1964, was re-christened as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) in 1971. The Jammu and 
Kashmir Liberation Front (Mohd. Yasin Malik faction) (JKLF-Y) was established in Kashmir valley in February, 
1988 by Mohd. Yasin Malik (currently lodged in Tihar Jail, Delhi) with the objective of separation from India and re- 
unification of Jammu and Kashmir, Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, Gilgit, Baltistan, Hunza and Aksai Chin, through an 
armed struggle. With the inception of terrorism in the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir, JKLF-Y became the first 
and the largest terrorist organization in the late 1980’s. 


6. The Note further states that JKLF-Y has been maintaining that the organization is fighting for separation of 
the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir from India and its leadership has all along been challenging the accession 
of State of Jammu and Kashmir with the Union of India and to this end, the leadership of the organization has been 
issuing press reports, addressing public gatherings and organizing protest rallies against the nation. 


7. It has further been stated in the Note that Chief Commander of JKLF-Y, Mohd. Yasin Malik was arrested by 
security forces in 1992 and after his release in 1994, he distanced himself from armed resistance but did not restrain 
from supporting terrorism and sustaining the same. He used his new facade to become one of the most important 
channels of financial resources for the violent campaign. JKLF-Y continued its anti-national activities and propaganda 
by organizing protests, strikes and motivating youth to join terrorist cadres. It played a vital role in the riots which 
broke out during the years 2008, 2010 and 2016. 


8. JKLF-Y is providing support to the terrorists and proscribed terrorist organizations in Jammu and Kashmir 
and is constantly fueling extremism to create a tacit acceptance for terror activities and terrorists’ operations in Jammu 
and Kashmir. 


9. The activists associated with JKLF-Y are involved in a number of cases including the sensational killing of 
Air-force personnel at Rawalpora, Srinagar and kidnapping of Dr. Rubaiya Syed, daughter of then Union Home 
Minister Mufti Mohammad Syed. 


10. On account of unlawful activities of JKLF-Y, the Central Government had declared the JKLF-Y as an 
‘unlawful association’ vide Gazette of India Notification no. 5.0. 1403(E) dt. 2277 March, 2019 for a period of five 
years under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. 


11. After the declaration of JKLF-Y as an unlawful association, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal 
which was constituted to adjudicate whether or not there was a sufficient cause for declaring JKLF-Y as an unlawful 
association, had also confirmed the notification of declaration no. 1403(E) vide order dated 20" September 2019 
which was published in the Gazette of India Notification bearing no. 5.0. 3460(E) dated 25" September 2019. 


12. Inspite of the ban imposed on JKLF-Y in 2019, the activists of this organization are still engaged in 
activities prejudicial to the integrity and security of the Union of India and thus the outfit poses a potential threat to 
the same. The ideology of the organization and the activities of its members are aimed at undermining the secular 
fabric of the nation as well as to promote separatism and terrorism which go against the principles that binds the 
diverse society of the country together. 


13. JKLF-Y has been organizing, coordinating, participating, arranging and addressing conference, symposia 
and unlawful assemblies to propagate their ideology and to spread hatred and disaffection against the nation by openly 
challenging the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the nation. JKLF-Y is covertly, overtly, explicitly and implicitly 
providing support to terrorists and the proscribed terrorist organizations active in Jammu and Kashmir, aimed at 
promoting separatism, thus posing a potential threat to the national integrity. It is in close touch with terrorist outfits 
and is constantly fueling extremism in Jammu and Kashmir. 


6 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(4i)] 


Criminal Cases against JKLF - Y activists 


14. 


The complicity of JKLF—Y cadres in criminal and anti-national activities is evident from the series of 
criminal cases that stand registered against them under various provisions of law including the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act and other substantive offences. The cases registered against the JKLF-Y activists/ members provide 
clinching evidence regarding their involvement in various unlawful activities. A list of cases registered by the 
National Investigation Agency (NIA), Directorate of Enforcement and Government of Jammu & Kashmir is given as 


under: 
SIL. FIR No. & Police Brief of Investigation Details of accused 
No. Station persons 
1. NIA Delhi. Regarding involvement of JKLF-Y leader Yasin Malik | Mohd. Yasin Malik & 
for raising, receiving and collecting funds domestically | others 
and abroad through various illegal channels, including 
RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI hawala, for funding separatist and terrorist activities in 
dt. 30.05.2017 Jammu and Kashmir through the funds so collected 
ws 1208, 121, 121A & = as such has entered into larger criminal conspiracy 
८ or causing disruption in the Kashmir valley by way of 
124A of the IPC, and ; ‘arch : 
pelting stones on the security forces, systematically 
ws 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, burning of schools, damage to public property and 
38, 39 and 40 of the : हि G ‘ 
waging war against Government and towards this 
UA(P)A. ee A Sit 
criminal conspiracy, engaged and _ instigated the 
general public of Kashmir for taking part in violent 
activities to make the atmosphere in the valley, which 
may be helpful for propagating their secessionist 
agenda. In the present case, accused Yasin Malik has 
been sentenced with rigorous imprisonment for life 
and fine of rupees ten lac vide order dated the 257 
May, 2022 has been imposed. 
2. Enforcement The Directorate of Enforcement (ED) has registered | Mohd. Yasin Malik & 
Directorate, Delhi Zonal | this case under the Prevention of Money Laundering | others 
Office-II Act (PMLA). After Investigation, main prosecution 
complaint in the case was filed on 24.08.2020. 
Further, supplementary Prosecution Complaint was 
ECIR/03/DLZ-II/2017 filed on 09.01.2023, arraigning Yasin Malik as an 
dated 14.06.2017 u/s 3 accused and cognizance of which was taken on 
of PMLA 10.01.2023. 
3. P.S. Kothibagh, Case registered against JKLF-Y activists for | Mohd. Yasin Bhat & 
Srinagar organizing meeting by Mohd. Yasin Bhat, a JKLF-Y | others 
activist in Habib Restaurant, Srinagar along with other 
JKLF-Y activists for undertaking separatist activities 
FIR no. 23/2023 u/s | in Jammu and Kashmir. 
121A IPC and section 
10 & 13 of the UA(P)A, 
1967 
4. P.S. Pulwama Information was received against JKLF-Y activist for | JKLF—Y activists 
use of offices of JKLF-Y to provide financial support 
to the elements inimical to the sovereignty and 
FIR no. 44/2019 u/s 10, | integrity of the nation. 
11 and 13 of the 
UA(P)A, 1967 
3. P.S. Handwara, Srinagar | Against JKLF-Y activists for subversive activities | JKLF—Y activists 


FIR no. 42/2019 u/s 10 
and 13 of the UA(P)A, 
1967 


causing threat to the sovereignty and integrity of the 
nation. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण if; 


7 P.S. Ganderbal Against two JKLF-Y activists for planning of | JKLF-Y activists 
successful call given for hartal by the JKLF-Y after its 
declaration as an unlawful association. 

FIR no. 51/2019 u/s 10 
of the UA (P)A, 1967 


Te P.S. Budgam Against JKLF-Y activists for their illegal activities in | JKLF-Y activists 
order to vitiate the peace of the State and to cause 
threat to the sovereignty and integrity of the nation. 
FIR no. 61/2019 u/s 10, 
11, and 13 of the 
UA(P)A, 1967 


i P.S. Hajin Against JKLF-Y activist after declaration of JKLF-Y | JKLF-Y activists 
as an unlawful association. 


FIR no. 11/2019 u/s 10 
and 13 of the UA(P)A, 
1967 


15. The Background Note further records that the above referred acts of the JKLF- Y lead to the conclusion that 
this organization is bent upon to work towards secession and separation of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 
India. It has been continuously encouraging the armed insurgency aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty, dis- 
harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government in a manner which is prejudicial 
to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Indian Union. Thus, the activities of JKLF-Y fall within the purview 
of unlawful activities. 


DECLARATION OF JKLF - ४ AS ANUNLAWFUL ASSOCIATION 


16. Keeping in view the gravity of the situation and commission of unlawful activities by the organization, the 
Central Government decided to declare Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front — Md. Yasin Malik as an ‘unlawful 
association’ under the provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. 


17. Accordingly, Notification no. 5.0. 1416 (8) dt. 15 March 2024 declaring JKLF-Y as an unlawful 
association, was issued. Subsequent thereto, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal has been constituted vide 
Notification no. 5.0. 1627 (8) dated 5" April 2024. 


Ill. STATUTORY PROVISIONS 
18. Section 2 (0) and (p) of the UA(P)A, read as follows: 
“2. Definitions. — (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 


(०) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or association, means any action taken by such 
individual or association (whether by committing an act or by words, either spoken or written, or by 
signs or by visible representation or otherwise), - 


(i) Which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground 
whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India or, the secession of a part of the 
territory of India from the Union, or which incites any individual or group of individuals to 
bring about such cession or secession; or 


(ii) Which disclaims, questions, disrupts, or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of India; or 
(iii) Which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India; 


(2) “unlawful association” means any association- 


(i) which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids 
persons to undertake any unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such 
activity; or 


(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable under Section 153-A or 
Section 153-B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or which encourages or aids persons 
to undertake any such activity, or of which the members undertake any such activity: 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Provided that nothing contained in sub-clause (ii), shall apply to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir”. 


19. Section 2(0) of the Act defines ‘unlawful activity’. It means “any action taken” by an association or an 
individual of the kind mentioned in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of the said sub-section. Any action taken has reference to 
and must be of the kind stipulated in and covered by clauses (i), (ii) or (iii). Action can be either written or spoken, by 
sign or by visible representation or even otherwise. Clause (i) refers to “action taken” with the intent or which 
supports any claim for secession or cession of any part of India or incites any individual or group of individuals to 
bring about secession or cession. Clause (ii) refers to “action taken” which has the effect of disclaiming, questioning, 
disrupting or intending to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. Clause (iii) refers to “action taken” 
which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India. 


20. Unlawful association has been defined in Section 2(p) of the Act and consists of two parts: (i) and (ii). Part (i) 
refers to the unlawful activity defined in Section 2(0) and encompasses associations, which have the object that 
encourage or even aid persons to undertake the said activity. The last part of Part (1) widens the definition of the term 
“unlawful association” to include an association of which members undertake unlawful activity. In a way, therefore, 
the association is vicariously liable and can be regarded as an unlawful association if members of an association 
undertake unlawful activity. 


21. Section 2(p)(i) does not refer to unlawful activity defined in Section 2(0) of the Act but refers to Sections 
153A and 153B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC for short). An association, which encourages or aids or the 
object of which is to encourage or aid persons to undertake activities punishable under Section 153A or 153B is an 
unlawful association. “Object” for which an association is formed, can in many cases be in writing but encouragement 
and aid to persons to undertake activities under Sections 153A and 153B may be oral or in writing. The last part of 
Section 2(p)(ii) widens and expands the scope of the term “unlawful association”, when it stipulates that an 
association of which members undertake activities which are punishable under Section 153A or 153B of the IPC is an 
unlawful association. An association, therefore, can become an unlawful association if its members undertake any 
activity covered by Section 153A or 153B of the IPC. 


IV. NATURE AND SCOPE OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE PRESENT TRIBUNAL 


22. The nature of the proceedings before this Tribunal and the scope of inquiry in the present proceedings have 
been laid down by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind vs. Union of India (1995) 1 SCC 428 in the specific 
context of the provisions of the UA(P)A, 1967. The proceedings before this Tribunal are civil in nature and the 
standard of proof is the standard prescribed by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). This lis has to be 
decided by objectively examining which version i.e. of the Central Govt. or that of the concerned organization, is 
more acceptable and credible. In this regard, reference may be made to following observations in Jamaat-e-Islami 
Hind (supra): 


“30. The allegations made by the Central Government against the Association - Jamaat-E-Islami 
Hind - were totally denied. It was, therefore, necessary that the Tribunal should have adjudicated 
the controversy in the manner indicated. Shri Soli J. Sorabjee, learned counsel for the Association, 
Jamaat-E-Islami Hind, contended that apart from the allegations made being not proved, in law 
such acts even if proved, do not constitute "unlawful activity" within the meaning of that expression 
defined in the Act. In the present case, the alternative submission of Shri Sorabjee does not arise for 
consideration on the view we are taking on his first submission. The only material produced by the 
Central Government to support the notification issued by it under Section 3(1) of the Act, apart from 
a resume based on certain intelligence reports, are the statements of Shri T.N. Srivastava, Joint 
Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and Shri N.C. Padhi, Joint Director, IB. Neither Shri Srivastava 
nor Shri Padhi has deposed to any fact on the basis of personal knowledge. Their entire version is 
based on official record. The resume is based on intelligence reports submitted by persons whose 
names have not been disclosed on the ground of confidentiality. In other words, no person has 
deposed from personal knowledge whose veracity could be tested by cross-examination. Assuming 
that it was not in public interest to disclose the identity of those persons or to produce them for 
cross-examination by the other side, some method should have been adopted by the Tribunal to test 
the credibility of their version. The Tribunal did not require production of those persons before it, 
even in camera, to question them and test the credibility of their version. On the other hand, the 
persons to whom the alleged unlawful acts of the Association are attributed filed their affidavits 
denying the allegations and also deposed as witnesses to rebut these allegations. In such a situation, 
the Tribunal had no means by which it could decide objectively, which of the two conflicting 
versions to accept as credible. There was thus no objective determination of the factual basis for the 
notification to amount to adjudication by the Tribunal, contemplated by the statute. The Tribunal 
has merely proceeded to accept the version of the Central Government without taking care to know 
even itself the source from which it came or to assess credibility of the version sufficient to inspire 
confidence justifying its acceptance in preference to the sworn denial of the witnesses examined by 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9 


the other side. Obviously, the Tribunal did not properly appreciate and fully comprehend its role in 
the scheme of the statute and the nature of adjudication required to be made by it. The order of the 
Tribunal cannot, therefore, be sustained." 


23. The present Tribunal constituted under the UA(P)A, has been vested with certain powers and the procedure 
to be adopted by it, under section 5 read with section 9 of the said Act, which are reproduced as under: 


“5. Tribunal. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, as 
and when necessary, a tribunal to be known as the "Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal" 
consisting of one person, to be appointed by the Central Government: Provided that no person shall 
be so appointed unless he is a Judge of a High Court. 


(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the 
presiding officer of the Tribunal, then, the Central Government shall appoint another person in 
accordance with the provisions of this section to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be 
continued before the Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled. 


(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Tribunal such staff as may be necessary for 
the discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 


(5) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of its functions including the place or places at 
which it will hold its sittings. 


(6) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this Act, have the same powers as 
are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, 
in respect of the following matters, namely: 


(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 


material object producible as evidence; 


(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 

(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or 
Office; 

(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 


(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).” 


“9. Procedure to be followed in the disposal of applications under this Act.—Subject to any rules 
that may be made under this Act, the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding any 
inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 4 or by a Court of the District Judge in disposing of any 
application under sub-section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section 8 shall, so far as may be, 
be the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the investigation of 
claims and the decision of the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall 
be final.” 


24. Further, under section 4(1) of Act, the Central Government refers the Notification (issued under Section 3(1) 
of the Act) to the Tribunal for “adjudicating” whether or not there is “sufficient cause” for declaring the association 
unlawful. Section 4(2) requires issuance of notice on the association affected to show cause why the association 
should not be declared as unlawful. Section 4(3) mandates an inquiry in the manner specified in section 9 after calling 
for such information as may be necessary from the Central Government or from office bearers or members of the 
association. The Tribunal under section 4(3) is required to adjudicate and make an order, as it may deem fit, either 
confirming the declaration made in the Notification or cancelling the same. After interpreting the said provisions of 
the UA(P)A in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), it was held by the Supreme Court as under: 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“11.... The entire procedure contemplates an objective determination made on the basis of material 
placed before the Tribunal by the two sides; and the inquiry is in the nature of adjudication of a lis 
between two parties, the outcome of which depends on the weight of the material produced by them. 
Credibility of the material should, ordinarily, be capable of objective assessment. The decision to 
be made by the Tribunal is “whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the Association 
unlawful”. Such a determination requires the Tribunal to reach the conclusion that the material to 
support the declaration outweighs the material against it and the additional weight to support the 
declaration is sufficient to sustain it. The test of greater probability appears to be the pragmatic test 
applicable in the context.” 


25. On the question of confidential information that is sought to be withheld, the Supreme Court emphasized that 
the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose of assessing credibility of the information and the Tribunal 
should satisfy itself whether it can safely rely upon it. This was necessary as in certain situations, source of 
information or disclosure of full particulars may be against public interest. Such a modified procedure while ensuring 
confidentiality of information and its source in public interest, enables the Tribunal to test the credibility of 
confidential information for objectively deciding the Reference. It was emphasized that the unlawful activities of an 
association may quite often be clandestine in nature and, therefore, material or information for various reasons may 
require confidentiality. Disclosure, it was held, can jeopardize criminal cases which have pending investigation and 
are on trial. 


26. On the question of nature and type of evidence which can be relied upon by the Tribunal, the Supreme Court 
referred to Rule 3 of UA(P) Rules, 1968. Rule 3(1) stipulates that the Tribunal, subject to sub-rule (2), shall follow “as 
far as practicable”, the rules of evidence laid down in Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (‘Evidence Act’, here-in after). In 
this regard, reference can be made to the following observations in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra): 


“22. ...The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a 
procedure would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in 
controversy after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without abdicating 
its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a course would 
satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, 
while protecting the rights of the association and its members, without jeopardizing the public 
interest. This would also ensure that the process of adjudication is not denuded of its content and 
the decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by it on all points in controversy after 
adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion already formed by the Central Government. 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer [408 US 471: 33 L Ed 2d 484 
(1972)] the United States Supreme Court, in a case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum 
requirements to be followed, as under: (L Ed pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They include (a) 
written notice of the claimed violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of evidence 
against him; (c) opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and 
documentary evidence; (d) the right to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses 
(unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing confrontation); (e) 
a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a traditional parole board, members of 
which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement by the factfinders 
as to the evidence relied on and reasons for revoking parole. We emphasise there is no 
thought to equate this second stage of parole revocation to a criminal prosecution in any 
sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the process should be flexible enough to consider evidence 
including letters, affidavits, and other material that would not be admissible in an 
adversary criminal trial.””. 


XXX XXX XXX 


26. ......The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a show-cause notice, of existence 
of sufficient cause to justify the declaration must necessarily imply and import into the inquiry, the 
minimum requirement of natural justice to ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is its own 
opinion, formed on the entire available material, and not a mere imprimatur of the Tribunal affixed 
to the opinion of the Central Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a fair procedure to prevent the 
vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure in a given case, would depend on the 
materials constituting the factual foundation of the notification and the manner in which the 
Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to be determined by the Tribunal keeping in view the 
nature of its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of natural justice, the fact that the materials in such 
matters are not confined to legal evidence in the strict sense, and that the scrutiny is not a criminal 
trial. The Tribunal should form its opinion on all the points in controversy after assessing for itself 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 11 


the credibility of the material relating to it, even though it may not be disclosed to the association, if 
the public interest so requires.” 


27. Before assessing the credibility of material and analyzing the evidence adduced, it is apposite to take note of 
sections 25, 26 and 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, as well as sections 161 and 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973. The same are reproduced hereunder: 


Indian Evidence Act, 1872 


25. Confession to police-officer not to be proved.—No confession made to a police-officer , shall be 
proved as against a person accused of any offence. 


26. Confession by accused while in custody of police not to be proved against him.—No confession 
made by any person whilst he is in the custody of a police-officer, unless it be made in the immediate 
presence of a Magistrate, shall be proved as against such person. 


Explanation.—In this section “Magistrate” does not include the head of a village discharging 
magisterial functions in the Presidency of Fort St. George 6 *** or elsewhere, unless such headman is 
a Magistrate exercising the powers of a Magistrate under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18827 (10 
of 1882). 


27. How much of information received from accused may be proved.—Provided that, when any fact 
is deposed to as discovered inconsequence of information received from a person accused of any 
offence, in the custody of a police-officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a 
confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved. 


Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 


“161. Examination of witnesses by police.—(1) Any police officer making an investigation under this 
Chapter, or any police officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special 
order, prescribe in this behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine orally any 
person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case. 


(2) Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put to him by such 
officer, other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal 
charge or to a penalty or forfeiture. 


(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course of an 
examination under this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and true record of the 
statement of each such person whose statement he records. 


Provided that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded by audio-video 
electronic means: 


Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under section 354, 
section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 376, 3 section 376A, section 376AB, 
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB], section 376E or section 
509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is alleged to have been committed or attempted shall be 
recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer. 


162. Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements in evidence.—(1) No statement made by 
any person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to 
writing, be signed by the person making it; nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, 
whether in a police diary or otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any 
purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made: 


Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose 
statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved, may be 
used by the accused, and with the permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to contradict such 
witness in the manner provided by section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); and when 
any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be used in the re-examination of such 
witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the provisions of 
clause (1) of section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); or to affect the provisions of 
section 27 of that Act. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Explanation.—An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement referred to in 
sub-section (1) may amount to contradiction if the same appears to be significant and otherwise 
relevant having regard to the context in which such omission occurs and whether any omission 
amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be a question of fact.” 


28. As per sections 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act, confessions made to a police officer or while in custody shall 
not be proved against a person accused of any offense during the trial of that offense. As per Section 162 of the 
Cr.P.C., no statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII 
(which includes Section 161 Cr.P.C.) can be used, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation 
at the time when such statement was made. However, these sections do not prohibit the use of such statements in 
proceedings where the accused is not being tried for the specific offense in question, or in civil proceedings or 
ancillary proceedings. 


29. The Supreme Court in Mahesh Kumar v. State of Rajasthan, 1990 Supp SCC 541 (2), noted the possible use 
of statement made to the police by the accused persons for being use of as evidence against the accused in an 
“enquiry” although inadmissible as evidence against them at the trial for the offence with which they were charged. 
Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“3. In Queen Empress v. Tribhovan Manekchand, a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court laid 
down that the statement made to the police by the accused persons as to the ownership of property 
which was the subject matter of the proceedings against them although inadmissible as evidence 
against them at the trial for the offence with which they were charged, were admissible as evidence 
with regard to the ownership of the property in an enquiry held by the Criminal Procedure Code. 
The same view was reiterated in Pohlu v. Emperor where it was pointed out that though there is a 
bar in Section 25 of the Evidence Act, or in Section 162 CrPC for being made use of as evidence 
against the accused, this statement could be made use of in an enquiry under Section 517 CrPC 
when determining the question of return of property. These two decisions have been followed by the 
Rajasthan High Court in Dhanraj_ Baldeokishan 9. State and the Mysore High Court 
in Veerabhadrappa v. Govinda.” 


30. The Supreme Court in Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar, (1981) 2 SCC 493, with reference to the bar under 
Section 162 of the Cr.P.C. against use in evidence of a statement made before a police officer in the course of 
investigation, held, the same would not apply where court calls for such statement in a civil proceeding provided the 
statement is otherwise relevant under the Evidence Act, 1872. Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“3. Before we refer to the provisions of Sections 162 and 172 of the Criminal Procedure Code, it 
would be convenient to set out briefly a few relevant provisions of that Code. Section 2 is the 
definition section and clause (g) of that section defines “inquiry” to mean “every inquiry, other than 
a trial conducted under this Code by a Magistrate or court”. Clause (a) of Section 2 gives the 
definition of “investigation” and it says that investigation includes “all the proceedings under this 
Code for the collection of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person (other than a 
Magistrate) who is authorised by a Magistrate in this behalf”. Section 4 provides: 


“4. (1) All offences under the Penal Code, 1860 shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, 
and otherwise dealt with according to the provisions hereinafter contained. 


(2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and 
otherwise dealt with according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the 
time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or 
otherwise dealing with such offences.” 


It is apparent from this section that the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code are applicable 
where an offence under the Penal Code, 1860 or under any other law is being investigated, inquired 
into, tried or otherwise dealt with. Then we come straight to Section 162 which occurs in Chapter 
XII dealing with the powers of the police to investigate into offences. That section, so far as material, 
reads as under: 


“162. (1) No statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an 
investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed by the person 
making it; nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or 
otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any purpose, save as 
hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at 
the time when such statement was made: 


Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose 
statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly 
proved, may be used by the accused, and with the permission of the court, by the 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


13 


prosecution, to contradict such witness in the manner provided by Section 145 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872; and when any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may 
also be used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only of explaining 
any matter referred to in his cross-examination. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the 
provisions of clause (1) of Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, or to affect the 
provisions of Section 27 of that Act.” 


It bars the use of any statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under 
Chapter XII, whether recorded in a police diary or otherwise, but, by the express terms of the 
section, this bar is applicable only where such statement is sought to be used “at any inquiry or trial 
in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made”. If the 
statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII is sought 
to be used in any proceeding other than an inquiry or trial or even at an inquiry or trial but in 
respect of an offence other than that which was under investigation at the time when such statement 
was made, the bar of Section 162 would not be attracted. This section has been enacted for the 
benefit of the accused, as pointed out by this Court in Tahsildar Singh v. State of U.P. It is intended 
“to protect the accused against the user of statements of witnesses made before the police during 
investigation, at the trial presumably on the assumption that the said statements were not made 
under circumstances inspiring confidence”. This Court, in Tahsildar Singh case approved the 
following observations of Braund, J. in Emperor v. Aftab Mohd. Khan: 


“As it seems to us it is to protect accused persons from being prejudiced by statements 
made to police officers who by reason of the fact that an investigation is known to be on 
foot at the time the statement is made, may be in a position to influence the maker of it, and, 
on the other hand, to protect accused persons from the prejudice at the hands of persons 
who in the knowledge that an investigation has already started, are prepared to tell 
untruths ” 


and expressed its agreement with the view taken by the Division Bench of the Nagpur High Court 
in Baliram Tikaram Marathe v. Emperor that “the object of the section is to protect the accused 
both against overzealous police officers and untruthful witnesses”. Protection against the use of 
statement made before the police during investigation is, therefore, granted to the accused by 
providing that such statement shall not be allowed to be used except for the limited purpose set out 
in the proviso to the section, at any inquiry or trial in respect of the offence which was under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made. But this protection is unnecessary in any 
proceeding other than an inquiry or trial in respect of the offence under investigation and hence the 
bar created by the section is a limited bar. It has no application, for example in a civil proceeding or 
in a proceeding under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution and a statement made before a police 
officer in the course of investigation can be used as evidence in such proceeding, provided it is 
otherwise relevant under the Indian Evidence Act. There are a number of decisions of various High 
Courts which have taken this view and amongst them may be mentioned the decision of 
Jaganmohan Reddy, J. in Malakala Surya Rao v. G. Janakamma. The present proceeding before us 
is a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution filed by the petitioners for enforcing their 
Fundamental Rights under Article 21 and it is neither an “inquiry” nor a “trial” in respect of any 
offence and hence it is difficult to see how Section 162 can be invoked by the State in the present 
case. The procedure to be followed in a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution is 
prescribed in Order XXXV of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966, and sub-rule (9) of Rule 10 lays down 
that at the hearing of the rule nisi, if the court is of the opinion that an opportunity be given to the 
parties to establish their respective cases by leading further evidence, the court may take such 
evidence or cause such evidence to be taken in such manner as it may deem fit and proper and 
obviously the reception of such evidence will be governed by the provisions of the Indian Evidence 
Act. It is obvious, therefore, that even a statement made before, a police officer during investigation 
can be produced and used in evidence in a writ petition under Article 32 provided it is relevant 
under the Indian Evidence Act and Section 162 cannot be urged as a bar against its production or 
use. The reports submitted by Shri L.V. Singh setting forth the result of his investigation cannot, in 
the circumstances, be shut out from being produced and considered in evidence under Section 162, 
even if they refer to any statements made before him and his associates during investigation, 
provided they are otherwise relevant under some provision of the Indian Evidence Act.” 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


31. With reference to police diaries and Section 172 of the Cr.P.C., the Supreme Court in Khatri (supra) held as 
under: 


“|. These reports are clearly relevant under Section 35 of the Indian Evidence Act which reads as 
follows: 


“35. An entry in any public or other official book, register or record, stating a fact in issue 
or relevant fact, and made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by 
any other person in performance of a duty specially enjoined by the law of the country in 
which such book, register or record is kept, is itself a relevant fact.” 


These reports are part of official record and they relate to the fact in issue as to how, and by whom 
the twenty-four under-trial prisoners were blinded and they are admittedly made by Sh L.V. Singh, a 
public servant, in the discharge of his official duty and hence they are plainly and indubitably 
covered by Section 35. The language of Section 35 is so clear that it is not necessary to refer to any 
decided cases on the interpretation of that section, but we may cite two decisions to illustrate the 
applicability of this section in the present case. The first is the decision of this Court in Kanwar Lal 
Gupta v. Amar Nath Chawla. There the question was whether reports made by officers of the CID 
(Special Branch) relating to public meetings covered by them at the time of the election were 
relevant under Section 35 and this Court held that they were, on the ground that they were (SCC p. 
667) “made by public servants in discharge of their official duty and they were relevant under the 
first part of Section 35 of the Evidence Act, since they contained statements showing what were the 
public meetings held by the first respondent”. This Court in fact followed an earlier decision of the 
Court in P.C.P. Reddiar v. S. Perumal. So also in Jagdat v. Sheopal, Wazirhasan, J. held that the 
result of an inquiry by a Kanungo under Section 202 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 
embodied in the report is an entry in a public record stating a fact in issue and made by a public 
servant in the discharge of his official duties and the report is therefore admissible in evidence under 
Section 35. We find that a similar view was taken by a Division Bench of the Nagpur High Court 
in Chandulal v. Pushkar Raj where the learned Judges held that reports made by Revenue Officers, 
though not regarded as having judicial authority, where they express opinions on the private rights 
of the parties are relevant under Section 35 as reports made by public officers in the discharge of 
their official duties, in so far as they supply information of official proceedings and historical facts. 
The Calcutta High Court also held in Lionell Edwards Limited v. State of W.B. that official 
correspondence from the Forest Officer to his superior, the Conservator of Forests, carried on by 
the Forest Officer in the discharge of his official duty would be admissible in evidence under Section 
35. There is therefore no doubt in our mind that the reports made by Sh L.V. Singh setting forth the 
result of the investigation carried on by him and his associates are clearly relevant under Section 35 
since they relate to a fact in issue and are made by a public servant in the discharge of his official 
duty. It is indeed difficult to see how in a writ petition against the State Government where the 
complaint is that the police officials of the State Government blinded the petitioners at the time of 
arrest or whilst in police custody, the State Government can resist production of a report in regard 
to the truth or otherwise of the complaint, made by a highly placed officer pursuant to the direction 
issued by the State Government. We are clearly of the view that the reports made by Shri L.V. Singh 
as a result of the investigation carried out by him and his associates are relevant under Section 35 
and they are liable to be produced by the State Government and used in evidence in the present writ 
petition. Of course, what evidentiary value must attach to the statements contained in these reports 
is a matter which would have to be decided by the court after considering these reports. It may 
ultimately be found that these reports have not much evidentiary value and even if they contain any 
statements adverse to the State Government, it may be possible for the State Government to dispute 
their correctness or to explain them away, but it cannot be said that these reports are not relevant. 
These reports must therefore be produced by the State and taken on record of the present writ 
petition. We may point out that though in our order dated February 16, 1981 we have referred to 
these reports as having been made by Shri L.V. Singh and his associates between January 10 and 
January 20, 1981 it seems that there has been some error on our part in mentioning the outer date 
as January 20, 1981 for we find that some of these reports were submitted by Shri L.V. Singh even 
after January 20, 1981 and the last of them was submitted on January 27, 1981, All these reports 
including the report submitted on December 9, 1980 must therefore be filed by the State and taken as 
forming part of the record to be considered by the court in deciding the question at issue between the 
parties.” 


32. The Supreme Court in Vinay D. Nagar v. State of Rajasthan, (2008) 5 SCC 597, again held that the bar of 
section 162 of the Cr.P.C. is with regard to the admissibility of the statement recorded of a person by the police officer 
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and by virtue of Section 162 Cr.P.C. would be applicable only where such statement is 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 15 


sought to be used at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement 
was made. The relevant extract of the said decision is as under: 


“14. On account of Section 162 CrPC, a statement made by any person to a police officer in the 
course of investigation under Chapter XII, if reduced into writing, will not be signed by the person 
making it, nor such statement recorded or any part thereof be used for any purpose at any inquiry or 
trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made. Such 
statement may be used by an accused and with the permission of the court by the prosecution to 
contradict the witness whose statement was recorded by the police in the manner provided under 
Section 145 of the Evidence Act and can also be used for re-examination of such witness for the 
purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination. Bar of Section 162 CrPC 
of proving the statement recorded by the police officer of any person during investigation however 
shall not apply to any statement falling within the provision of Clause (1) of Section 32 of the 
Evidence Act, nor shall it affect Section 27 of the Evidence Act. Bar of Section 162 CrPC is in 
regard to the admissibility of the statement recorded of a person by the police officer under Section 
161 CrPC and by virtue of Section 162 CrPC would be applicable only where such statement is 
sought to be used at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time 
when such statement was made. 


15. In Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar this Court has held that Section 162 CrPC bars the use of any 
statement made before the police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII, 
whether recorded in the police diary or otherwise. However, by the express terms of Section 162, 
this bar is applicable only where such statement is sought to be used “at any inquiry or trial” in 
respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made. If the 
statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII is sought 
to be used in any proceeding, inquiry or trial in respect of an offence other than which was under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made, the bar of Section 162 will not be 
attracted.” 


33. After examining the aforementioned provisions, as well as the legal principles established in a catena of 
judgments, and considering that the inquiry before this Tribunal does not entail adjudicating the guilt of the accused 
but rather assessing the adequacy of material before the Central Government to designate JKLF-Y as an ‘unlawful 
association’, the statements of witnesses recorded by the police officers, the statements made by the accused before 
police officers, along with the lists of items seized and seizure memos, are deemed admissible before this Tribunal. 
They can be utilized to ascertain the sufficiency of material before the Central Government for making the declaration 
under section 3(1) of UA(P)A. 


V. PROCEDURE FOLLOWED BY THIS TRIBUNAL 


34. Consequently, upon due consideration of the aforesaid Notification no. 1416 (E) dt. 157 March, 2024 and 
Notification no. 1627 (8) dt. 5“ April, 2024, this Tribunal held a preliminary hearing on 16.04.2024, whereupon on a 
consideration of the material placed on record by the Central Government, statutory notice under section 4(2) of the 
Act was issued to the JKLF-Y and its leaders/activists/members to show cause, within a period of 30 days, as to why 
JKLF-Y ought not to be declared an unlawful association. The notices issued were given due publicity as is required 
under section 3(4) of the Act. 


35. The Gazette Notification dated 15.03.2024 was also published in two National Newspapers (all India 
Edition), out of which one was in English while the other was in Hindi. The said notification was also published in 
two local newspapers one of which was in vernacular language and the other in English, both having wide circulation 
in Kashmir zone of UT of Jammu & Kashmir where the activities of the JKLF-Y were or are believed to be ordinarily 
carried out. The method of affixation and proclamation by beating of drums, as well as loudspeakers, was also 
adopted. Proclamation was made at the known addresses of the JKLF—Y along with all of its leaders, members and 
front organization as well as that of its principal office bearers. 


36. The statutory notice issued by the Tribunal along with the Gazette Notification dated 15.03.2024 was 
displayed on the notice boards of the offices of the Deputy Commissioner/District Magistrate/Tehsildar in all the 
district headquarters of the Kashmir Zone of UT of Jammu & Kashmir where the activities of the association were or 
are believed to be ordinarily carried on. Help of All-India Radio and electronic media of the U.T. of Jammu & 
Kashmir was also taken. Announcements were made through radio/electronic media at prime time. 


37. Apart from the above, notice was also issued to the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir through its Chief 
Secretary. 
38. The Registrar attached to the Tribunal was directed to ensure the compliance of the service of notice issued 


to the JKLF-Y and its office bearers in the manner indicated. The Registrar was also directed to file an independent 
report in that behalf before the next date of hearing i.e. 20.05.2024. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


39. Accordingly, the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir filed its affidavit of service, affirming that service 
had been effected as directed by the Tribunal. The Registrar, vide his report dated 18.05.2024, also confirmed service 
of statutory notice issued by the Tribunal. Specifically, notice was also served on Mohd. Yasin Malik being the chief 
protagonist of JKLF—Y, in Tihar Jail where he is currently lodged, through the Superintendent of Prisons, Central Jail 
no. 7. 


40. This Tribunal having satisfied itself that service had been effected on JKLF-Y as per the directions contained 
in the order dated 16.04.2024, proceeded further with the inquiry. On the next hearing which was scheduled for 
20.05.2024, Md. Yasin Malik appeared through video conference from the jail premises, on behalf of JKLF-Y. Md. 
Yasin Malik was specifically asked by the Tribunal whether he will be represented by a lawyer for the current 
Reference proceedings or whether he wishes to engage a lawyer and needs some time for the same, and if he doesn’t 
have the means to do so, whether he would like to be assigned a lawyer at state expense? However, Md. Yasin Malik 
categorically responded that he will personally argue and represent JKLF—Y in the Reference proceedings. Further, on 
behalf of Union of India, more time was sought to file affidavits and relevant documents in support of the notification 
declaring the JKLF-Y as an unlawful association. 


41. Vide order dt. 20.05.24 itself, further proceedings of the present Reference for the purpose of recording of 
evidence were scheduled to be held at Srinagar on 20", 21%, and 24 June 2024. However, prior to the hearings 
scheduled at Srinagar, this Tribunal also fixed a prior hearing on 05.06.2024 in the High Court of Delhi for directions. 


42. On 05.06.2024, it was submitted on behalf of the Union of India/ Central Govt. that some more time would 
be required for filing the affidavits in evidence in support of the Notification of declaration dt. 15.03.2024. 
Consequently, this Tribunal further adjourned the proceedings for 13.06.2024 and permitted the filing of affidavit/s on 
behalf of the Union of India by the said date. Direction was also given to the UOI to file a list of witnesses. However, 
a reply cum affidavit of Md. Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF—Y was received by the Registrar of the Tribunal on 
30.05.2024. On 05.06.24, Md. Yasin Malik who had joined through video conference submitted that he shall not be 
filing any other affidavit. Proceedings were thereafter adjourned to 13.06.2024, to be held in the High Court of Delhi 
on which date, it was submitted by ld. Counsel appearing for the UOI that list of witnesses shall be filed with the 
Registrar by 17.06.2024 and that affidavits in evidence shall also be filed by 28.06.2024. The Tribunal was further 
informed that affidavit of 1 witness i.e. from the Enforcement Directorate, on behalf of UOI has already been filed 
with the Registrar of the Tribunal. Thereafter, the present Reference was directed to be taken up for hearing on 
20.06.2024 at Srinagar. 


43. On 20.06.2024, the Reference proceedings were taken up in Srinagar, in the premises of High Court of 
Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. However, despite a public notice having been issued for the hearings to be held in 
Srinagar, no person from the general public or from/on behalf of JKLF—Y appeared before the Tribunal on 20.06.2024 
to join or participate in the proceedings. Consequently, this Tribunal directed the next proceeding to be held in the 
present Reference on 06.07.2024 in Tihar Jail, to give an opportunity of personal hearing to Md. Yasin Malik, in the 
interest of justice since Md. Yasin Malik cannot be taken out from the Jail premises owing to a specific office order 
passed by the competent authority. Witnesses who were to depose on behalf of the Union of India and whose 
affidavits had already been served on Md. Yasin Malik were directed to be examined in Tihar jail on 06.07.2024. 


44. On 06.07.2024, Reference proceedings were conducted in a makeshift court room which was set up in the 
office of the Superintendent of Central Jail no. 7. Md. Yasin Malik was brought to the courtroom with adequate 
security arrangements. Directions were given to the concerned jail authority to facilitate the entry of witnesses who 
were to be examined as also of Id. Counsels for Union of India and UT of Jammu & Kashmir. On 06.07.2024, 
statements of the following witnesses on behalf of the Union of India were recorded at Tihar Jail: 


S.No. | Name of Witness Details of Affidavit Affidavits kept in File no. 
along with date 

1. Sh. Hariprasad K.K., Ex. PW-1/A dated File no. — Vol. IV 
02.07.2024 


S.D.P.O., Kothibagh, Srinagar 


Affidavit from page nos. | to 10; 
and exhibits from page nos. 11 to 
52 


2. Sh. Saqib Gani, Ex. PW-2/A dated File no. — Vol. IV 
D.S.P, HQ, Budgam, Kashmir 02.07.2024 


Affidavit from page nos. | to 8; 
and exhibits from page nos. 9 to 
20 


3. Sh. Rameez Rashid Bhat, Ex. PW-3/A dated File no. — Vol. IV 


[भाग I-—avs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


17 


D.S.P, Hajin, Bandipora, Kashmir 


02.07.2024 


Affidavit from page nos. | to 8; 
and exhibits from page nos. 9 to 
23 


Sh. Shabir Ahmad, 
S.H.O, P.S. Pulwama, Kashmir 


Ex. PW-4/A dated 
02.07.2024 


File no. — Vol. IV 


Affidavit from page nos. | to 8; 
and exhibits from page nos. 9 to 
18 


All of these witnesses were cross-examined by Md. Yasin Malik in person. Owing to ill health of Md. Yasin 
Malik, further recording of evidence of other witnesses was adjourned. Further proceedings for recording of evidence 
were scheduled for 13 and 147 July 2024, in Tihar Jail no. 7. 


On 13.07.2024, following witnesses on behalf of the UOI were examined: 


S.No. | Name of Witness Details of Affidavit along Affidavits kept in File no. 
with date 
5. Sh. Showkat Ahmad Mir, SHO, P.S. Ex. PW-5/A dated 02.07.2024 | File no. - Vol. IV 
Handwara, Kashmir 
Affidavit from page nos. 1 to 8; 
and exhibits from page nos. 9 to 
31 
i Sh. Rajesh Kumar Gupta, Director Ex. PW-6/A dated 05.07.2024 | File no. — Vol. IV 
(Counter Terrorism), MHA, GOI 
Affidavit from page nos. 1 to 8; 
and exhibits from page nos. 9 to 
59, along with 
documents/confidential material 
in a sealed cover 
7. Sh. B.B. Pathak, Ex. PW-7/A dated 03.07.2024 | File 10. - Vol. IV-A 
D.S.P., NIA, Delhi 
Affidavit from page nos. | to 23; 
and exhibits from page nos. 24 to 
499 
On 14.07.2024, following witnesses were examined in Tihar Jail no. 7: 
7 Munshi Ghulam Nabi, Ex. PW-8/A dated 08.07.2024 File no. — Vol. IV 
D.S.P, Counter Intelligence, 
5 275 3 आओ Affidavit from page nos. | to 7; 
and exhibits from page nos. 8 to 
59 
7 Tariq Ahmad Sofi, Ex. PW-9/A dated 08.07.2024 | File no. - Vol. IV 
Dy.S.P, CIK, Bandipora, Kashmir 
Affidavit from page nos. | to 7; 
and exhibits from page nos. 8 to 
29 
10. Ghulam Hasan, Ex. PW-10/A dated 03.06.2024 | File no. - Vol. IV 


D.S.P, Ganderbal, Kashmir 


(inadvertently mentioned as 
03.07.2024 in the verification 


Affidavit from page nos. | to 5; 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


para of the affidavit) and exhibits from page nos. 6 to 
32, 
11. Sh. Arun Kumar Gupta, Ex. PW 11/A dt. 12.06.2024 File no. — Vol. IV - 8 
Assistant Director, ED, Delhi Zonal 
Office - II 


Affidavit from page nos. | to 14; 
and exhibits from page nos. 15 to 
195 


It needs a highlight that Witness Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gupta who appeared as PW - 6, claimed privilege on behalf of 
Union of India in respect of the documents/confidential material supplied in a sealed cover. Subject to the outcome of 
claim of privilege, the sealed cover was taken on record. On 14.07.2024, after conclusion of evidence on behalf of 
UOI, Md. Yasin Malik appeared as a witness on behalf of JKLF—Y. As RW, he tendered his reply dt. 27.05.2024 
which he asserted to be supported by an affidavit but the same was objected to by 10. counsel for the UOI on the 
ground of not being a properly affirmed/sworn affidavit and also that it contained scandalous assertions. Subject to the 
objection raised, the reply was allowed to be tendered as Ex. RW 1/A. Md. Yasin Malik also gave a statement that no 
other witness is to be examined on behalf of JKLF—Y. Md. Yasin Malik was thereafter cross-examined on behalf of 
UOI. 


45. On 14.07.2024, recording of evidence on behalf Union of India as also JKLF—Y concluded and consequently, 
proceedings were adjourned to 27.07.2024 for addressing final submissions. 


46. On 27.07.2024, elaborate submissions were heard on behalf of the Union of India under section 123 of the 
Evidence Act read with Rule 3(2) of the UA(P) Rules, 1968 claiming privilege / confidentiality in respect of certain 
documents submitted in a sealed envelope; and as referred to in the paragraph 13 of the affidavit of the concerned 
witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs 1.6. PW 6. Further, arguments were also addressed on the same day in 
respect of existence of ‘sufficient grounds’ for JKLF-Y to be declared as an ‘unlawful association’. However, since 
Md. Yasin Malik needed some time to prepare his arguments to respond to the submissions put forth on behalf of 
Union of India, the proceedings were further adjourned to 03.08.2024 for submissions on behalf of JKLF—Y. On 
03.08.2024 itself, after conclusion of submission/arguments on behalf of JKLF—Y, order in the matter was reserved. 


VI. EVIDENCE ADDUCED BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL 
PW-1 


47. Mr. Hariprasad K.K., S.D.P.O., Kothibagh, Srinagar tendered his affidavit as Ex. PW 1/A and deposed 
that he is the supervising officer of case bearing FIR no. 23/2023 and in course of discharge of his duties as the 
supervisory officer, had gone through the records of the case files and was well conversant with the facts and 
circumstances of the case. Witness further submitted that he had been duly authorized by the competent authority to 
depose before the Tribunal and relied on such authorization dt. 04.07.24 as Ex. PW 1/A-1. 


48. PW 1 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide Notification no. S.O. 1416(E) published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, on 15" March, 2024, has declared Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Mohd. Yasin Malik Faction 
as an ‘unlawful association’. Witness affirmed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKLF-Y prepared by the 
Central Government and on the basis of the facts of various cases registered against the said organization and its 
leaders, he could testify that JKLF-Y and its leaders were involved in carrying out secessionist activities. 


49. Witness further deposed that it was borne out from the records that Jammu and Kashmir National Liberation 
Front was formed in the year 1964, which was later on renamed as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front. PW 1 
stated that as is borne out from the records, a new faction of the said organization was established in the year 1988 by 
the prominent separatist leader Mohd. Yasin and was named as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (Yasin Malik 
Faction). 


50. PW | testified on the basis of the Background Note prepared by the Central Govt. and the govt. records that 
JKLF-Y was formed with the objective of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India and for re- 
unification of Jammu & Kashmir, Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, Gilgit, Baltistan, Hunza and Aksai Chin through an 
armed struggle. Witness further testified that between 1988 to 1990, JKLF-Y became one of the largest terrorist 
organizations in Jammu & Kashmir, whose members/activists were involved not only in the infamous exodus of 
Kashmiri Hindus from Kashmir Valley but also in some prominent crimes of that period including the kidnapping of 
Rubaiya Syed, daughter of the then Home Minster of India. 


51. PW 1 further testified that it was also borne out from the records that Mohd. Yasin Malik, who was the chief 
commander of JKLF-Y, was arrested in the year 1992 but subsequently released in the year 1994 after which though 
he distanced himself from armed resistance but he continued supporting terrorist organizations covertly and 
financially. Witness deposed that JKLF-Y has been spearheading anti-India secessionist agenda at the instance of ISI, 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 19 


Pakistan and prominent terrorist organization by following pro-Pakistan propaganda for secession of Jammu & 
Kashmir from the Indian Union. PW 1 further deposed that because of these unlawful activities, JKLF-Y was 
proscribed by the Central Government in the 2019 which ban was confirmed by the Tribunal constituted to adjudicate 
the validity of the ban imposed. However, as is borne out from the records and the FIR’s registered, despite banning of 
JKLF-Y, the organization and its members have not stopped their secessionist activities and are continuing to raise 
funds for furtherance of the organizational activities and objectives i.e. secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the 
Union of India and cession of constitutional authority of the GOI in J&K. 


22. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, its leaders and members have consistently been challenging 
the accession of erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir with the Union of India and have been issuing press reports, 
addressing public gatherings and are working towards secession of Jammu & Kashmir by continuously encouraging 
the armed insurgency which acts are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty, dis-harmony by promoting feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government, in a manner which is gravely prejudicial to the territorial integrity 
and sovereignty of the Indian Union. 


FIR No. 23/2023: 


53. In regard to criminal cases which have been registered against JKLF—Y, Witness deposed that on 09-07-2023, 
Police Station Kothibagh, Srinagar received an information through reliable sources that Mohd. Yasin Bhat r/o 
Naseembagh, Srinagar has organized a meeting in Habib Restaurant situated at Residency Road and had invited many 
ex-members of banned association of JKLF-Y along with other separatist activists, who are yet to be identified. As per 
the information received, this meeting was a cover for undertaking separatist/ unlawful activities and the real intention 
of this meeting was to rekindle the activities of banned JKLF-Y for waging a war against the Government of India so 
as to threaten the integrity, sovereignty and security of India. The above said meeting was organized under the garb 
and cover of Eid Milan Party. Based on the above said information, FIR no. 23/2023 was registered at PS Kothibagh 
on 09.07.2023 u/s 10/13 of UA(P)A and u/s 121A of the IPC against the named accused. A true copy of FIR no. 
23/2023 along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 1 as Ex. PW 1/1. 


54. Witness further deposed that during the investigation of the FIR, statements of witnesses were recorded u/s 
161 Cr.P.C who corroborated the contents of the written complaint. Since on the basis of statements of the witnesses, 
and evidence collected, commission of the offence punishable u/ss 10/13/18 of UA(P)A 7r/w ss. 121A/201 of the IPC 
was prima facie established, hence a charge-sheet dt. 06.12.2023 was filed before the jurisdictional Court against the 
accused namely (i) Mohd. Yasin Bhat (ii) Mohd. Rafiq Phaloo @ Salim Nanaji (iii) Syed Rehman Shamas @ Shams- 
u-din Rehmani (iv) Jahangir Ahmad Bhat (v) Khursheed Ahmad Bhat (vi) Shabir Ahmad Dar (vii) Sajad Hussain Gul 
(viii) Firdous Ahmad Shah (ix) Gh. Hassan Parray @ Firdousi (x) Saheel @ Suhail Ahmad Mir (xi) Farooq Siddiqui @ 
Papa @ Dada (presently in Canada and absconding), and (xii) Khursheed Ahmad Mir (also absconding). True copies 
of the statements of witnesses recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C and u/s 164 Cr. P.C., in vernacular, along with their true 
English translations were relied upon by PW 1 as Ex. PW 1/2 to Ex. PW 1/4. 


93: Witness also relied upon true copies of seizure memos prepared during the investigation of FIR no. 23/2023, 
in vernacular, along with their true English translations as Ex. PW 1/5 to Ex. PW 1/16. PW 1 also relied on true 
copies of disclosure memos prepared during investigation of FIR no. 23/2023, in vernacular, along with their true 
English translations as Ex. PW 1/17 and Ex. PW 1/18. Copy of the charge-sheet filed in FIR no. 23/2023 was further 
relied upon by PW 1 as Ex. PW 1/19. 


56. PW | concluded his testimony by affirming that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of 
service and the records of the criminal cases registered against JKLF-Y, it was manifest that JKLF-Y, its leaders and 
members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and continuously advocating secession of the territory of Jammu and Kashmir from 
the Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of 
India; 
०) committing acts of commission and omissions intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India to bring 


about cession of lawful constitutional authority of GOI in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the integrity and security of the country; 
e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and have been a firm preacher of Kashmir separatist movement. 
f) exploiting the situation in the valley by actively provoking and luring the youth of Jammu & Kashmir 


towards violence so as to disrupt the peace in the valley through announcement of hartal calls and issuance 
of protest calendars, leading to riots which have resulted in injuries to and death of several civilians, police 
and security forces personnel. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Witness further deposed that sufficient material has been brought on record which manifests that the proscribed 
organization JKLF-Y, its leaders and members who continued to be its members even after being banned, also have 
support from across the border and have been actively supporting the separatists to bring about a secession of Jammu 
and Kashmir from the Union of India. 


Cross- examination by Md. Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF-Y 


a7. In cross-examination, PW | stated that he could not admit or deny that JKLF - Y had its origin in 1966 and 
at that point of time was known as JKNLF. PW | was not aware if JKLF came into existence in London in 1976. 
Witness denied, as per his knowledge that in 1988 this organization was being headed by Amanullah Khan or that 
Mohd. Yasin Malik became its member in 1988 only. Regarding a question on the arrest of Yasin Malik in the year 
1990 or 1992, Witness replied that as per his affidavit, Yasin Malik was arrested in 1992. PW 1 however submitted 
that he could not admit or deny if Yasin Malik was arrested on 06.08.1990 as Commander in Chief of JKLF-Y and 
was brought to Tihar Jail under the Public Safety Act. PW 1 also could not admit or deny the suggestion that the split 
of JKLF-Y happened in 1995 when Yasin Malik got expelled by Amanullah Khan and thereafter, formed his own 
independent faction i.e. JKLF(Y). Witness denied the suggestion that the organization of Yasin Malik never provided 
any logistic support or did not provide any militant shelter or financial support for any terror activities and also that no 
FIR has been registered against JKLF-Y or its members after 1994 in regard to terrorist activities. PW | further denied 
the suggestion that except accused no. | in FIR no. 23/2023 registered at P.S. Kothi Bagh i.e. Mohd. Yasin Bhat, who 
is in custody, all other accused are not the members of JKLF(Y). PW 1 vol. that all the accused in the said FIR were 
members of JKLF(Y). PW 1 also denied the assertion that Khurshid Ahmed Mir was never a part of JKLF(Y), which 
fact has been stated in paragraph no. 7 of Ex. PW1/19 i.e. the charge-sheet, or that all the persons as mentioned in 
paragraph no. 12 of the charge-sheet were never associated with the organization JKLF(Y). 


PW-2 


58. Saqib Gani who is currently posted as Dy.S.P. Budgam, Kashmir tendered his affidavit as Ex. PW 2/A. 
Witness deposed that he is the supervisory officer of the case bearing FIR no. 61/2019, and in the course of discharge 
of his duties as the supervisory officer, had gone through the records of the case files and was well conversant with 
the facts and circumstances of the case. PW 2 further deposed that he had been duly authorized by the competent 
authority to depose before this Tribunal and relied upon such authorization dt. 04.07.24 as Ex. PW 2/A-1. 


59. PW 2 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide Notification no. S.O. 1416(E) published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, on 15" March, 2024, has declared Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Y as an ‘unlawful 
association’. Witness affirmed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKLF-Y prepared by the Central 
Government and on the basis of the facts of various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, he 
could testify that JKLF-Y and its leaders were involved in carrying out secessionist activities. 


60. Witness further deposed that it was borne out from the records that Jammu and Kashmir National Liberation 
Front was formed in the year 1964, which was later on renamed as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front. PW 2 
stated that as is borne out from the records, a new faction of the said organization was established in the year 1988 by 
the prominent separatist leader Mohd. Yasin and was named as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Yasin Malik 
Faction. 


61. PW 2 testified on the basis of the Background Note prepared by the Central Govt. and the govt. records that 
JKLF-Y was formed with the objective of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India and for re- 
unification of Jammu & Kashmir, Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, Gilgit, Baltistan, Hunza and Aksai Chin through an 
armed struggle. Witness further testified that between 1988 to 1990, JKLF-Y became one of the largest terrorist 
organizations in Jammu & Kashmir, whose members/activists were involved not only in the infamous exodus of 
Kashmiri Hindus from Kashmir Valley but also in some prominent crimes of that period including the kidnapping of 
Rubaiya Syed, daughter of the then Home Minster of India. 


62. PW 2 further testified that it was also borne out from the records that Mohd. Yasin Malik, who was the chief 
commander of JKLF-Y, was arrested in the year 1992 but subsequently released in the year 1994 after which though 
he distanced himself from armed resistance but he continued supporting terrorist organizations covertly and 
financially. Witness deposed that JKLF-Y has been spearheading anti-India secessionist agenda at the instance of ISI, 
Pakistan and prominent terrorist organization by following pro-Pakistan propaganda for secession of Jammu & 
Kashmir from the Indian Union. PW 2 further deposed that because of these unlawful activities, JKLF-Y was 
proscribed by the Central Government in the 2019 which ban was confirmed by the Tribunal constituted to adjudicate 
the validity of the ban imposed. However, as is borne out from the records and the FIR’s registered, despite banning of 
JKLF-Y, the organization and its members have not stopped their secessionist activities and are continuing to raise 
funds for furtherance of the organizational activities and objectives i.e. secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the 
Union of India and cession of constitutional authority of the GOI in J&K. 


63. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, its leaders and members have consistently been challenging 
the accession of erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir with the Union of India and have been issuing press reports, 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 21 


addressing public gatherings and are working towards secession of Jammu & Kashmir by continuously encouraging 
the armed insurgency which acts are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty, dis-harmony by promoting feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government, in a manner which is gravely prejudicial to the territorial integrity 
and sovereignty of the Indian Union. 


FIR No. 61/2019: 


64. In regard to criminal and unlawful activities of JKLF—Y affecting the sovereignty and integrity of the Indian 
Union, PW 2 deposed that on 23.03.2019, information was received from reliable sources that despite declaration of 
JKLF-Y as an unlawful organization by the Central Government, the offices of the organization located within the 
jurisdiction of Police Station Budgam are operating where the members of the proscribed organization are utilizing 
resources kept in the offices for continuing their illegal activities which are prejudicial to the sovereignty of the 
country. Based on the said information, FIR no. 61/2019 was registered at P.S. Budgam on 23.03.2019 u/ss 10, 11 
and 13 of UA(P) Act after which investigation commenced. A true copy of the FIR no. 61/2019, in vernacular, along 
with the true English translation of its relevant portion was relied upon by PW 2 as Ex. PW 2/1. 


65. Witness testified that during the course of investigation, statements of material witnesses were recorded under 
section 161 Cr.P.C who corroborated the information regarding activities of the proscribed organization and 
continuing illegal activities of its members. True copies of the statements of some of the witnesses recorded u/s 161 
Cr.P.C., in vernacular, along with their true English translations have been relied upon by PW 2 as Ex. PW 2/2 and 
Ex. PW 2/3. 


66. PW 2 further deposed that after collecting sufficient material, prima facie case was made out and 
accordingly, charge-sheet dt. 27.04.2023 bearing Challan no. 37 of 2019 was filed before the concerned jurisdictional 
Court and the case is now at the stage of trial. A true copy of the aforesaid charge-sheet filed in FIR no. 61/2019 in 
vernacular, along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 2 as Ex. PW 2/4. 


67. PW 2 concluded his testimony by affirming that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of 
service and the records of the criminal cases registered against JKLF-Y, it was manifest that JKLF-Y, its leaders and 
members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and continuously advocating secession of the territory of Jammu and Kashmir from 
the Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of 
India; 
c) committing acts of commission and omissions intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India to bring 


about cession of lawful constitutional authority of GOI in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the integrity and security of the country; 
e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and have been a firm preacher of Kashmir separatist movement. 
f) exploiting the situation in the valley by actively provoking and luring the youth of Jammu & Kashmir 


towards violence so as to disrupt the peace in the valley through announcement of hartal calls and issuance 
of protest calendars, leading to riots which have resulted in injuries to and death of several civilians, police 
officials and security forces personnel. 


Witness further deposed that sufficient material has been brought on record which manifests that the proscribed 
organization JKLF-Y, its leaders and members who continued to be its members even after being banned, also have 
support from across the border and have been actively supporting the separatists to bring about a secession of Jammu 
and Kashmir from the Union of India. 


Cross- examination by Md. Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF-Y. 


68. In cross-examination, PW 2 stated that he could not admit or deny that JKLF - Y had its origin in 1966 and 
at that point of time was known as JKNLF. PW 2 was not aware if JKLF came into existence in London in 1976. 
Witness denied, as per his knowledge that in 1988 this organization was being headed by Amanullah Khan or that 
Mohd. Yasin Malik became its member in 1988 only. Regarding a question on the arrest of Yasin Malik in the year 
1990 or 1992, Witness replied that as per his affidavit, Yasin Malik was arrested in 1992. PW 2 however submitted 
that he could not admit or deny if Yasin Malik was arrested on 06.08.1990 as commander-in-chief of JKLF-Y and was 
brought to Tihar Jail under the Public Safety Act. PW 2 also could not admit or deny the suggestion that the split of 
JKLF-Y happened in 1995 when Yasin Malik got expelled by Amanullah Khan and thereafter, formed his own 
independent faction i.e. JKLF(Y). Witness denied the suggestions that the organization of Yasin Malik never provided 
any logistic support or did not provide any militant shelter or financial support for any terror activities and also that no 
FIR has been registered against JKLF-Y or its members after 1994 in regard to terrorist activities. PW 2 further denied 
the suggestion that despite there being thousands of members of JKLF(Y), and there being operative offices in J&K, 
none of the members except Yasin Malik is in jail. Witness vol. that those members of JKLF-Y who were arrested are 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


presently on bail except Yasin Malik. It was also denied by PW 2 to be correct that there is no serious crime made out 
against those who have been admitted on bail by the competent court. 


PW-3 


69. Rameez Rashid Bhat, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Hajin, Bandipora, Kashmir tendered his affidavit 
as Ex. PW3/A and deposed that he was the supervising officer of the case bearing FIR no. 11/2019 and in course of 
discharge of his duties as the supervisory officer, had gone through the records of the case files, and consequently 
was well conversant with the facts and circumstances of the case. Witness deposed that he had been duly authorized 
by the competent authority to depose before this Tribunal and relied upon such authorization dt. 04.07.24 as Ex. PW 
3/A-1. 


70. PW 3 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide Notification no. S.O. 1416(E) published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, on 15" March 2024, has declared Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Mohd. Yasin Malik Faction 
as an ‘unlawful association’. Witness affirmed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKLF-Y prepared by the 
Central Government and on the basis of the facts of various cases registered against the said organization and its 
leaders, he could testify that JKLF-Y and its leaders were involved in carrying out secessionist activities. 


71. Witness further deposed that it was borne out from the records that Jammu and Kashmir National Liberation 
Front was formed in the year 1964, which was later on renamed as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front. PW 3 
stated that as is borne out from the records, a new faction of the said organization was established in the year 1988 by 
the prominent separatist leader Mohd. Yasin and was named as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Yasin Malik 
Faction. 


72; PW 3, on the basis of the Background Note prepared by the Central Govt. and the govt. records, testified that 
JKLF-Y was formed with the objective of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India and for re- 
unification of Jammu & Kashmir, Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, Gilgit, Baltistan, Hunza and Aksai Chin through an 
armed struggle. Witness further testified that between 1988 to 1990, JKLF-Y became one of the largest terrorist 
organizations in Jammu & Kashmir, whose members/activists were involved not only in the infamous exodus of 
Kashmiri Hindus from Kashmir Valley but also in some prominent crimes of that period including the kidnapping of 
Rubaiya Syed, daughter of the then Home Minster of India. 


73. PW 3 further testified that it was also borne out from the records that Mohd. Yasin Malik, who was the chief 
commander of JKLF-Y, was arrested in the year 1992 but subsequently released in the year 1994 after which though 
he distanced himself from armed resistance but he continued supporting terrorist organizations covertly and 
financially. Witness deposed that JKLF-Y has been spearheading anti-India secessionist agenda at the instance of ISI, 
Pakistan and prominent terrorist organization by following pro-Pakistan propaganda for secession of Jammu & 
Kashmir from the Indian Union. PW 3 further deposed that because of these unlawful activities, JKLF-Y was 
proscribed by the Central Government in the 2019 which ban was confirmed by the Tribunal constituted to adjudicate 
the validity of the ban imposed. However, as is borne out from the records and the FIR’s registered, despite banning of 
JKLF-Y, the organization and its members have not stopped their secessionist activities and are continuing to raise 
funds for furtherance of the organizational activities and objectives i.e. secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the 
Union of India and cession of constitutional authority of the GOI in J & K. 


74. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, its leaders and members have consistently been challenging 
the accession of erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir with the Union of India and have been issuing press reports, 
addressing public gatherings and are working towards secession of Jammu & Kashmir by continuously encouraging 
the armed insurgency which acts are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty, dis-harmony by promoting feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government of India, in a manner which is gravely prejudicial to the territorial 
integrity and sovereignty of the Indian Union. 


FIR No. 11/2019: 


75. Concerning secessionist activities of JKLF—Y, PW 3 deposed that on 25.03.2019, information was received 
from reliable sources that despite declaration of JKLF-Y as an unlawful organization, a number of persons still 
continue to be the members of the proscribed organization and were carrying out illegal activities within the 
jurisdiction of Police Station Hajin which are prejudicial to the security, territorial integrity and sovereignty of India. 
Based on the said information, FIR no. 11/2019 was registered at P.S. Hajin on 25.03.2019 u/ss. 10 and 13 UA(P) 
Act and an investigation was initiated. A true copy of the FIR no. 11/2019, in vernacular, along with the true English 
translation of its relevant portion was relied upon as Ex. PW 3/1. 


76. Witness further deposed that in the course of investigation of the FIR, statements of material witnesses were 
recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C who corroborated the information regarding continuing illegal activities of the proscribed 
organization and continued membership of the unlawful organization. PW 3 testified that leading to the statements, 
raids were conducted and incriminating materials were seized. Accused Mushtaq Ahmad Wani was arrested, and his 
confessional statement was recorded. True copies of the statements of some of the witnesses recorded u/s 161 Cr. P.C. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 23 


in vernacular along with their true English translations were relied upon by PW 3 as Ex. PW 3/2 to Ex. PW 3/3. 
Witness also relied upon a true copy of a seizure memo prepared during the course of investigation, dated 16.06.2019, 
in vernacular, along with its true English translation as Ex. PW 3/4. A true copy of the confessional statement dated 
07.09.2019 of accused Mushtaq Ahmed Wani in vernacular along with its true English translation was relied upon as 
Ex. PW 3/5. PW 3 further deposed that after collecting sufficient material which prima facie established the contents 
of the FIR, a chargesheet dt. 17.08.22 bearing Challan no. 39 of 2022 was filed before the concerned jurisdictional 
Court and the case is now at the stage of trial. A true copy of chargesheet bearing Challan no. 39 of 2022 filed in FIR 
no. 11/2019 in vernacular along with its true English translation was relied upon as Ex. PW 3/6. 


77. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, since its inception, has been propagating anti-national 
narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its agencies inimical to India 
which openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within Jammu and Kashmir. PW 3 further testified 
that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of service and the records of the criminal cases, it is 
manifest that JKLF-Y and its leaders and members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and continuously advocating secession of territory of Jammu and Kashmir from 
the Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of 
India; 
c) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring about cession 


of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J & K; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the territorial integrity and security of the 
country; 
e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and inciting violence in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir on 


religious lines; 


f) inciting and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in 
order to keep the anti-India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars, leading to 
riots which resulted in the injuries to and death of several civilians, police officials and Security Forces 
personnel. 


Cross-examination by Mohd. Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF-Y. 


78. In cross-examination, PW 3 stated that he could not admit or deny that JKLF - Y had its origin in 1966 and 
at that point of time was known as JKNLF. PW 3 was not aware if JKLF came into existence in London in 1976. 
Witness denied, as per his knowledge that in 1988 this organization was being headed by Amanullah Khan or that 
Mohd. Yasin Malik became its member in 1988 only. Regarding a question on the arrest of Yasin Malik in the year 
1990 or 1992, Witness replied that as per his affidavit, Yasin Malik was arrested in 1992 but admitted it to be correct 
that Mohd. Yasin Malik was arrested in 1990 while he was commander-in-chief of JKLF-Y. However, witness could 
not confirm whether Yasin Malik was brought to Tihar Jail under the Public Safety Act. PW 3 also could not admit or 
deny that the split of JKLF-Y happened in 1995 when Yasin Malik got expelled by Amanullah Khan and thereafter, 
formed his own independent faction i.e. JKLF(Y). Witness denied the suggestions that the organization of Yasin Malik 
never provided any logistic support or did not provide any militant shelter or financial support for any terror activities 
and also that no FIR has been registered against JKLF-Y or its members after 1994 in regard to terrorist activities. PW 
3 further denied the suggestion that despite there being thousands of members of JKLF(Y), and there being operative 
offices in J&K, none of the members except Yasin Malik is in jail. Witness vol. that those members of this 
Organization who had been arrested may or may not be on bail. It was further denied, as being incorrect, the 
suggestion that there was no serious crime made out against those who have been admitted to bail by the competent 
court. In regard to a question concerning other FIR’s having been registered against JKLF—Y, Witness stated that as 
per his affidavit, FIR no. 11/2019 was registered at P.S. Hajin against members of JKLF(Y) but he was not aware if 
any other FIRs have been registered thereafter against any member of JKLF(Y). 


PW-4 


79. Sh. Shabir Ahmad, currently posted as S.H.O, P.S. Pulwama, Kashmir tendered his affidavit as Ex. PW 4/A 
and deposed that he was the Investigating officer of the case registered as FIR no. 44/2019 and as such was well 
conversant with the facts and circumstances of the case. Witness further affirmed that he had been duly authorized by 
the competent authority to depose before this Tribunal and relied upon such authorization dt. 04.07.24 as PW 4/ A-1. 


80. PW 4 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide Notification no. S.O. 1416(E) published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, on 15" March 2024, has declared Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Y as an ‘unlawful 
association’. Witness affirmed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKLF-Y prepared by the Central 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Government and on the basis of the facts of various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, he 
could testify that JKLF-Y and its leaders were involved in carrying out secessionist activities. 


81. Witness further deposed that it was borne out from the records that Jammu and Kashmir National Liberation 
Front was formed in the year 1964, which was later on renamed as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front. PW 4 
stated that as is borne out from the records, a new faction of the said organization was established in the year 1988 by 
the prominent separatist leader Mohd. Yasin and was named as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Yasin Malik 
Faction. 


82. PW 4, on the basis of the Background Note prepared by the Central Govt. and the govt. records, testified that 
JKLF-Y was formed with the objective of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India and for re- 
unification of Jammu & Kashmir, Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, Gilgit, Baltistan, Hunza and Aksai Chin through an 
armed struggle. Witness further testified that between 1988 to 1990, JKLF-Y became one of the largest terrorist 
organizations in Jammu & Kashmir, whose members/activists were involved not only in the infamous exodus of 
Kashmiri Hindus from Kashmir Valley but also in some prominent crimes of that period including the kidnapping of 
Rubaiya Syed, daughter of the then Home Minster of India. 


83. PW 4 further testified that it was also borne out from the records that Mohd. Yasin Malik, who was the chief 
commander of JKLF-Y, was arrested in the year 1992 but subsequently released in the year 1994 after which though 
he distanced himself from armed resistance but he continued supporting terrorist organizations covertly and 
financially. Witness deposed that JKLF-Y has been spearheading anti-India secessionist agenda at the instance of ISI, 
Pakistan and prominent terrorist organization by following pro-Pakistan propaganda for secession of Jammu & 
Kashmir from the Indian Union. PW 4 further deposed that because of these unlawful activities, JKLF-Y was 
proscribed by the Central Government in the 2019 which ban was confirmed by the Tribunal constituted to adjudicate 
the validity of the ban imposed. However, as is borne out from the records and the FIR’s registered, despite banning of 
JKLF-Y, the organization and its members have not stopped their secessionist activities and are continuing to raise 
funds for furtherance of the organizational activities and objectives i.e. secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the 
Union of India and cession of constitutional authority of the GOI in J & K. 


84. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, its leaders and members have consistently been challenging 
the accession of erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir with the Union of India and have been issuing press reports, 
addressing public gatherings and are working towards secession of Jammu & Kashmir by continuously encouraging 
the armed insurgency which acts are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty, dis-harmony by promoting feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government of India, in a manner which is gravely prejudicial to the territorial 
integrity and sovereignty of the Indian Union. 


FIR No. 44/2019: 


85. Witness further testified that despite JKLF-Y being declared by the Central Government to be an unlawful 
organization, it is continuing to operate its offices at different places within the jurisdiction of Police Station 
Pulwama through its representatives and is causing threat to the sovereignty of the Union of India. Consequently, 
FIR no. 44/2019 was registered at PS Pulwama on 30.03.2019 u/ss 10, 11 & 13 of the UA(P) Act and an 
investigation was initiated. A true copy of the FIR no. 44/2019, in vernacular, along with true English translation of 
its relevant portion was relied upon as Ex. PW 4/1. 


86. PW 4 affirmed on oath that during the investigation, statements of material witnesses were recorded under 
section 161 Cr.P.C who corroborated the information regarding operation of offices of the proscribed organization by 
its members. Consequently, leading to the statements and information, searches were conducted at different places 
and incriminating materials were seized. True copies of the statements of some of the witnesses recorded u/s 161 
Cr.P.C., in vernacular, along with their true English translations were relied upon as Ex. PW 4/2 to PW 4/3. A true 
copy of the seizure memo dt. 24.06.2023 prepared during investigation was relied upon as Ex. PW 4/4. 


87. Witness further stated that the investigation conducted till date and which is still ongoing prima facie 
establishes commission of the alleged offences. However, it is yet to be concluded though the same is at its fag end 
and a chargesheet is also likely to be filed soon. Explaining the delay in conclusion of investigation, PW 4 stated that 
the investigations faced significant challenges due to reorganization of the State of Jammu and Kashmir into two 
separate Union Territories and subsequently, due to lockdowns on account of Covid-19. Witness elaborated that 
significant delay has also been caused due to the climate of fear created by the proscribed organization and other 
separatist organizations such that individuals are deterred from coming forward to provide statements, hindering the 
progress of the investigations. 


88. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, since its inception, has been propagating anti-national 
narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its agencies inimical to India 
which openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within Jammu and Kashmir. PW 4 further testified 
that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of service and the records of the criminal cases, it is 
manifest that JKLF-Y and its leaders and members have been: 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 25 


9) incessantly encouraging and continuously advocating secession of territory of Jammu and Kashmir from 
the Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of 
India; 
०) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring about cession 


of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J & K; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the territorial integrity and security of the 
country; 
e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and inciting violence in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir on 


religious lines; 


f) inciting and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in 
order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars, leading to 
riots which resulted in injuries to and death of several civilians, police officials and Security Forces 
personnel. 


89. PW 4 concluded his testimony by further affirming that it stood established that the activities of JKLF-Y 
were aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the 
lawful government and that the members of JKLF-Y are indulging and acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the 
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Cross-examination by Mohd. Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF-Y. 


90. In cross-examination, PW 4 stated that he could not admit or deny that JKLF-Y had its origin in 1966 and at 
that point of time was known as JKNLF. PW 4 was not aware if JKLF came into existence in London in 1976. 
Witness denied, as per his knowledge that in 1988 this organization was being headed by Amanullah Khan or that 
Mohd. Yasin Malik became its member in 1988 only. Regarding a question on the arrest of Yasin Malik in the year 
1990 or 1992, Witness replied that as per his affidavit, Yasin Malik was arrested in 1992 but stated that he could 
neither admit or deny that Mohd. Yasin Malik was arrested in 1990 while he was commander-in-chief of JKLF-Y or 
whether Yasin Malik was brought to Tihar Jail under the Public Safety Act. PW 4 also could not admit or deny the 
suggestion that the split of JKLF-Y happened in 1995 when Yasin Malik got expelled by Amanullah Khan and 
thereafter, formed his own independent faction i.e. JKLF(Y). Witness denied the suggestions that the organization of 
Yasin Malik has never provided any logistic support or did not provide any militant shelter or financial support for 
any terror activities and also that no FIR has been registered against JKLF-Y or its members after 1994 in regard to 
terrorist activities. PW 4 further denied the suggestion that despite there being thousands of members of JKLF(Y), and 
there being operative offices in J&K, none of the members except Yasin Malik is in jail. Witness vol. that those 
members of this organization who had been arrested may or may not be on bail. It was further denied, as being 
incorrect, the suggestion that there was no serious crime made out against those who have been admitted to bail by the 
competent court. In regard to a question concerning other FIR’s having been registered against JKLF—-Y, Witness 
stated that as per his affidavit, FIR no. 44/2019 was registered at P.S. Pulwama against members of JKLF(Y) but he 
was not aware if any other FIRs have been registered thereafter against any member of JKLF(Y). 


PW-5 


91. Sh. Showkat Ahmad Mir, currently posted as Inspector, P.S. Handwara, Kashmir, tendered his affidavit as 
Ex. PW 5/A and deposed that he was the supervising officer of case bearing FIR no. 42/2019 and was well conversant 
with the facts and circumstances of the case. Witness further stated that he had been duly authorized by the competent 
authority to depose before this Tribunal and relied upon such authorization dt. 11.07.24 as Ex. PW 5/A-1. 


92. PW 5 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide Notification no. S.O. 1416(E) published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, on 15" March 2024, has declared Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Mohd. Yasin Malik Faction 
as an ‘unlawful association’. Witness affirmed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKLF-Y prepared by the 
Central Government and on the basis of the facts of various cases registered against the said organization and its 
leaders, he could testify that JKLF-Y and its leaders were involved in carrying out secessionist activities. 


93. Witness further deposed that it was borne out from the records that Jammu and Kashmir National Liberation 
Front was formed in the year 1964, which was later on renamed as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front. PW 5 
stated that subsequently, a new faction of the said organization was established in the year 1988 by the prominent 
separatist leader Mohd. Yasin and was named as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Yasin Malik Faction. 


94. PW 5, on the basis of the Background Note prepared by the Central Govt. and the govt. records, testified that 
JKLF-Y was formed with the objective of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India and for re- 
unification of Jammu & Kashmir, Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, Gilgit, Baltistan, Hunza and Aksai Chin through an 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


armed struggle. Witness further testified that between 1988 to 1990, JKLF-Y became one of the largest terrorist 
organizations in Jammu & Kashmir, whose members/activists were involved not only in the infamous exodus of 
Kashmiri Hindus from Kashmir Valley but also in some prominent crimes of that period including the kidnapping of 
Rubaiya Syed, daughter of the then Home Minster of India. 


95. PW 5 further testified that it was also borne out from the records that Mohd. Yasin Malik, who was the chief 
commander of JKLF-Y, was arrested in the year 1992 but subsequently released in the year 1994 after which though 
he distanced himself from armed resistance but he continued supporting terrorist organizations covertly and 
financially. Witness deposed that JKLF-Y has been spearheading anti-India secessionist agenda at the instance of ISI, 
Pakistan and prominent terrorist organization by following pro-Pakistan propaganda for secession of Jammu & 
Kashmir from the Indian Union. PW 5 further deposed that because of these unlawful activities, JKLF-Y was 
proscribed by the Central Government in the 2019 which ban was confirmed by the Tribunal constituted to adjudicate 
the validity of the ban imposed. However, as is borne out from the records and the FIR’s registered, despite banning of 
JKLF-Y, the organization and its members have not stopped their secessionist activities and are continuing to raise 
funds for furtherance of the organizational activities and objectives i.e. secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the 
Union of India and cession of constitutional authority of the GOI in J & K. 


96. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, its leaders and members have consistently been challenging 
the accession of erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir with the Union of India and have been issuing press reports, 
addressing public gatherings and are working towards secession of Jammu & Kashmir by continuously encouraging 
the armed insurgency which acts are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty, dis-harmony by promoting feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government of India, in a manner which is gravely prejudicial to the territorial 
integrity and sovereignty of the Indian Union. 


FIR No. 42/2019: 


97. PW 5 testified that an information was received from reliable sources that despite ban having been imposed 
on JKLF-Y, activities of the organization were still being carried on by its members which activities were against the 
integrity and sovereignty of the nation. Based on the information, FIR no. 42/2019 was registered on 23.03.2019 u/ss 
10 and 13 of the UA(P) Act at P.S. Handwara, district Kupwara and investigation was consequently conducted. A 
true copy of the FIR no. 42/2019, in vernacular, along with true English translation of its relevant portion was relied 
upon as Ex. PW 5/1. 


98. Witness deposed on oath that during the investigation, statements of material witnesses were recorded u/s 161 
and 164 of Cr.P.C who corroborated the information regarding continuation of unlawful activities of the proscribed 
organization by its members despite the ban and also of their involvement in terrorist activities. Leading to the said 
information and statements, accused Rafiq Ahmad War was arrested on 30.06.2019. True copies of the statement of 
some of the material witnesses recorded u/s 161 and 164 Cr.P.C in vernacular along with their true English 
translations were relied upon as Ex. PW 5/2 to PW 5/7. A true copy of arrest memo dt. 30.06.2019 was relied upon as 
Ex. PW 5/8. PW 5 further deposed that after collecting sufficient material which prima facie establishes the contents 
of the FIR, a charge-sheet bearing Challan no. 4/2024 was filed before the concerned jurisdictional Court on 
20.02.2024 and the case was now at the stage of framing of charges. A true copy of charge-sheet bearing Challan no. 
4 of 2024 filed in FIR no. 42/2019, in vernacular, along with its true English translation has been relied upon as Ex. 
PW 5/9. Witness explained that the investigation faced significant challenges due to reorganization of the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir into two separate Union Territories and subsequently, due to the lockdown situation created by 
Covid-19. PW 5 elaborated on the aspect of delay that significant delay had been caused in the investigation due to the 
climate of fear created by the proscribed organization and other separatist organizations such that individuals are 
deterred from coming forward to provide statements, hindering the progress of the investigations. 


99. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, since its inception, has been propagating anti-national 
narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its agencies inimical to India 
which openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within Jammu and Kashmir. PW 5 further testified 
that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of service and the records of the criminal cases, it is 
manifest that JKLF-Y and its leaders and members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and continuously advocating secession of territory of Jammu and Kashmir from 
the Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of 
India; 
c) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring about cession 


of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J & K; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the territorial integrity and security of the 
country; 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 27 


e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and inciting violence in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir on 
religious lines; 


f) inciting and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in 
order to keep the anti-India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars, leading to 
riots which resulted in injuries to and death of several civilians, police officials and Security Forces 
personnel. 


100. PW 5 concluded his testimony by further affirming that it stood established that the activities of JKLF-Y 
were aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the 
lawful government and that the members of JKLF-Y are indulging and acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the 
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Cross-examination by Mohd. Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF-Y. 


101. In cross-examination, PW 5 stated that he could not admit or deny if Yasin Malik as commander-in-chief of 
JKLF (Y) was arrested on 06.08.1990. Witness denied the suggestion that no FIR has been registered against JKLF-Y 
after 2019. PW 5 vol. to state that many FIRs have been registered in different districts against the workers of JKLF- 
Y. He further stated that he had only given the details of the criminal case which is pertaining to his Police Station and 
could not state about other districts/police stations about which the witnesses from those respective districts can give 
the details. PW 5 further testified that there were many persons supporting militancy, who belonged to JKLF-Y, and 
had been arrested but he could not state if they were still under arrest or not. PW 5 admitted it to be correct that in his 
Police Station, no FIR subsequent to the one mentioned in the affidavit, had been registered against JKLF-Y. 


PW-6 


102. Sh. Rajesh Kumar Gupta, currently posted as Director (Counter Terrorism), MHA, GOI, tendered his 
affidavit as Ex. PW 6/A and deposed that he was well conversant with the facts and circumstances of this Reference 
since he has been dealing with all official files concerning JKLF—Y in his current position. Witness relied upon a copy 
of the official noting dt. 04.07.24 vide which he had been authorized to appear before this Tribunal as Ex. PW 6/A-1. 
The complete file containing the said noting was submitted by the witness in a sealed cover. 


103. PW 6 further deposed that the Notification no. S.O. 1416 (E) dt. 15 March 2024, issued by the Central 
Government is based on the information and material received from the central intelligence and investigation agencies 
and Criminal Investigation Department of UT of Jammu and Kashmir, with regard to the unlawful activities of JKLF- 
Y. On the basis of information received from the intelligence and investigation agencies of the Central Government 
and the UT of Jammu and Kashmir regarding unlawful activities of JKLF-Y, a note was prepared for the consideration 
of the Cabinet Committee on Security. Thereafter, the Cabinet Committee on Security took the decision and approved 
the proposal contained in the above note, in the meeting held on 7" March, 2024. Accordingly, the declaration 
concerning JKLF—Y to be an ‘unlawful association’ was made and published vide Notification dated 15" March, 
2024, bearing no. S.O. 1416 (E). A copy of the said Notification published in the official gazette dated 15.03.2024 was 
relied upon as Ex. PW 6/1. 


104. Witness testified that in terms of sub-section (1) of section 5 read with sub-section (1) of the section 4 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide Notification dated 5“ April 2024, bearing no. S.O. 1627 (B), this 
Tribunal was constituted. Witness further testified that the Background Note submitted to this Tribunal in terms of 
Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules 1968, vide letter dated 9" April 2024, is based upon the material/ 
information as contained in the concerned file. A copy of the said Background Note was relied upon as Ex. PW 6/2. 


105. PW 6 further stated that earlier, on the basis of unlawful activities of JKLF-Y, the Central Government had 
declared the JKLF-Y as an ‘unlawful association’ vide Gazette of India Notification no. 5.0. 1403 (E) dt. 2274 March 
2019 for a period of five years under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. Subsequently, the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Tribunal constituted to adjudicate whether or not, there is sufficient cause for declaring JKLF- 
Y as an unlawful association, had also confirmed this notification vide its Order dt. 20" Sept. 2019 which was 
published in the Gazette of India bearing Notification no. 5.0. 3460 (8) dt. 25" Sept. 2019. 


106. Witness further testified that various cases registered by the Jammu and Kashmir Police, National 
Investigation Agency and Directorate of Enforcement throw light on the unlawful and subversive activities of the 
chairman and activists of JKLF-Y. The concerned officers of the UT of Jammu and Kashmir have filed their affidavits 
in evidence before this Tribunal in respect of cases registered in Jammu and Kashmir against the activists of JKLF-Y 
under various provisions of law including the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 and IPC. Further, the 
officers concerned of the National Investigation Agency and Directorate of Enforcement have also filed respective 
affidavits in evidence before this Tribunal in respect of the cases registered against the Chairman of JKLF-Y under 
various sections of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, Indian Penal Code and Prevention of Money 
Laundering Act. 


107. PW 6 further submitted that in addition to the evidence already having been adduced by various witnesses 
during the course of proceedings before this Tribunal in support of the declaration as contained in Notification no. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


S.O. 1416 (E), various intelligence inputs show that JKLF-Y is continuing its unlawful activities which are prejudicial 
to the security of the country. Inputs received from intelligence agencies clearly bring out that JKLF-Y is 
continuously indulging in activities for seeking separation of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India and 
considering all these facts, circumstances and evidence adduced before this Tribunal, the JKLF-Y has been banned 
under the UA(P)A, 1967. Witness further stated that the declaration of JKLF-Y as an unlawful association is not only 
justified but is necessary in the interest of security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of India since the chairman and 
activists of the JKLF-Y have been indulging in radicalizing the youth through provocative speeches aimed at 
separation of Jammu and Kashmir from Union of India. 


108. During the course of his testimony, PW 6 submitted the original file (duly indexed) containing the above- 
mentioned central intelligence reports/inputs for the perusal of this Tribunal and deposed that the Central Government 
is seeking privilege for the said original file, relying on section 123 of the Indian Evidence Act read with section 3(2) 
and proviso to Rule 5 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules of 1968. Witness submitted that the contents of the 
original file are privileged and confidential in nature and hence, cannot be made available to the banned association or 
to any third party as the Government considers it against the public interest to disclose the same to either the banned 
association or to any third-party inter-alia in terms of the provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 
1968. Subject to the claim of privilege raised on behalf of the Central Govt. by PW 6, the original file containing 
confidential inputs/reports was taken on record as Ex. PW 6/3. 


109. Responding to the reply dt. 27.05.2024 filed by Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF-Y after statutory Notice u/s 
4(2) of the UA(P) Act was directed to be issued by this Tribunal vide the order dt. 16.4.2024, Witness stated that in his 
reply, Yasin Malik has not refuted the grounds as detailed in the Background Note on the basis of which the 
Notification has been issued by the Central Government declaring JKLF-Y to be an unlawful association and infact, 
has admitted that JKLF-Y was involved in militant activities for secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 
India and further that till date offices of JKLF-Y even in the international sphere continue to operate and work towards 
their sole aim of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Indian Union. As per the submission of the witness, the said 
reply is devoid of any merit and was merely a personal note prepared by Yasin Malik which does not serve the 
purpose of the present proceedings before the Tribunal in any manner. 


110. PW 6 concluded his testimony by submitting that from the cogent and irrefutable evidence which has 
emerged till now, it is clear that JKLF-Y is continuously encouraging veiled terrorist activities and inciting people to 
bring about a secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union. Such activities of JKLF-Y are aimed at 
causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feeling of enmity and hatred against the lawful 
government in a manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the India and consequently, 
the Notification no. 5.0. 1416 (E) dated 15% March 2024 may be confirmed and upheld in the national interest. 


This witness was not cross-examination by Mohd. Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF-Y. 
PW7 


111. Sh. B.B. Pathak, currently posted as DSP, NIA, Delhi tendered his affidavit as Ex. PW7/A and deposed that 
he was the current investigating officer of the case registered as RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI and in course of discharge of 
his duties as the investigating officer, had gone through the records of the case files and was well conversant with the 
facts and circumstances of the case. 


112. In support of the grounds necessitating the notification declaring JKLF—Y as an ‘unlawful association’, PW 7 
deposed that the Central Government, in exercise of its powers conferred under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
UA(P) Act, 1967 has declared the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Mohd. Yasin Malik Faction to be an 
unlawful association vide Notification number S.O. 1416 (E) dt. 15.03.2024. 


113. PW 7 further deposed that National Investigation Agency being India’s Federal Counter Terrorism 
Investigation Agency has investigated the case RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI in which anti-national and unlawful activities of 
accused Mohd. Yasin Malik @ Aslam have surfaced. Detailing the facts and circumstances, PW 7 testified that on 
30.05.2017, the Ministry of Home Affairs, GOI issued the Order no. 11011/2017-IS-IV, in exercise of its powers 
conferred under section 6(5) read with section 8 of the NIA Act, 2008, directing the NIA to register a ‘Regular Case’ 
and take up the investigation of the same as credible information had been received by the Central Government that 
Hafiz Muhammad Saeed and other secessionist and separatist leaders, including the members/cadres of the Hurriyat 
Conference, have been acting in connivance with active militants of proscribed terrorist organizations i.e. Hizb-ul- 
Mujahideen, Dukhtaran-e-Millat, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist organizations/associations for raising, receiving 
and collecting funds domestically and abroad through various illegal channels including hawala, for funding separatist 
and terrorist activities in Jammu and Kashmir through the funds so collected and as such, have entered into a larger 
criminal conspiracy for causing disruption in the Kashmir valley by way of pelting stones on the security forces, 
systematically burning of schools, damage to public property and waging war against India. Accordingly, on 
30.05.2017, NIA registered a case being RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI under sections 120B, 121 & 121A of the Indian Penal 
Code and sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 and 40 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. A Copy of the 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 361)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 29 


FIR i.e. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI along with MHA Order no. 11011/2017-IS-IV were relied upon by PW 7 as Ex. PW 
7/1. 


114. Witness testified that investigation revealed that various terrorist organisations viz. Jammu & Kashmir 
Liberation Front, HM, LeT, in connivance with various secessionist groups particularly the APHC/Hurriyat 
Conference and its constituents funded by Pakistan and its agencies have entered into a criminal conspiracy to wage 
war against the Government of India by following the ideology of ‘freedom’ i.e. secession of J&K from the Union of 
India. Witness deposed that APHC was formed as a conglomerate of 26 political/social/religious organisations in 1993 
to give a political mask to the secessionist activities and has been consistently promoted by Pakistan to fulfil its 
motive to establish its claim over J&K. In the year 2008, the APHC split into three factions. One faction was headed 
by Mirwaiz Umar and is called as APHC-M, the 2™ is led by Syed Ali Shah Geelani and is called as APHC-G 
whereas the 37 faction is led by Yasin Malik who is head of JKLF. Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Mirwaiz Umar Faroog and 
Yasin Malik together had formed the Joint Resistance Leadership (JRL) which used to promote the cause of 
secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India through calendar of protests mentioning the precise dates and 
places of protests, demonstrations etc. which were conveyed to the general population through newspapers and social 
media platforms. These protest calendars had detailed instructions for hartal, picketing, blockage of routes and roads, 
suspension of public transport, instructions for organizing processions and marches, writing of graffiti on the walls, 
exhorting people to play ‘azadi taranas’ (songs) and complete shutdown of markets/economic activities. These protest 
calendars would exhort and provoke people to agitate against the State and the security forces, showing defiance 
against the Government of India. During the course of investigation, protest calendars for the period 06.08.2016 to 
16.08.2016 were recovered and seized during a search conducted in the house of one of the leaders of APHC namely 
Altaf Ahmad Shah @ Fantoosh. Investigation further revealed that during the period as mentioned in the seized 
protest calendars, the protests were very violent and led to the registration of 89 cases of stone-pelting and other 
unlawful activities including arson, school burning, damage to the public property and vehicles etc. In the said 
incidents, 07 persons got killed and 175 persons were injured. Arrests of 366 persons involved in such activities were 
carried out in Srinagar. As per the information received from BSF, 40 BSF personnel got injured who were dealing 
with stone-pelting incidents from Sept. 2016 to June 2017. APHC, though poses as a political front, however it is 
manifest that agenda of APHC is to create an atmosphere conducive to the fulfilment of the goal of secession of 
Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. The secessionist agenda of the Hurriyat is also reflected on its website 
www.huriyatconference.com, which speaks about “Freedom struggle” and that “People of Jammu & Kashmir have 
been fighting against Indian Occupation”. 


115. PW 7 further testified that pursuant to the investigation carried out by the NIA in RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI, 
charge-sheet dated 18.01.2018 was filed before the NIA Special Court, New Delhi against 12 accused persons, 
including two designated terrorists based in Pakistan, namely Hafiz Muhammad Saeed who is heading the banned 
terror outfit ‘LeT’ and Mohd. Yusuf Shah @ Salahuddin who is heading the banned terror outfit ‘HM’, both of whom 
have been declared as absconders. The said charge-sheet also includes other arrested accused persons who are the 
leaders of APHC viz. (i) Aftab Ahmad Shah @ Shahid-ul-Islam (ii) Altaf Ahmad Shah @ Fantoosh (since expired) 
(iii) Nayeem Ahmad Khan (iv) Farooq Ahmad Dar @ Bitta Karate (v) Mohammad Akbar Khanday (vi) Raja 
Mehrajuddin Kalwal (vii) Bashir Ahmad Bhat @ Peer Saifullah and (viii) Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, who is a 
‘hawala’ conduit and who was involved in providing funds to APHC for terrorists and secessionist activities leaders, 
all of whom have been charge-sheeted u/ss 1203, 121, 121A & 124A of the Indian Penal Code and _ sections 13, 16, 
17, 18, 20, 38, 39 & 40 of the UA(P) Act, 1967. The case was further investigated in terms of section 173 (8) of 
Cr.P.C. Copy of the 1“ charge-sheet dated 18.01.2018 was relied upon by PW 7 as Ex. PW 7/2. 


116. Witness further stated that during the course of further investigation, active role of Yasin Malik who heads 
the JKLF-Y surfaced in carrying out secessionist activities including organising protests and stone pelting incidents, 
and in providing tacit help to terror activities. PW 7 affirmed that JKLF became a part of a larger consortium called 
‘All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC)’ to give a political mask to the militant activities of various secessionist 
groups so that their so-called ‘cause’ of securing secession of Jammu and Kashmir through terrorist activities gets a 
wider acceptability before the larger world. This was done as a part of a well-thought-out conspiracy by Yasin Malik 
along with other accused persons to show the Indian Government in poor light in front of the world and to divert the 
attention from the crimes against humanity in Jammu & Kashmir. 


117. Witness further stated on oath that during further investigation, it has been established that Yasin Malik had a 
close nexus with militant and terrorist organisations, and they were collaborating to undermine the territorial integrity 
of India to achieve the ultimate goal of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Indian Union. This is demonstrated 
from a whatsapp message sent by co-accused Ayaz Akbar Khanday to Mirwaiz Umar Farooq on 14.05.2017, and 
retrieved from the mobile phone of accused Ayaz Akbar Khanday, which reads as follows: 


“Syed Ali Geelani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Mohammad Yasin Malik on Sunday in a joint statement asked 
all political and militant organization to follow freedom struggle with vision and wisdom. Appealing to 
maintain unity, the leaders said that it is time to remain united and follow cherished goal with spirit of 
persistence and unity among all concerned factions. Freedom movement is in its crucial stage, said 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


resistance leaders and added that we need to be careful as our enemy can derive advantage from prevailing 
crises. 


118. PW 7 further testified that the seizure of a copy of Hizb-ul-Mujahideen’s letter-head from the premises of 
Yasin Malik wherein the terrorist organizations viz. Hizb-ul-Mujahideen, Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Muhammad 
jointly warned the people who supported the football tournament/ game in the valley, to disengage themselves from 
the organisers of this game and to show loyalty and “faithfulness” to the freedom struggle, clearly shows the 
association of Yasin Malik with terrorist organizations and their common aim which is to secure secession of Jammu 
& Kashmir from the Union of India. 


119. PW 7 also deposed that the statements recorded during the investigation disclose that for carrying forward its 
agenda of secession, the APHC has a well-established network of cadres starting from the village level to the district 
level in Kashmir valley who, at the instance of APHC leaders, at the grass-root level, propagate the ideology of 
secession among the masses, collect donations from the public, instigate the youth for anti-India activities, facilitate 
them to join terrorist organisations, arrange safe hide-outs for them, and in case they are located by security forces, 
these cadres mobilise the public for obstructing security forces and organise stone-pelting. In case the terrorists get 
killed in action, these local cadres create massive lawlessness, spread insurrectionary and hateful messages against the 
Indian State on social and mass media. Further, the APHC leaders or their representatives go and attend the funerals of 
killed terrorists, hail them as ‘martyrs’ and instigate many more youth to follow their path, thus pushing an entire 
generation into ranks of terrorist organisations. 


120. PW 7 further deposed that during the investigation, sms messages of July 2016, retrieved from the mobile 
phone of accused Altaf Ahmad Shah @ Fantoosh! clearly reveals that the ‘Joint Resistance Leadership’ i.e. Syed Ali 
Shah Geelani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Yasin Malik incite people to hold protests, ‘hartals’ and complete shut- 
downs for seeking ‘Right to self-determination’, ‘ask Jmams to lead the protests in mosques’ and tell traders etc. not to 
go to police when they are called there. It has also been revealed from the SMS messages that they were particular 
about sending the press notes regarding strike-calls given by them so that maximum number of people can be 
mobilized for the protests. Further, during the investigation, certain incriminating emails have also been recovered 
which show that Yasin Malik has set up an elaborate structure and mechanism across the world to raise funds for 
carrying out terrorist and other unlawful activities in Jammu and Kashmir in the name of “Freedom Struggle”. Giving 
examples, PW 7 deposed that Tariq Sharif is JKLF Finance Coordinator for U.K Zone and Khwaza Manzoor Ahmed 
Chishti is JKLF Finance Secretary for Saudi Arabia. Such money is transferred to India through various channels and 
is then pumped into Kashmir for running secessionist agenda. One of the emails retrieved from the email inbox of 
Yasin Malik is the one sent by Khawaza Manzoor Ahmed Chishti, Secretary Finance- JKLF, Riyadh to Tariq Sharif, 
who is the Finance Coordinator of UK Zone for JKLF. In the highlighted email, both had discussed about their ‘short 
term’ and ‘long term’ financial plans for their offices in India & PoK. 


121. Witness further testified that during the investigation, it has further been established that Yasin Malik had a 
close connection with banned terror organization Lashkar-e-Taiba, which is revealed from an email sent by Mohd. 
Hussain Khan to Arif Shafi Wani GK and copied to Yasin Malik on 24.08.2014. This email has the transcript of an 
interview given by Yasin Malik to Rajat Sharma in a programme titled ‘Aap Ki Adalat’ wherein Yasin Malik stated 
that he had visited Lashkar-e-Taiba’s camp in ‘Mureed’ where Hafiz Saeed who is head of ‘LeT’ and a designated 
global terrorist, had organized a felicitation event for him, and he had addressed Lashkar cadres there. Another email 
dated 03.07.2017 titled as ‘Open letter to United States of America’ retrieved from the e-mail account of Yasin Malik 
shows his support, solidarity and unity with Syed Salahuddin, the chief of banned terror organization Hizb-ul- 
Mujahideen, when the US declared him a ‘global terrorist’. 


122. Highlighting the role of Yasin Malik in utilising funds through the hawala route, PW 7 deposed that 
investigation has revealed that Yasin Malik was receiving funds from Pakistan through a hawala conduit, which is 
substantiated by a document seized from the house of Ghulam Mohammad Bhat, the accountant-cum-cashier of co- 
accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali who himself was the biggest hawala operator in the Kashmir valley. The said 
document shows Yasin Malik to have received Rs. 15,00,000/- from co-accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali on 
07.04.2015 which tranche was a part of the funds received by Zahoor Watali from Hafiz Sayeed. Consequently, based 
on the evidence collected during further investigation, 27 supplementary charge-sheet was filed on 04.10.2019 against 
five accused persons, namely Mohd. Yasin Malik, Shabir Ahmad Shah, Masarat Alam Bhat, Syeda Aasiya Andrabi, 
and Abdul Rashid Sheikh u/ss 120B, 121, 121A & 124A IPC and sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38 & 39 of the UA (P) 
Act. Witness highlighted that the anti-national and secessionist activities of Yasin Malik are detailed in the paras 
17.3.1 to 17.3.43 of the 2™ supp. charge-sheet. A Copy of the 2™ supp. Charge-sheet was relied upon by PW 7 as Ex. 
PW 7/3. Subsequently, charges have also been framed on 16.03.2022 against Yasin Malik for the offences punishable 
under sections u/ss 1208 IPC, 121 IPC, 121A IPC, 13 UA(P) Act r/w sections 1208 IPC, 15 UA(P) Act r/w sections 
120B IPC, and sections 17, 18, 20, 38 & 39 of UA (P) Act. A copy of the order ‘on charge’ dt. 16.03.2022 passed by 


1 Accused no. 4 in the first charge-sheet filed by the NIA 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 31 


the Id. Special Judge, NIA, New Delhi was relied upon as Ex. PW 7/4. Yasin Malik had pleaded guilty to the charges 
framed against him following which he was convicted of all the ‘charges’ and sentenced to R.I. for life, and a fine of 
Rs. 10 lakhs has also been imposed on him. A copy of the order dated 25.05.2022 convicting Yasin Malik was relied 
upon as Ex. PW 7/5. 


Cross-examination by Mohd. Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF-Y. 


123. In his cross-examination, PW 7 deposed that he could not admit or deny that APHC had split in 2002 and not 
2008 as stated in para 7 of his affidavit, and vol. to state that his testimony is on the basis of investigations carried out 
in FIR no. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI. Witness further submitted that he could not admit or deny that S.P. Faisal Qyum 
along with SDPO of Kothibagh, SHO P.S. Maisuma and the police team came and arrested Yasin Malik from his 
residence and detained him in Police Stn. Kothibagh for a few days and thereafter, he was shifted to Srinagar Central 
Jail where he was detained for one and half months or that Yasin Malik, thereafter, was shifted to JIC. PW 7 denied 
the suggestion that because Yasin Malik was detained in custody from 08.07.2016 till the 17 week of November, 
2016, he could not have indulged in anti-national activities during that period. 


124. PW 7 further deposed that he could not admit or deny if Zakir Mussa of Al Qaida gave a speech, which was 
made viral by Al Qaida following their pattern of propaganda where name of Mr. Yasin Malik was taken. Witness 
stated that he could not admit or deny whether the three posters which were recovered from the house of Yasin Malik, 
form a part of the charge-sheet. PW 7 denied the suggestion that Yasin Malik had never ever met Afzal Guru. Witness 
further denied the suggestions that the contents of para 22 of his affidavit were wrong or that the email referred 
therein was not sent by Yasin Malik. PW 7 also denied the suggestions that the particulars of the email referred to in 
para 22 of his affidavit were incorrect or that the contents of para 23 of his affidavit are incorrect. PW 7 further 
denied the suggestion to the effect that the ‘open letter to United States of America’ dated 03.07.2017, referred in 
para 24 of his affidavit, which was written by Yasin Malik, was an act of being a ‘Peace Maker’. Witness denied the 
suggestion that the contents of para 25 of his affidavit are incorrect or that the contents of para 26 of his affidavit are 
also incorrect. PW 7 specifically denied the assertion of Yasin Mailk that he had not received Rs. 15 lakhs from co- 
accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah Wadali on 07.04.2015 and volunteered to state that the contents of this paragraph were 
based on the documents recovered during the investigations. 


PW 8 


125. Sh. Munshi Ghulam Nabi (PW-8), currently posted as Dy.S.P., CIK, Kupwara tendered his affidavit as Ex. 
PW8/A and deposed that he was the investigating officer of case bearing FIR no. 3 of 1990 and having gone through 
the case records, was well conversant with the facts and circumstances of the case. Witness further stated that he had 
been duly authorized by the competent authority to depose before this Tribunal and relied upon such authorization dt. 
10.07.24 as Ex. PW 8/A - 1. 


126. PW 8 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
UA(@) Act, 1967 vide Notification no. 5.0. 1416(E) published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, on 15" March 
2024, has declared Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Mohd. Yasin Malik Faction to be an ‘unlawful association’. 
Witness affirmed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKLF-Y prepared by the Central Government and on 
the basis of the facts of various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, he could testify that 
JKLF-Y and its leaders were involved in carrying out secessionist activities. 


127. Witness further deposed that it was borne out from the records that Jammu and Kashmir National Liberation 
Front was formed in the year 1964, which was later on renamed as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front. PW 8 
stated that subsequently, a new faction of the said organization was established in the year 1988 by the prominent 
separatist leader Mohd. Yasin and was named as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Yasin Malik Faction. 


128. PW 8, on the basis of the Background Note prepared by the Central Govt. and the govt. records, testified that 
JKLF-Y was formed with the objective of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India and for re- 
unification of Jammu & Kashmir, Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, Gilgit, Baltistan, Hunza and Aksai Chin through an 
armed struggle. Witness further testified that between 1988 to 1990, JKLF-Y became one of the largest terrorist 
organizations in Jammu & Kashmir, whose members/activists were involved not only in the infamous exodus of 
Kashmiri Hindus from Kashmir Valley but also in some prominent crimes of that period including the kidnapping of 
Rubaiya Syed, daughter of the then Home Minster of India. 


129. PW 8 further testified that it was also borne out from the records that Mohd. Yasin Malik, who was the chief 
commander of JKLF-Y, was arrested in the year 1992 but subsequently released in the year 1994 after which though 
he distanced himself from armed resistance but he continued supporting terror organizations covertly and financially. 
Witness deposed that JKLF-Y has been spearheading anti-India secessionist agenda at the instance of ISI, Pakistan and 
prominent terrorist organization by following pro-Pakistan propaganda for secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the 
Indian Union. PW 8 further deposed that because of these unlawful activities, JKLF-Y was proscribed by the Central 
Government in the 2019 which ban was confirmed by the Tribunal constituted to adjudicate the validity of the ban 
imposed. However, as is borne out from the records and the FIR’s registered, despite banning of JKLF-Y, the 
organization and its members have not stopped their secessionist activities and are continuing to raise funds for 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


furtherance of the organizational activities and objectives i.e. secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India 
and cession of constitutional authority of the GOI in J&K. 


130. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, its leaders and members have consistently been challenging 
the accession of erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir with the Union of India and have been issuing press reports, 
addressing public gatherings and are working towards secession of Jammu & Kashmir by continuously encouraging 
the armed insurgency which acts are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty, dis-harmony by promoting feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government of India, in a manner which is gravely prejudicial to the territorial 
integrity and sovereignty of the Indian Union. 


FIR No. 03/1990: 


131. Regarding the secessionist activities of JKLF-Y, PW 8 deposed that on 04.04.1990, a letter was received 
from SSP, CID, Srinagar disclosing that terrorist organizations such as HM, JKLF, Hizballah, Ala Tigers, Peoples 
League and few others have conspired to create public disorder with the specific purpose of disrupting the 
constitutionally established Govt. in J&K by resorting to violence and making efforts to secede the state of J&K from 
Union of India. It was further disclosed in the letter that in view to achieve their objective, these organizations have 
been recruiting large number of youths and are sending them to POK for arms training. It was also disclosed that the 
said organizations, in collaboration and as well as with the help of Pakistan Government, have been obtaining 
firearms, explosives etc. for killing innocent people including Govt. Officials and security forces to achieve their 
abovementioned objective. Based on the said information, FIR no. 03/1990 was registered at P.S. CI, Kupwara on 
04.04.1990 u/s 3 & 4 of TADA, u/s 25 of Arms Act, u/s 3 of the Official Secrets Act, u/s 3 of EOA, u/s 2 & 3 of 
E&IMCO and u/s 120B of RPC. A true copy of the FIR no. 03/1990 in vernacular, along with true English 
translation of its relevant portion was relied upon by PW 8 as Ex. PW 8/1. 


132. Witness further deposed that during investigation, various arms, ammunitions and other incriminating 
materials were seized vide seizure memos. True copies of the seizure memos prepared during investigation, in 
vernacular, along with their true English translations were relied upon by PW 8 as Ex. PW 8/2 to PW 8/22. 


133. PW 8 testified that though the material collected till date during investigation prima facie proves the 
commission of the alleged offences but since in the FIR there have been more than 58 accused till date, most of whom 
are terrorists and many of them have exfiltrated to POK and other places, as a result of which the investigation could 
not be completed. However, the same is now at its fag end. PW 8 further testified that the investigations faced 
significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the valley orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated 
groups, who received unwavering support from across the border and terrorist organizations. This climate of fear 
deterred individuals from coming forward to provide statements, hindering the progress of the investigations. 


134. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, since its inception, has been propagating anti-national 
narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its agencies inimical to India 
which openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within Jammu and Kashmir. PW 8 further affirmed 
that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of service and the records of the criminal cases, it is 
manifest that JKLF-Y and its leaders and members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and continuously advocating secession of territory of Jammu and Kashmir from 
the Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of 
India; 
c) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring about cession 


of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J & K; 


d) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and inciting violence in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir on 
religious lines; 


e) inciting and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in 
order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars, leading to 
riots which resulted in the injuries to and death of several civilians, police officials and Security Forces 
personnel. 


135. PW 8 concluded his testimony by further affirming that it stood established that the activities of JKLF-Y 
were aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the 
lawful government and that the members of JKLF-Y are indulging and acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the 
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Cross-examination by Mohd. Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF-Y. 


136. In cross-examination, PW 8 stated that he could not admit or deny whether Yasin Malik was first arrested on 
06.08.1990. He vol. to state that as per record, the date of arrest as mentioned in his affidavit was correct. Witness 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 33 


further deposed that that the FIR no. 03/1990 had been registered against the organizations named therein, which 
includes JKLF and admitted it to be correct that there were no specific named accused in the FIR. Witness denied the 
suggestion that no accused have been arrested under this FIR since the date of its registration. He vol. to state that 
during the investigations, many persons including those who were part of JKLF, had been arrested. However, PW 8 
could not give names of such arrested persons though he also stated that their names have been mentioned in the 
records prepared during the investigations and are a part of the Case Diary. Witness denied the suggestion that the 
above FIR and the investigations being carried out have no relevance today, in regard to the present proceedings. PW 
8 further deposed that he was not aware of any Cease Fire agreement between Yasin Malik and Government of India 
as no such document is part of the investigation. PW 8 also denied the suggestion that no FIR has been registered 
against any member of JKLF(Y) after 1994 with regard to militancy cases and highlighted in this regard, FIR bearing 
no. 42/2019 registered at P.S. Handwara against Rafiq Ahmed War who is the District Commander of JKLF(Y). PW 8 
denied the suggestion that Rafiq Ahmed War is the District President and not a District Commander. 


PW 9 


137. Mr. Tariq Ahmed Sofi, currently posted as Deputy Superintendent of Police, Counter-Intelligence, 
Bandipora, Kashmir appeared as PW 9 and tendered his affidavit in evidence as Ex. PW 9/A. Witness deposed that 
he is the Investigating Officer of FIR no. 01/1991 and in that capacity, was well conversant with the facts and 
circumstances of the case. PW 9 stated that he had been duly authorized by the competent authority to depose before 
this Tribunal and relied upon such authorization dt. 10.07.24 as Ex. PW 9/A - 1. 


138. PW 9 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
UA(P) Act, 1967 vide Notification no. 5.0. 1416(E) published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary on 157 March 
2024, has declared Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Mohd. Yasin Malik Faction as an ‘unlawful association’. 
Witness affirmed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKLF-Y prepared by the Central Government and on 
the basis of the facts of various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, he could testify that 
JKLF-Y and its leaders were involved in carrying out secessionist activities. 


139. Witness further deposed that it was borne out from the records that Jammu and Kashmir National Liberation 
Front was formed in the year 1964, which was later on renamed as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front. PW 9 
stated that subsequently, a new faction of the said organization was established in the year 1988 by the prominent 
separatist leader Mohd. Yasin and was named as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Yasin Malik Faction. 


140. PW 9, on the basis of the Background Note prepared by the Central Govt. and the govt. records, testified that 
JKLF-Y was formed with the objective of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India and for re- 
unification of Jammu & Kashmir, Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, Gilgit, Baltistan, Hunza and Aksai Chin through an 
armed struggle. Witness further testified that between 1988 to 1990, JKLF-Y became one of the largest terrorist 
organizations in Jammu & Kashmir, whose members/activists were involved not only in the infamous exodus of 
Kashmiri Hindus from Kashmir Valley but also in some prominent crimes of that period including the kidnapping of 
Rubaiya Syed, daughter of the then Home Minster of India. 


141. PW 9 further testified that it was also borne out from the records that Mohd. Yasin Malik, who was the chief 
commander of JKLF-Y, was arrested in the year 1992 but subsequently released in the year 1994 after which though 
he distanced himself from armed resistance but he continued supporting terror organizations covertly and financially. 
Witness deposed that JKLF-Y has been spearheading anti-India secessionist agenda at the instance of ISI, Pakistan and 
prominent terrorist organization by following pro-Pakistan propaganda for secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the 
Indian Union. PW 9 further deposed that because of these unlawful activities, JKLF-Y was proscribed by the Central 
Government in the 2019 which ban was confirmed by the Tribunal constituted to adjudicate the validity of the ban 
imposed. However, as is borne out from the records and the FIR’s registered, despite banning of JKLF-Y, the 
organization and its members have not stopped their secessionist activities and are continuing to raise funds for 
furtherance of the organizational activities and objectives i.e. secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India 
and cession of constitutional authority of the GOI in J&K. 


142. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, its leaders and members have consistently been challenging 
the accession of erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir with the Union of India and have been issuing press reports, 
addressing public gatherings and are working towards secession of Jammu & Kashmir by continuously encouraging 
the armed insurgency which acts are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty, dis-harmony by promoting feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government of India, in a manner which is gravely prejudicial to the territorial 
integrity and sovereignty of the Indian Union. 


FIR No. 01/1991 


143. As regards the secessionist activities of JKLF—Y, Witness deposed that it came to light that Pakistan’s 
intelligence agency ISI, in connivance with other organizations like JKLF, JEI etc. have planned to separate J&K from 
the Indian Union at the behest of Pakistan Government by threatening the minorities, radicalizing the Kashmiri youth 
against the Govt. of India, and creating communal strife in the valley to achieve the said objective. It also came to 
light that these organizations have been working to send Kashmiri youth to POK for arms training by orchestrating 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


infiltration with the assistance of Pakistani Military and intelligence agencies. Based on the said information, FIR no. 
01/1991 was registered at P.S. CI, Kashmir on 10.01.1991 u/s 3 & 4 of TADA, u/s 25 of Arms Act, u/s 3 of EOA, u/s 
2 & 3 of EXIMCO and u/s 302, 365, 307 and 1208 of RPC. A true copy of FIR no. 01/1991, in vernacular, along 
with true English translation of its relevant portion was relied upon as Ex. PW 9/1. 


144. Witness further deposed that during investigation, various arms, ammunitions and other incriminating 
material was seized vide separate seizure memos and statements of material witnesses were recorded. True copies of 
the statements of witnesses recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C. in vernacular, along with their true English translations were 
relied upon by PW 9 as Ex. PW 9/2 to PW 9/4. Further, true copies of the seizure memos prepared during 
investigation of aforesaid FIR, in vernacular, along with their true English translations were relied upon by PW 9 as 
Ex. PW 9/5 to PW 9/13. PW 9 stated that though the material collected till date during investigation prima facie 
proves the commission of the alleged offences, however, the investigation is still in progress though at its fag end. 


145. PW 9 elaborated on the aspect of delay in concluding the investigation and submitted that the investigation 
faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the valley orchestrated by separatist leaders and their 
affiliated groups, who received steady support from across the border and terrorist organizations. This climate of fear 
deterred individuals from coming forward to provide statements, hindering the progress of the investigations. 


146. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, since its inception, has been propagating anti-national 
narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its agencies inimical to India 
which openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within Jammu and Kashmir. PW 9 further affirmed 
that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of service and the records of the criminal cases, it is 
manifest that JKLF-Y and its leaders and members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and continuously advocating secession of territory of Jammu and Kashmir from 
the Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of 
India; 
०) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring about cession 


of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J & K; 


d) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and inciting violence in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir on 
religious lines; 


e) inciting and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in 
order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars, leading to 
riots which resulted in the injuries and death of several civilians, police officials and Security Forces 
personnel. 


147. PW 9 concluded his testimony by further affirming that it stood established that the activities of JKLF-Y 
were aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the 
lawful government and that the members of JKLF-Y are indulging and acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the 
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Cross-examination by Mohd. Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF-Y. 


148. In cross-examination, PW 9 stated that Yasin Malik might have been arrested on 06.08.1990 as he used to 
keep getting arrested and released. However, witness stated that as per record, the date of arrest as mentioned in his 
affidavit was correct. Witness further deposed that the FIR no. 01/1991 had been registered against the organizations 
named therein, which includes JKLF and admitted it to be correct that there were no specific named accused in the 
FIR. Witness denied the suggestion that no accused have been arrested under this FIR since the date of its registration. 
He vol. to state that during the investigations, many persons including those who were part of JKLF, had been 
arrested. However, PW 9 could not give names of such arrested persons though he also stated that their names have 
been mentioned in the records prepared during the investigations and are a part of the Case Diary. Witness denied the 
suggestion that the above FIR and the investigations being carried out have no relevance today, in regard to the 
present proceedings. PW 9 further deposed that he was not aware of any Cease Fire agreement between Yasin Malik 
and Government of India. PW 9 also denied the suggestion that no FIR has been registered against any member of 
JKLF(Y) after 1994 with regard to militancy cases 


PW 10 


149. Mr. Ghulam Hassan, currently posted as Deputy Superintendent of Police, Head Quarters, Ganderbal, 
Kashmir appeared as PW 10 and tendered his affidavit in evidence as Ex. PW 10/A. Witness deposed that he is the 
Supervising Officer of FIR no. 51/2019 and in that capacity, was well conversant with the facts and circumstances of 
the case. PW 10 stated that he had been duly authorized by the competent authority to depose before this Tribunal 
and relied upon such authorization dt. 11.07.24 as Ex. PW 10/A - 1. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 35 


150. PW 10 deposed that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1) of section 3 of 
the UA(P) Act, 1967 vide Notification no. 5.0. 1416(E) published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, on 15% 
March 2024, has declared Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Mohd. Yasin Malik Faction as an ‘unlawful 
association’. Witness affirmed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKLF-Y prepared by the Central 
Government and on the basis of the facts of various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, he 
could testify that JKLF-Y and its leaders were involved in carrying out secessionist activities. 


151. Witness further deposed that it was borne out from the records that Jammu and Kashmir National Liberation 
Front was formed in the year 1964, which was later on renamed as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front. PW 10 
stated that subsequently, a new faction of the said organization was established in the year 1988 by the prominent 
separatist leader Mohd. Yasin and was named as Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front - Yasin Malik Faction. 


152. PW 10, on the basis of the Background Note prepared by the Central Govt. and the govt. records, testified 
that JKLF-Y was formed with the objective of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India and for re- 
unification of Jammu & Kashmir, Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, Gilgit, Baltistan, Hunza and Aksai Chin through an 
armed struggle. Witness further testified that between 1988 to 1990, JKLF-Y became one of the largest terrorist 
organizations in Jammu & Kashmir, whose members/activists were involved not only in the infamous exodus of 
Kashmiri Hindus from Kashmir Valley but also in some prominent crimes of that period including the kidnapping of 
Rubaiya Syed, daughter of the then Home Minster of India. 


153. PW 10 further testified that it was also borne out from the records that Mohd. Yasin Malik, who was the chief 
commander of JKLF-Y, was arrested in the year 1992 but subsequently released in the year 1994 after which though 
he distanced himself from armed resistance but he continued supporting terror organizations covertly and financially. 
Witness deposed that JKLF-Y has been spearheading anti-India secessionist agenda at the instance of ISI, Pakistan and 
prominent terrorist organization by following pro-Pakistan propaganda for secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the 
Indian Union. PW 10 further deposed that because of these unlawful activities, JKLF-Y was proscribed by the Central 
Government in the 2019 which ban was confirmed by the Tribunal constituted to adjudicate the validity of the ban 
imposed. However, as is borne out from the records and the FIR’s registered, despite banning of JKLF-Y, the 
organization and its members have not stopped their secessionist activities and are continuing to raise funds for 
furtherance of the organizational activities and objectives i.e. secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India 
and cession of constitutional authority of the GOI in J&K. 


154. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, its leaders and members have consistently been challenging 
the accession of erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir with the Union of India and have been issuing press reports, 
addressing public gatherings and are working towards secession of Jammu & Kashmir by continuously encouraging 
the armed insurgency which acts are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty, dis-harmony by promoting feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government of India, in a manner which is gravely prejudicial to the territorial 
integrity and sovereignty of the Indian Union. 


FIR No. 51/2019: 


155. PW 10 deposed further about the specific secessionist activities of JKLF—-Y. Witness stated that on 
23.03.2019, information was received from reliable sources that JKLF is still active in Jammu & Kashmir with the 
object of separating J&K from the Union of India despite being banned by the Central Government on 22.03.2019. 
Two persons namely Bashir Ahmad Rather and Mushtaq Ahmad Wani both of whom are closely associated with 
JKLF, were planning to make a call of hartal successful which had been called by the separatist organizations on 
24.03.2019. Based on the said information, FIR no. 51/2019 was registered at P.S. Beehama, Ganderbal on 
23.03.2019 u/s 10 & 13 of UA(P) Act. A true copy of the FIR no. 51/2019, in vernacular, along with true English 
translation of its relevant portion was relied upon as Ex. PW 10/1. 


156. PW 10 further stated that during investigation of the FIR, statements of material witnesses were recorded 
under section 161 Cr.P.C. who corroborated the information regarding activities of the proscribed organization and 
continued membership of the unlawful organization. Leading to the statements and information, raids were conducted, 
and incriminating material was seized vide seizure memos. Accused Mushtaq Ahmad Wani was arrested and his 
confessional statement was recorded. True copies of the statements of some of the witnesses recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C. 
and u/s 164. Cr.P.C., in vernacular, along with their true English translations were relied upon by PW 10 as Ex. PW 
10/2 to PW 10/4. Further, true copies of seizure memos prepared during investigation of the aforesaid FIR, in 
vernacular, along with their true English translations were relied upon as Ex. PW 10/5 to PW 10/10. Witness further 
deposed that after collecting sufficient material prima facie establishing the allegations of the FIR, a chargesheet 
bearing Challan no. 1 of 2023 was filed before the concerned jurisdictional Court. A true copy of chargesheet bearing 
Challan no. 1 of 2023 filed in FIR no. 51/2019, in vernacular, along with its true English translation was relied upon 
as Ex. PW 10/11. Witness stated that the case is now at the stage of trial. 


157. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKLF-Y, since its inception, has been propagating anti-national 
narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its agencies inimical to India 
which openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within Jammu and Kashmir. PW 10 further affirmed 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of service and the records of the criminal cases, it is 
manifest that JKLF-Y and its leaders and members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and continuously advocating secession of territory of Jammu and Kashmir from 
the Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the Government of 
India; 
c) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring about cession 


of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J & K; 


d) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and inciting violence in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir on 
religious lines; 


e) inciting and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in 
order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars, leading to 
riots which resulted in the injuries to and death of several civilians, police officials and Security Forces 
personnel. 


158. PW 10 concluded his testimony by further affirming that it stood established that the activities of JKLF-Y 
were aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the 
lawful government and that the members of JKLF-Y are indulging and acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the 
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Cross-examination by Mohd. Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF-Y. 


159. In cross-examination, PW 10 deposed that he could not admit or deny that Yasin Malik was first arrested on 
06.08.1990. Witness volunteered to state that as per record, the date of arrest as mentioned in his affidavit is correct. 
PW 10 further deposed that he could not state that no FIR has been registered against JKLF(Y) or any of its member 
after the FIR no. 51/2019. Witness volunteered that he could only depose about his district where he had_ been posted 
and was not aware about the FIRs that may have been registered in the other districts. PW 10 admitted it to be correct 
that the abovementioned FIR had been registered against the organizations named therein, which includes JKLF and 
also that the names of the accused are specified in the FIR. Witness however denied the suggestion that no member of 
JKLF (Y) has been arrested since 1994 with regard to any militancy activity or for providing logistical support to the 
terrorists. He further vol. to state that many members of JKLF(Y) have been arrested after 1994 for the offences of 
unlawful and terrorist activities. PW 10 admitted it to be correct that Bashir Ahmed Rather was District President of 
JKLF (Y), District Ganderbal. However, he further stated that he could not admit or deny that JKLF(Y) had its office 
in Ganderbal in the year 2019. 


PW 11 


160. Mr. Arun Kumar, currently serving as Assistant Director in Enforcement Directorate, Delhi Zonal Office — II, 
New Delhi appeared as PW 11 and tendered his affidavit in evidence as Ex. PW 11/A. Witness deposed that he is 
fully conversant with the facts of the present Reference concerning JKLF—Y, based upon his knowledge derived from 
the relevant records of the case, being the Investigating Officer of ECIR no. 03/DLZ0-II/2017 emanating from FIR no. 
RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI. 


161. PW 11 stated that the Central Government in exercise of its powers under section 3(1) of the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, vide notification number S.O. 1416 [E] dated 15% March 2024 has declared Jammu 
and Kashmir Liberation Front - Mohd. Yasin Malik Faction to be an ‘unlawful association’. Witness further stated that 
he had read the brief Background Note on JKLF-Y prepared by the Central Government and on the basis of facts of 
various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, he could testify that JKLF-Y and its leaders were 
involved in secessionist activities. 


162. PW 11 further testified that the National Investigation Agency registered a case bearing no. RC- 
10/2017/NIA/DLI dated 30.05.2017 u/ss 1203, 121 and 121A of IPC, 1860 read with ss. 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 and 
40 of UA(P) Act, 1967 against Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, members/cadres of Hurriyat Conference, Hizb-ul- 
Mujahideen (HM), Dukhtaran-e-Milat, Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT), other proscribed terrorist organizations, various 
secessionist & separatist leaders, hawala operators and LoC traders for acting in connivance with active militants for 
raising, receiving and collecting funds domestically and abroad through various illegal channels for funding separatist 
and terrorist activities in Jammu and Kashmir through the funds so collected and entering into a larger criminal 
conspiracy for causing disruption in the Kashmir valley by way of pelting stones on the security forces, causing 
damage to public property and waging war against India. A true copy of FIR no. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI dt. 
30.05.2017 was relied upon by PW 11 as Ex. PW 11/1. 


163. PW 11 further deposed that pursuant to investigation conducted, NIA filed charge-sheet no. | of 2018 dated 
18.01.2018 before the Special Judge, NIA, New Delhi. Subsequently, NIA filed first supplementary charge-sheet no. | 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 37 


A of 2018 dated 22.01.2019 under sections 1203, 121 & 121 A of IPC read with sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 
and 40 of UA(P)A, 1967. Thereafter, NIA filed a 2™ supp. charge-sheet no. 1 B of 2019 dated 04.10.2019 under 
Section 173 (8) Cr. PC. 


164. Witness further testified that investigation by the NIA revealed that various terrorist organisations viz. JKLF- 
Y, Hizb-ul-Mujahideen, Dukhtaran-e-Milat, Lashkar-e-Taiba, in connivance with various secessionist groups 
particularly the All Party Hurriyat Conference and its constituents funded by Pakistan and its agencies have entered 
into a criminal conspiracy to wage a war against the Government of India. APHC which was formed as a 
conglomerate of 26 political/social/religious organisations in 1993 to give a political mask to the secessionist 
activities, has been consistently promoted and supported by Pakistan to fulfil its evil motive and establish its claim 
over Jammu & Kashmir. The investigation has revealed that APHC had entered into a criminal conspiracy and 
engaged in instigating the general public of Kashmir for taking part in violent activities in furtherance of propagating 
the secessionist agenda. APHC has repeatedly asked the people to observe strikes and instigated them to indulge in 
unlawful activities such as stone-pelting, burning of public properties etc. 


165. PW 11 further stated that the investigation by NIA revealed that JKLF-Y which was an active constituent of 
APHC was involved in receiving overseas funds through conduits such as Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, terrorist 
organisations based in Pakistan, Pakistani establishment and other overseas persons through hawala and other means. 
In pursuit of the secessionist agenda, in 2016, Yasin Malik along with SAS Geelani and Mirwaiz Umar Farooq formed 
a self-styled group called “Joint Resistance Leadership" whereby they started issuing directions to the masses to hold 
protests, demonstrations, hartals, shutdowns, road-blocks and such other disruptive activities which would push the 
entire society into chaos and lawlessness. During the period from 06.08.2016 to 16.08.2016, these protests were very 
violent and as per the record available 366 persons were arrested, 175 persons got injured and 7 persons were killed 
during these incidents. 


166. PW 11 further deposed that Yasin Malik had set up an elaborate structure and mechanism across the world to 
raise funds for carrying out terrorist, secessionist, and other unlawful activities in Jammu and Kashmir in the name of 
"freedom struggle". These funds were then used not only to sustain JKLF-Y but also to fuel secessionist activities and 
unleash violence in Jammu and Kashmir in the form of terrorist attacks, stone-pelting, protests, demonstrations, forced 
shut-downs. All this was done to build up and feed an anti-India and pro-secession narrative, glorifying the 
secessionists as 'freedom-fighters' and denigrating the security forces. The investigation further revealed that valley 
wide intense protests after the killing of militant Burhan Wani were funded by the Hurriyat, of which JKLF-Y is a 
part. 


167. Witness further stated that the NIA had initially filed charge-sheet against 12 accused persons, including two 
accused persons who are designated global terrorists based in Pakistan, namely Hafiz Muhammad Saeed and Mohd. 
Yusuf Shah @ Salahuddin. Other accused persons who were arrested and have been charge-sheeted are the leaders of 
APHC viz. Aftab Ahmad Shah @ Shahid-ul-Islam, Altaf Ahmad Shah @ Fantoosh, Nayeem Ahmad Khan, Farooq 
Ahmad Dar @ Bitta Karate, Mohammad Akbar Khanday, Raja Mehrajuddin Kalwal, Bashir Ahmad Bhat @ Peer 
Saifullah, and Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali. On 04.10.2019, NIA filed a second supplementary charge-sheet arraigning 
Mohd. Yasin Malik @ Aslam, Shabir Ahmad Shah @ Shabir Shah, Masarat Alam @ Masrat Alam Bhat, Syeda 
Aasiya Andrabi @ Asiya Andrabi and Abdul Rashid Sheikh @ Er. Rashid @ Sheikh Rashid as accused. 


168. PW 11 further testified that pursuant to the investigation by the NIA which revealed large scale laundering of 
funds through illegal channels which funds were prima facie being used for illegal and unlawful activities in Jammu & 
Kashmir, investigation was conducted by Enforcement Directorate under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 
2002 after registering an ECIR which revealed that Yasin Malik was a part of the terror design to raise funds, to 
propagate the ideology of terrorists, agenda of secessionism and subversive activities. JKLF—Y had formed a well- 
developed network of cadres with district presidents, block level leaders and workers who collected donations from 
public, businessmen and others. The collected money was routed through a complex system including cash couriers 
and conduits who gathered money from Pakistan High Commission in New Delhi and delivered the funds to the 
Hurriyat leadership including Yasin Malik for subversive and secessionist activities in J & K. Yasin Malik was duly 
supported in this cause by Pakistani agencies through the Hurriyat activists such as Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali. He 
was continuously in touch with these Pakistan-based entities and had received money through hawala to act as the 
financial conduit in the larger conspiracy network. A true copy of ECIR no. 03/DLZO-II/2017 dated 14.06.2017 
registered by the Enforcement Directorate was relied upon by the witness as Ex. PW 11/2. 


169. PW 11 further affirmed that investigation conducted into the use of funds generated through suspect money 
laundering by Hurriyat activists for secessionist activities shows that Zahoor Watali was receiving money from 
various sources i.e. Hafiz Saeed, ISI, Pakistan High Commission at New Delhi and also from a source based in Dubai. 
In turn Zahoor Watali used to remit the same to the separatist Hurriyat leaders including Yasin Malik who had 
received foreign contributions of an amount of Rs 15,75,595 from a source in Saudi Arabia in 2013 and Rs. 15,00,000 
in 2015-16 through Zahoor Watali. Investigation has further revealed that these funds were used to organize stone 
pelting, to damage property, to organize assaults on security forces and for funding families of slain terrorists. Witness 
highlighted that NIA has filed along with its charge-sheet, the incriminating documents recovered during the course of 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


investigation which provide proof of funds having received by Yasin Malik from Zahoor Watali i.e. a document 
recovered from the house of accountant of Zahoor Watali showing that Yasin Malik has been given Rs. 15 lacs. A true 
copy of the complaint dt. 22.01.2019 filed by the Enforcement Directorate u/s 44 & 45 of the PML Act was relied 
upon by PW 11 as Ex. PW 11/3. 


170. Witness further highlighted in his deposition that in the statement of Yasin Malik which was recorded on 
25.08.2022 u/s 50 of the PML Act, he refused to comment on the document seized by NIA reflecting that he has 
received 15,00,000/- from Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali. Thus, he could not discharge the burden of proof under 
section 24 of the PML Act with respect to the incriminating documents which showed foreign contributions received 
from Hafiz Saeed, the Pakistan High Commission and another source from Dubai. A true copy of statement dated 
25.08.2022 of Yasin Malik recorded under section 50 of PML Act has been relied upon by PW 11 as Ex. PW 11/4. 


171. PW 11 stated that investigation has revealed that funds equivalent to Rs. 30,75,595/- were received by Yasin 
Malik which funds are proceeds of crime as defined under section 2(1)(u) of the PML Act, same having been derived 
from criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence and in terms of section 3 of the PML Act, it amounts to the 
offence of money laundering which is punishable u/s 4 of the PML Act, 2002. Further, Yasin Malik has been 
arraigned as an accused in the complaint dt. 09.01.2023 filed by the Enforcement Directorate u/s 44 & 45 of the PML 
Act. A true copy of complaint dt. 09.01.23 filed by the ED u/s. 44 & 45 of the PML Act has been relied upon as Ex. 
PW 11/5. 


172. Witness concluded his testimony by stating that investigated facts show that JKLF-Y and its head Yasin 
Malik, have indulged in anti-national subversive activities for secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 
India and cession of the Constitution of India in the said territory. PW 11 further stated that the ban imposed upon on 
JKLF-Y by the Central Government is appropriate and needs to be upheld in national interest since the activities of 
JKLF-Y are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred 
against the lawful government in a manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity of the Union of India. 


Cross-examination by Mohd. Yasin Malik on behalf of JKLF-Y. 


173. In cross-examination, PW 11 was asked about the document on the basis of which he has deposed that Yasin 
Malik has been receiving illegal foreign funds for secessionist activities. In response, Witness answered that the 
document was recovered from the house of Mohd. Ghulam Bhat, accountant-cum-cashier of Zahoor Ahmed Shah 
Watali and was titled as “Foreign Contributions and Expenditures 2015-2016” having four columns, wherein the first 
column is of the date, the second column is of the amount, the third column is of the source of receiving the fund and 
the fourth column mentions the name of the persons who have been given the money. Witness admitted it to be 
correct that in this document, Rs. 15 lacs have been shown to have been received from Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali 
but denied the suggestion that in this document, there is no amount which is shown to have been received from Hafiz 
Syed, and Mr. Iqbal Cheema, High Commissioner, Pakistan by Yasin Malik. PW 11 vol. to state that this document is 
only a document showing the money being received in a year by Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali and money being 
distributed to various persons but is not a statement of account. In response to a further question, PW 11 deposed that 
he could not state whether Yasin Malik was confronted with Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali while taking Yasin Malik on 
remand since he was not a part of the investigations at that time. Witness further denied the suggestions that the money 
sent by Umar Bashir, as has been reflected at page no. 143 of annexure A-4 i.e. document recovered from Ghuam 
Bhat, is apparently the money forwarded by him over a period of three years to his family members for their day to 
day expenditure or that this money was not received by Yasin Malik. 


RW 


174. Mohd. Yasin Malik entered in the witness box as the sole witness on behalf of JKLF—Y. He tendered his 
reply cum affidavit as Ex. RW 1/A. The reply cum affidavit tendered by Yasin Malik contains the history of how 
Yasin Malik was drawn into believing that an armed struggle was the only way to fulfil and realise the aspirations of 
the Kashmiri youth in particular and Kashmiri population in general. The reply delves into how after a while Yasin 
Malik purportedly gave up armed struggle in favour of a ‘Gandhian’ way of resistance to the perceived Indian 
occupation/domination of Jammu & Kashmir. He has also tried to highlight, through questionable factual assertions, 
as to how the top political and govt. functionaries of Central Govt. had engaged with him so as to bring out a peaceful 
settlement to the Kashmir issue raised by the separatists, through a dialogue and that infact, Central Govt., over the 
years since him having adopted ‘Gandhian’ mode of peaceful resistance, has been soliciting his efforts in resolving the 
Kashmir issue. The reply is full of references to urdu poetry by the use of which Yasin Malik has tried to justify his 
struggle for secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Indian Union. He has also levelled certain allegations against 
some senior police and intelligence functionaries and Central govt. functionaries also but those allegations hold little 
relevance in so far as the present Reference proceedings are concerned. He has also tried to make out a case that post 
the ban imposed by the Central Govt. on JKLF—Y in 2019, there has been no instance of any unlawful activity by the 
JKLF-Y and its cadres warranting reimposition of the ban. The reply also contains point wise explanation of the 
allegations levelled against JKLF—Y i.e. visiting terrorists camps and being facilitated therein, working with Pakistani 
military establishment, receiving illegal funds from hawala operator Zahoor Watali. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 39 


175. Mr. Yasin Malik has further sought to explain that the allegation leveled by National Investigation Agency 
(NIA) to the effect that he received money from Mr. Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, is completely fabricated and 
concocted. He has counter alleged that in the ‘N/A case’, he was arrested without a counsel being present and was 
transferred to New Delhi without a counsel in violation of law and procedure. Further, it has been claimed by Mr. 
Yasin Malik that in 1994, various state officials assured him that they shall resolve the Kashmir dispute through a 
meaningful dialogue process and once he will initiate a unilateral ceasefire, then all cases against him and his 
members shall be taken back. Subsequently, a unilateral ceasefire was declared in 1994 by him and his organization 
and consequently, he was provided bail in all the 32 pending militancy related cases under Terrorist and Disruptive 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1982 (“TADA’) and thereafter, none of the cases were pursued against him in terms of the 
cease-fire agreement from 1994 till 2018. It has been further stated in the reply cum affidavit that after the ceasefire in 
1994, there has not been a single incident or accusation against him or his colleagues at JKLF that they have supported 
militancy openly or clandestinely or provided any logistical help to any militant organization. Regarding the 
formation of All Parties Huriyat Conference (APHC), it has been stated in the reply that in the early 1990s, there 
was a political vacuum in the state of J&K where the militancy was on absolute peak and ‘pro-Indian’ political section 
in J&K had either left the Indian shore or were residing in Jammu as migrants under security. It was in this context, to 
address the political vacuum in J&K, that GOI unanimously decided to release certain Kashmiri political leaders in 
1992 namely Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Abdul Ghani Lone, Molana Abbas Ansari, Prof. Abdul Ghani Bhatt and Qazi 
Nisar who were till then holed up in Indian prisons but which did not include Mr. Malik. It has further been stated that 
Yasin Malik did not have any role in the formation of APHC in 1993. 


176. Concerning the accusation against him regarding his active role in fueling the unrest in Kashmir after the 
death of Burhan Wani, Mr. Yasin Malik has submitted in his reply that the NIA in its charge-sheet alleges that he has 
been implicated in over 89 cases of stone pelting and other unlawful activities such as arson, school burning and 
damage to public property etc. between 06.08.2016 to 16.08.2016. However, he could not have been involved in any 
law & order situation or stone pelting between the first week of July to November 2016 as he was in Police Custody 
within 30 minutes of the announcement that Burhan Wani had been killed. Mr. Yasin Malik in his reply has also 
denied that he had close nexus with militant & terrorist organizations and they were working in collaboration to 
destroy the territorial integrity of India. It has been stated that in fact, militants and other terrorists were victimizing 
Mr. Malik by issuing death threats, an example of which is the speech issued by one Zakir Musa, a militant with ‘AI- 
Qaeda’, where-in Musa stated that he shall publicly execute and hang Yasin Malik on the tower at Lal Chowk, 
Srinagar, for keeping youth in Kashmir away from the Jihad (‘armed struggle’) and exposing them to Gandhian 
ideology of non-violent struggle. 


177. Mr. Yasin Malik has also denied accusations of colluding with Pakistan. In rebuttal, Mr. Yasin Malik states 
in his reply that in fact he was issued a passport in the year 2001 by the GOI and subsequently, in 2006, he along with 
other Kashmiri leaders were cleared to visit Pakistan from Srinagar to Muzzfarabad by bus. It was a highly publicized 
event and was reported by media as he was a guest of Pakistan state and thus, all the photographs with senators, local 
MLA’s and government officials of Pakistan were taken during the visit. In conclusion, it was submitted in the reply 
that after travelling on both paths i.e. of the armed struggle and non-violence, his advice to the youth of Kashmir is 
that their struggle should only be guided by the principles of non-violence and peace and on a path where no wife 
loses her soldier husband and no Kashmiri parent needs to lose their children, henceforth in Kashmir. 


Cross-examination of Mohd. Yasin Malik on behalf of UOI by Sh. Amit Prasad, ld. Advocate. 


178. In cross-examination, RW deposed that he was arrested in NIA RC No 10/2017 on 10.04.2019. RW vol. to 
state that he was detained in Srinagar on 22.02.2019 and thereafter was arrested under the Public Safety Act and 
subsequently, was brought to Delhi on 09.04.2019 and thereafter, formally arrested by the NIA on 10.04.2019. RW 
admitted it be correct that JKLF(Y) has its offices in every district of Kashmir but volunteered to add that since the 
organization has been banned on 22.03.2019, the offices remain closed. Witness gave details of the organisational 
structure including his position as the Chairman and Treasurer of JKLF(Y); Advocate Bashir Ahmed Bhatt, Shauquat 
Ahmed Bakshi, Mushtaq Ahmed Dar and Master Afzal being its 4 Vice-Chairmen; Er. Ghulam Rasul Dar being the 
General Secretary; and Mr. Altaf Hussain Khan was the Spokesperson. RW further stated that JKLF-Y had different 
zonal set-ups for PoK, Gilgit, Baltistan and Jammu & Kashmir, and that this Organization also had an international 
structure and there exist branches in more than 50 countries in the world. Witness further admitted that in London, 
they have a full Secretariat of JKLF-Y as it was formed in London in 1976. RW further deposed that the members of 
JKLF-Y which are about 1000 in Kashmir, are not working on his instructions and advice as their active working may 
result in their arrest and detention since the ban has been imposed by the Government of India in 2019. In response to 
a specific question, RW answered that he had not met any of the above-mentioned office bearers of his Organization 
since he is in Judicial Custody in Tihar from 10.04.2019. 


179. RW further stated that except the offices of JKLF(Y) in India, other offices across the world are functional 
and supporting the cause of JKLF(Y). Witness further deposed that since inception, the ideology of JKLF(Y) has been 
to establish United Independent Kashmir i.e. reintegration of PoK, Gilgit, Baltistan with existing J&K, India and from 
1988 to 1994, efforts were made to achieve the said object by way of armed militancy. However, after the year 1994 
the said efforts were continued through a non-violent struggle. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


VII. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE UOI 


180. On 27.07.2024 the matter was fixed for addressing final submissions. Ld. Additional Solicitor General 
addressed arguments for claiming privilege for the documents produced in a sealed cover and also submitted 
arguments on the existence of ‘sufficient grounds’ to hold JKLF-Y as an unlawful association. Addressing the 
Tribunal first on the claim for privilege, 10. Addl. SG referred to section 123 of the Evidence Act read with Rule 3(2) 
of the UA(P) Rules, 1968, which are reproduced as under: 


Indian Evidence Act, 1872 


“123. Evidence as to affairs of State — No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from 
unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer 
at the head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks 


fit. ” 
The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 
“3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence.- 


(1) In holding an inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 4 or disposing of any application under 
sub-section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section 8, the Tribunal or the District Judge, 
as the case may be, shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), follow, as far as 
practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), where any 
books of account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal or the Court of 
the District Judge by the Central Government and such books of account or other documents 
are claimed by that Government to be of a confidential nature then, the Tribunal or the Court 
of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall not,- 


(a) Make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the proceedings 
before it; or 


(b) Allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books of 
account or other documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings 
before it.” 


181. Learned Addl. Solicitor General submitted that the claim of privilege by the Union of India for the 
documents placed in a sealed cover has been made as the documents are of such a nature that the non-disclosure of 
which would be in the interest of the public. It was submitted that this concept of public interest is taken into account 
even in the criminal proceedings qua the accused, whereas in juxtaposition, the present matter stands at a much higher 
pedestal and involves the issue of sovereignty and integrity of the country. Learned Addl. SG submitted that in the 
cases concerning national security, sovereignty and integrity, the Tribunal has to interpret and analyze the material 
differently as the decisions taken by the Central Government in such manner are based on highly sensitive information 
and inputs; and the effects of such decisions are not confined to the boundaries of the nation. 


182. To support her arguments, Id. Addl. SG has relied upon the judgment delivered in a case of preventive 
detention i.e. Raj Kumar Singh vs. State of Bihar (1986) 4 SCC 407 wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court, inter alia, 
held as under: 


“The executive authority is not the sole judge of what is required for national security or public order. 
But the court cannot substitute its decision if the executive authority or the appropriate authority acts on 
proper materials and reasonably and rationally comes to that conclusion even though a conclusion with 
which the court might not be in agreement. It is not for the court to put itself in the position of the 
detaining authority and to satisfy itself that untested facts reveal a path of crime provided these facts are 
relevant. See in this connection the observations of O. Chinnappa Reddy, J. in Vijay Narain Singh case 
[(1984) 3 SCC 14: 1984 SCC (Cri) 361: AIR 1984 SC 1334: (1984) 3 SCR 435 ] at p. 440 and 441. 
(SCC p. 19, para 1) 346. Similarly, in the case of Union of India vs. Rajasthan High Court, (2017) 2 
SCC 599: 2016 SCC Online SC 1468. It was not for the court in the exercise of its power of judicial 
review to suggest a policy which it considered fit. The formulation of suggestions by the High Court for 
framing a National Security Policy travelled far beyond legitimate domain of judicial review. 
Formulation of such a policy is based on information and inputs which are not available to the court. 
The court is not an expert in such matters. Judicial review is concerned with the legality of executive 
action and the court can interfere only where there is a breach of law or a violation of the Constitution. ” 


Ld. Addl. SG has also placed reliance upon the judgment delivered in Ex-Armymen's Protection Services (P) Ltd. v. 
Union of India, (2014) 5 SCC 409, wherein it has been inter alia held as under: 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 41 


“15. It is difficult to define in exact terms as to what is “national security”. However, the same 
would generally include socio-political stability, territorial integrity, economic solidarity and 
strength, ecological balance, cultural cohesiveness, external peace, etc. 


16. What is in the interest of national security is not a question of law. It is a matter of policy. It is 
not for the court to decide whether something is in the interest of the State or not. It should be left to 
the executive.” 


183. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that the UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder provide for a mechanism to claim 
privilege and withhold certain facts/documents to seek non-disclosure of the same. Ld. Addl. SG then placed reliance 
on the judgment delivered in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held as under: 


"19. ...the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Act itself permits the Central Government to 
withhold the disclosure of acts which it considers to be against the public interest to disclose. 
Similarly, Rule 3(2) and the proviso to Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 
also permit non-disclosure of confidential documents and information which the Government 
considers against the public interest to disclose... 


20... 


24. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine in 
nature and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued 
confidentiality in public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such information, 
and, may be, also full particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. The scheme of 
the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder provide for 
maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in public interest. 


22....in such cases where the Tribunal is satisfied that non-disclosure of such information to the 
association or its office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non-disclosure to the 
association or its office-bearers, but in order to perform its task of adjudication as required by the 
Act, the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the 
information and satisfying itself that it can safely act on the same. In such a situation, the Tribunal 
can devise a suitable procedure whereby it can itself examine and test the credibility of such 
material before it decides to accept the same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for 
declaring the association to be unlawful. The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence 
in the strict sense. 


23:4 


24. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its source, in 
public interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the confidential 
information for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the conflicting evidence of 
the other side. This modified procedure satisfies the minimum requirements of natural justice and 
also retains the basic element of an adjudicatory process which involves objective determination of 
the factual basis of the action taken." 


184. Ld. Addl. SG also relied on the judgment delivered in People’s Union for Civil Liberties vs. Union of India, 
(2004) 2 SCC 476, where it was, inter alia, held as under: 


“69. The legislative policy behind the aforementioned provisions is no longer res integra. The State 
must have the prerogative of preventing evidence being given on matters that would be contrary to 
public interest. 


70. For determining a question when a claim of privilege is made, the Court is required to pose the 
following questions: 


(1) whether the document in respect of which privilege is claimed, is really a document 
(unpublished) relating to any affairs of State; and 


(2) whether disclosure of the contents of the document would be against public interest? 


71. When any claim of privilege is made by the State in respect of any document, the question 
whether the document belongs to the privileged class has first to be decided by the court. The court 
cannot hold an enquiry into the possible injury to public interest which may result from the 
disclosure of the document in question. The claim of immunity and privilege has to be based on 
public interest. 


72. The section does not say who is to decide the preliminary question viz. whether the document is 
one that relates to any affairs of State, or how it is to be decided, but the clue in respect thereof can 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


be found in Section 162. Under Section 162 a person summoned to produce a document is bound to 
bring it to the court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its production or to its 
admissibility. The validity of any such objection shall be decided on by the courtl. It further says 
that: The court, if it deems fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of State, or take 
other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility 


73. In order to claim immunity from disclosure of unpublished State documents, the documents must 
relate to affairs of the State and disclosure thereof must be against interest of the State or public 
interest.” 


185. Ld. Addl. SG, thus, submitted that from a bare reading of the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court, it is 
clear that an enquiry contemplated under the UA(P)A gives a right to the Government to claim privilege of sensitive 
documents in public interest/national interest, which right has been duly upheld by the Supreme Court; and that in the 
present case, the documents for which claim of privilege, by their very nature, are confidential and sensitive in nature 
and, therefore, cannot be supplied as a public document. 


186. Ld. Addl. SG further submitted that the confidential documents form a part of the evidence collected by the 
intelligence agencies which pertain to secessionist and unlawful activities of the JKLF-Y and those associated with it, 
and the said documents can be verified by the Tribunal only. Ld. Addl. SG also submitted that material placed in the 
sealed cover by the Central Government is in the form of secret information collected over a period by the 
investigating and intelligence agencies, communications between the intelligence agencies, information which may 
lead to further recoveries, discoveries of facts as also unearth conspiracies but the disclosure whereof would be clearly 
detrimental to the larger public interest and the security of the State. Ld. Addl. SG highlighted that the material filed 
by the Central Government contains the note then put up to the Cabinet Committee on Security along with documents 
supporting the note and the grounds on which the Notification dt. 15.03.2024 was issued besides intelligence inputs 
and correspondence in relation thereto. 


187. Ld. Addl. SG further submitted that the sealed cover material is inherently and dehors being a part of the 
evidence of the present proceedings, of confidential nature, disclosure of which would be contrary to the public as also 
national interest. 


188. Ld. Addl. SG has also placed further reliance in this regard on the following judgments of the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court: 


(a) S.P. Gupta Vs. Union of India (1981) Supp SCC 87 
(b) Iqbal Singh Marwah Vs. Meenakshi Marwah (2005) 4 SCC 470 


189. Placing reliance on the above, Id. Addl. SG further emphasised that in regard to the claim of privilege for 
non-disclosure of sealed cover documents, Hon’ble Supreme Court in S.P. Gupta (supra), has held as under: 


“73. We have already pointed out that whenever an objection to the disclosure of a document under 
Section 123 is raised, two questions fall for the determination of the court, namely, whether the 
document relates to affairs of State and whether its disclosure would, in the particular case before 
the court, be injurious to public interest. The court in reaching its decision on these two questions 
has to balance two competing aspects of public interest, because the document being one relating to 
affairs of State, its disclosure would cause some injury to the interest of the State or the proper 
functioning of the public service and on the other hand if it is not disclosed, the non-disclosure 
would thwart the administration of justice by keeping back from the court a material document. 
There are two aspects of public interest clashing with each other out of which the court has to 
decide which predominates. The approach to this problem is admirably set out in a passage from the 
judgment of Lord Reid in Conway v. Rimmer [(1968) AC 910, 952, 973, 979, 987, 993 : (1968) I All 
ER 874 (HL)]: 


“It is universally recognized that there are two kinds of public interest which may clash. 
There is the public interest that harm shall not be done to the nation or the public service by 
disclosure of certain documents, and there is the public interest that the administration of 
justice shall not be frustrated by the withholding of documents which must be produced if 
justice is to be done. There are many cases where the nature of the injury which would or 
might be done to the nation or the public service is of so grave a character that no other 
interest, public or private, can be allowed to prevail over it. With regard to such cases it 
would be proper to say, as Lord Simon did, that to order production of the document in 
question would put the interest of the State in jeopardy. But there are many other cases 
where the possible injury to the public service is much less and there one would think that it 
would be proper to balance the public interests involved.” 


190. Ld. Addl. SG, therefore, submitted that the rigors of S.P Gupta (supra) for claiming privilege have to be read 
in context of the provisions of UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder which provide that document, disclosure 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 43 


whereof may not be in the public interest, be not disclosed. She further submitted that the UA(P) Rules, as quoted 
above, start with a non obstante clause and thus, an inbuilt mechanism has been provided under the UA(P)A and the 
Rules framed thereunder. Accordingly, the Tribunal is mandated to grant privilege, forbidding disclosure where the 
claim of the Government is that the disclosure of such documents could affect the safety and sovereignty of the 
country and where the Tribunal also finds that the public interest outweighs the interest of the 
association/members/office bearers. 


191. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that the claim of confidentiality has to satisfy the test of character of the document 
and thus, the foundation of immunity from non-disclosure stems from the character of the document. 


192. Ld. Addl. SG also submitted that the decisions of the previous Tribunals constituted under Section 4 of the 
UA(P)A, in which the claim of privilege by the Central Government had been allowed holding that the same satisfied 
the requirement of section 123 of the Evidence Act, are binding on this Tribunal in view of the provisions of section 
5(7) of the UA(P)A which provide that the proceedings before this Tribunal are judicial proceedings and accordingly, 
reliance has been placed on the order dt. 217 March 2023, vide which the Tribunal chaired by Hon'ble Mr. Justice 
Dinesh Kumar Sharma, Judge, Delhi High Court, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of section 4 of 
the abovesaid Act, confirmed the declaration made by Central Government declaring the Popular Front of India (PFI) 
and its associates or affiliates or fronts including Rehab India Foundation (RIF), Campus Front of India (CFI), All 
India Imams Council (AIIC), National Confederation of Human Rights Organization (NCHRO), National Women‘s 
Front, Junior Front, Empower India Foundation and Rehab Foundation, Kerala as ‘unlawful associations’, by 
upholding the Notification no. $.O. 4559 (E), dated the 27" September, 2022 of the GOI issued by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, dt. 28" Sept. 2022. 


193. In view of the aforesaid highlighted legal position, the Id. Addl. SG submitted that the Central Government 
respectfully claims privilege on the documents contained in the sealed cover, as mentioned in the affidavit filed by the 
concerned witness from the MHA who deposed on behalf of the Central Government/ — UOT. 


194. Thereafter, as a precursor to the submissions on the existence of sufficient grounds for banning JKLF-Y as an 
unlawful association, Id. Addl. SG underscored the reasons for the enactment of the UA(P) Act, 1967. Ld. Addl. SG 
highlighted that the statement of objects and reasons of the UA(P)A itself underlines the purpose of its enactment 
which is to provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and associations and 
for matters connected therewith. She submitted that the statute empowers the Parliament to impose by a due process of 
law reasonable restrictions in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India on the right to form an association, 
freedom of speech and expression, and on right to assemble peacefully and with arms. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that 
further, section 48 of the UA(P)A itself provides that the provisions of the UA(P)A and the Rules made thereunder 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or 
any instrument having effect by virtue of an enactment other than this Act, giving it a clear over-riding position. She 
submitted that the validity of the provisions of the Act ought to be judged in the backdrop of the history of the Act 
necessitating their introduction. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that the Unlawful Activities (Preventive) Act, 1963 was 
enacted to make powers available for dealing with activities directed against the integrity and sovereignty of India 
which may take the manner and form either of “terrorism” or “other unlawful activity” which threatens the 
sovereignty of India. 


195. Ld. Addl. SG further submitted that the exception to the freedom of speech and expression, and to form 
associations and union, under Article 19(1) of the Constitution of India, was inserted in the form of “sovereignty and 
integrity of India” in Article 19(2) and 19(4), after the National Integration Council appointed a Committee on 
National Integration and Regionalization. The said Committee was to look into the aspect of putting reasonable 
restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that pursuant to the 
acceptance of recommendations of the Committee, the Constitutional Sixteenth (Amendment) Act 1963 was enacted 
to impose reasonable restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. Further, to implement the 
provisions of the 1963 Act, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill was introduced in the Parliament. The main 
objective of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act is to make powers available for dealing with activities directed 
against the integrity and sovereignty of India. 


196. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that after attaining Independence, Parliament has passed many laws to regulate 
national security in order to protect sovereignty of India. The UA(P)A, 1967 is an Act to provide for the more 
effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and associations and for dealing with terrorist 
activities and other matters connected therewith. 


197. Ld. Addl. SG further submitted that to achieve the aforesaid purpose of tackling the menace of activities 
inimical to the sovereignty and integrity of India, the legislature in its wisdom decided to create two species of the 
offence i.e. 


a. Unlawful Activity & Unlawful Association [S-2(0) r/w Chapter 2 & 3 (Sections 3-14)]; and 
b. Terrorist Act & Terrorist Organization [S-2(k), (I),(m) r/w Chapter 4-6 (Sections 15-40)]. 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


198. Ld. Addl. SG further submitted that the repeal of the Prevention of Terrorist Activities Act, 2002 entailed an 
absence of a legal framework to address the perils of terrorism. Accordingly, as a consequence, the UA(P)A was 
amended to include a definition of the term ‘terrorism’ and to give substantive powers to the Indian State to address the 
same. The amendments made therein were made also keeping in mind India's commitments under the Security 
Council Resolution dated 28" September, 2001, which enjoined the Indian state to fight both terrorism as well as 
terror funding. 


199. In view of the aforesaid, Id. Addl. SG submitted that it is evident that the provisions of UA(P)A have been 
enacted by the Parliament which had the legislative competence to enact the same and that once it is clear that the 
Parliament had the legislative competence to enact the law, there is a presumption of constitutionality in favour of the 
statute. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that an organization can be banned solely based on the opinion of the Central 
Government and, therefore, the challenge to Chapter II of UA(P)A has already been repelled by the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court in paras 84 -92 of Arup Bhuyan 7. State of Assam (2023) 8 SCC 745. In para 90 of this judgment, the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court held as under: 


“90. Thus from the aforesaid it can be seen that before any organization is declared unlawful a 
detailed procedure is required to be followed including the wide publicity and even the right to a 
member of such association to represent before the Tribunal. As observed hereinabove the 
notification issued by the Central Government declaring a particular association unlawful, the same 
is subject to inquiry and approval by the Tribunal as per Section 4. Once that is done and despite 
that a person who is a member of such unlawful association continues to be a member of such 
unlawful association then he has to face the consequences and is subjected to the penal provisions 
as provided under Section 10 more particularly Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA, 1967.” 


200. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that from the aforesaid discussion of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, it is clear that an 
organization can be banned solely on the basis of the opinion of the Central Government and through the process duly 
established by the law enacted by the Parliament. 


201. On the aspect of standard of proof required for judging the merits of the present Reference, learned Addl. SG 
submitted that the proceedings before this Tribunal are civil in nature and the standard of proof is the standard 
prescribed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra) as per which the matter has to be decided 
by objectively examining which version is more acceptable and credible. In this regard, ld. Addl. SG has referred to 
the observation made in para 30 of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). Ld. Addl. SG also argued that the procedure to be 
followed by the Tribunals can be read from the law enacted under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. Ld. Addl. 
SG submitted that similarly, the Tribunal established under the UA(P)A has been bestowed with certain powers and 
the procedure to be adopted by it under Section 5 read with Section 9 of the said Act. 


202. Ld. Addl. SG has submitted that as per the mandate of section 4 of the UA(P)A, the jurisdiction of this 
Tribunal is to adjudicate whether or not there is sufficient cause available with the Central Government to ban the 
organization in question. Ld. Addl. SG has submitted that any procedural irregularities or defects in material adduced 
before this Tribunal are to be tested by the concerned trial court within the parameters of the Evidence Act, 1872 and 
other relevant laws. Ld. Addl. SG further submitted that the jurisdiction of this Tribunal is to satisfy itself whether 
these documents can be relied upon to ascertain ‘sufficiency of cause’ and whether the agencies responsible for the 
enforcement of law and order could or could not have ignored the same for recommending suitable action under the 
UA(P)A. 


203. Ld. Addl. SG has submitted that for the purpose of assessing the sufficiency of cause, this Tribunal has to 
holistically look into the entire material / incidents and if the material / incidents are relatable acts of commission of 
‘unlawful activity’, ‘secession’ or ‘cession of a part of the territory of India’, on the anvil of preponderance of 
probability, then the ban is justified and is required to be confirmed. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that the Central 
Government has led sufficient and cogent material and evidence to demonstrate that there was sufficient material 
available with the Central Government to form an opinion that the JKLF-Y and its associates were indulging in 
unlawful activities. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that the law does not require that the cases which should form the basis of 
opinion formed by the Central Government should be proximate to the date of the decision or there should be ‘X’ 
number of cases to prove an association to be an unlawful association; and that even one case may be sufficient for 
this assessment. Ld. Addl. SG has submitted that the delay in the investigation will have no bearing in the present 
proceedings as the degree of evidence required before this Tribunal and the adjudication thereon is to be based on the 
principle of preponderance of probabilities. 


204. As regards the hostile environment prevailing in the territory of Jammu & Kashmir creating hurdles in 
conclusion of cases against the separatist and militants, ld. Addl. SG submitted that as has been stated in the 
testimonies of various witnesses, the delay in the investigation and trial has occurred due to extremely hostile 
environment which prevailed in the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that it is a matter 
of public knowledge that since last more than three decades, the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir has been 
adversely affected by the acts and deeds of the separatist groups and its leaders. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 45 


205. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that from 1989 to 2016, the situation in the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir 
remained volatile and disturbed due to the circumstances created by terrorist groups camouflaged as Separatist 
Groups/Political Parties or self-styled political leaders who instigated and provoked the general public at large against 
the lawfully established governments with the help of foreign state and non-state actors having interests inimical to the 
interest of the country. Ld. Addl. SG has submitted that these facts have been referred to in the concurring opinion of 
Hon’ble Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul in para-31 and Epilogue recorded in paras 113-135 of the judgment Re: Article 
370 of the Constitution, reported in 2023 SCC Online SC 1647. 


206. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that the separatist leaders and their activists had created such terror in the minds of 
public that the general public, which even did not support their cause, feared to oppose them or to report to the police 
against various incidents and even feared to depose or give evidence against the said separatist leaders, thus, leading to 
a non-cooperative atmosphere for the police and investigating agencies in the cases registered against the said 
separatist organizations or its leaders. 


207. Ld. Addl. SG also submitted that the investigation was further slowed thereafter due to COVID which had 
brought all the routine activities to a standstill as a complete lockdown in the entire nation was imposed. Hence, the 
investigation in the cases registered against the JKLF-Y in the State of Jammu & Kashmir could not be processed at 
the pace it should have been. 


208. Ld. Addl. SG has also submitted that the NIA in its 2™ supp. charge-sheet filed on 04.10.2019 in RC- 
10/2017/NIA/DLI vide paragraphs 17.3.1 to 17.3.43 has highlighted the magnitude of secessionist and terrorist 
activities in the Kashmir valley and the nexus of JKLF-Y with cross border terrorist organizations in the Kashmir 
valley. The investigation carried out by the NIA, therefore, corroborates the hostile environment in Jammu and 
Kashmir, which for a long period did not let the Investigating agency to complete the investigations in respective 
FIRs. 


209. The Id. Addl. SG submitted that from a bare perusal of the facts stated in the NIA charge-sheet read and the 
facts stated in the judgment of the Supreme Court in Re: Article 370 of the Constitution (supra), it can be clearly 
inferred that prior to coming into force the Jammu & Kashmir Re-Organization Act, 2019, the various successive 
governments / authorities from 2004 to 2019, for the reasons recorded in the judgment of the Supreme Court, did not 
take any stern action against the separatists and rather than concentrating on prosecuting the criminal acts of separatist 
and secessionist forces, indulged in dialogue with separatists. 


210. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that despite several FIRs having been lodged against the members of the JKLF-Y, its 
activists / sympathizers are still active and are indulging in unlawful/anti-national activities as defined in the UA(P)A, 
posing a serious threat to the sovereignty and integrity of India, communal harmony, and internal security. Ld. Addl. 
SG has submitted that if the JKLF-Y is not banned, the activists and sympathizers of JKLF-Y will again pose a serious 
threat to the communal harmony, internal security and integrity of the country. 


211. Ld. Addl. SG also argued that the assertions made by the Central Government in the ‘Background Note’ 
submitted before this Tribunal and the material adduced in support of the said ‘Background Note’ has remained 
uncontroverted and has not been disproved by the proscribed organisation. Instead of controverting and disproving the 
assertions contained in the ‘Background Note’, Md. Yasin Malik, being the chairman of JKLF — Y, in his reply dated 
27.05.2024 and during his examination before the Tribunal dated 14.07.2024 at Tihar Jail has expressly admitted that 
the aim and objective of the organisation is to seek ‘right of self-determination’ and work towards making of “United 
Independent Kashmir” which is nothing but a facade to advocating secessionism and cessation of a part of the 
territory of the Union of India. 


212. It was further argued on behalf of UOI that the Chairman of JKLF-Y in his response to the express charge of 
indulging into secessionist activities, has not made any positive assertion or statement refuting the said 
allegation/assertion and has not expressly declared that the proscribed organisation i.e. JKLF-Y or its members and 
office bearers honour the Constitution of India, or that they do not advocate separation of territory of Kashmir from 
the Union of India. It was thus submitted on behalf of UOI that the factum of existence and relevancy of the material 
on the basis of which Central Government had declared JKLF-Y as a proscribed organisation has not been disproved, 
repelled or controverted by the said organisation. The authenticity, veracity, existence and relevancy of the afore- 
referred material, which is in the nature of FIRs registered against the members and office bearers of the proscribed 
organisation for indulging in secessionist activities in the territory of Kashmir, has been duly testified on oath by the 
respective competent officers of the various investigating agencies. 


213. It was also submitted that ample opportunity was given by this Tribunal to the proscribed organisation to 
adduce evidence in its favour to prove that JKLF-Y has not been indulging into secessionist or cessationist activities. 
However, the proscribed organisation has failed to avail the said opportunity and hence, there is no material or 
evidence before this Tribunal having been adduced by JKLF-Y to seek non-confirmation of the ban imposed by the 
Central Government. 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


214. Ld. Addl. AG further argued that mere denial of the assertions made in the ‘Background Note’ do not qualify 
as a positive statement being made on behalf of the Organization that it believes in the Constitution of India and does 
not want secession of territory of Jammu & Kashmir. 


215. Ld. Addl. SG thus reiterated that in view of the aforesaid, in the respectful submission of the Central 
Government, the reply of the Proscribed Organization which does not dispute its’ indulgence into secessionist 
activities, does not make any positive assertion that it believes in the Constitution of India and does not want secession 
of the territory of Jammu & Kashmir from Union of India, does not state that it accedes to or intend to accept the 
sovereignty and merger of territory of Jammu & Kashmir with India, should be taken as acceptance by JKLF - Y of 
the facts and allegations made in the ‘Background Note’ as uncontroverted and on this ground only, the ban against 
the Proscribed Organization is liable to be confirmed. 


216. Regarding certain parts of the Reply filed on behalf of JKLF - Y by Yasin Malik i.e. paras | to 25 of the 
preliminary submissions, it was submitted on behalf of the UOI that those submissions of the affidavit are liable to be 
expunged/struck off from the record as the same are vexatious and scandalous in nature and are based on unfounded 
facts. Mr. Yasin Malik has made scandalous allegations not only with regard to the administration of justice but also 
against the officers involved in investigation of the NIA case with ulterior motives despite the fact that he has pleaded 
guilty to the charges framed by the Id. Trial Court. Thus, in view of the provision of Order VI Rule 16 of CPC and the 
provisions analogous thereto, the said pleadings are liable to be expunged/struck off from the record of this Tribunal 
by holding the same to be unnecessary, frivolous, vexatious and scandalous in nature. 


217. It was further argued that conviction of Md. Yasin Malik on admission of his guilt to the charges framed 
against him in the trial of RC 10/2017/NIA/DL further buttresses the case of the Central Govt. of existence of 
‘sufficient grounds’ for declaring JKLF - Y as an ‘unlawful association’. 


218. Ld. Addl. SG concluded by highlighting that perusal of the reply filed by the Chairman of JKLF-Y and his 
examination recorded before the Tribunal dated 14.07.2024 makes it clear that the Proscribed Organization has been 
indulging into secessionist activity and has a secessionist ideology. There has been no positive assertion that the 
Proscribed Organization honors the Constitution of India but only works on making a ‘United Independent Kashmir’ 
which is a cessionist act under section 2(0) of the UAP(A), 1967 and accordingly, a ground for declaration of an 
association as ‘unlawful’ under Section 3 of UAP(A), 1967. It was asserted on behalf of the UOI that by making a 
positive assertion to the effect of believing in the secessionist and cessionist ideology through its chairman, it is clear 
that as an organization, JKLF — Y has admitted to the grounds on which ban has been imposed by the Central 
Government. 


219. Lastly, learned Addl. SG has submitted that the Notification no. 5.0. 1416 (8), dated 15" March 2024, issued 
by the Central Government declaring the JKLF-Y to be an unlawful association is based on the information and 
material received from the administration of the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, the National Investigation 
Agency, and the various intelligence agencies, with regard to the unlawful activities of JKLF-Y and is liable to be 
confirmed. On conclusion of submissions/arguments on behalf of the UOI on 27.07.2024, the proceedings were 
further posted for 03.08.2024 for Md. Yasin Malik to address the Tribunal with submission/ and counter arguments on 
behalf of JKLF-Y. 


220. On 3.8.2024, Md. Yasin Malik appeared through video conference from Tihar Jail since he cannot be brought 
outside of the jail due to a specific order having been passed by the competent authority in this regard. The 
submissions on behalf of JKLF—Y were concluded on 03.08.2024 itself. On the same day, the order in the present 
Reference was reserved. 


VIII. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF JKLF - ४ 


221. On 03.08.2024, Md. Yasin Malik put forth his submissions opposing the declaration concerning JKLF—Y. He 
joined through video conference from Tihar Jail. It may be highlighted that on 27.07.2024, final submissions on behalf 
of UOI stood concluded. Accordingly, to give a reasonable time frame to Md. Yasin Malik to prepare his submissions 
and counter arguments, since he was advocating the cause of his organization in person, the proceedings were 
adjourned to 03.08.2024. 


222. The tenor of Md. Yasin Malik’s submissions was in line with the cross-examination of witnesses and his own 
reply cum affidavit. He tried to buttress his submission that post his release in 1994, he had adopted ‘Gandhian’ way 
of resisting the Govt. machinery and since then, had been an ardent and most vocal proponent of non-violent struggle 
even at the cost of peril to his life due to death threats extended by other armed separatists. Regarding his involvement 
in the intense law & order situation which was created in Kashmir valley after the death of terrorist Burhan Wani, 
Yasin Malik reiterated his submission as contained in his reply that there was no possibility of his involvement in any 
of the protests/stone pelting incidents since he had been arrested on the very day when Burhan Wani was exterminated 
by the security forces. 


223. Specifically concerning the declaration in question vide which JKLF—Y has been banned/declared to be 
unlawful again for a period of 5 years, Yasin Malik argued that UOI has not been able to highlight even a single 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 47 


incident wherein the activists of JKLF—Y had indulged in any subversive or unlawful activities after the ban was 
initially imposed in 2019. 


IX. ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION 


224. The arguments addressed on behalf of Union of India regarding the existence of ‘sufficient grounds’ for 
declaring JKLF-Y as an unlawful association also included submissions for claiming privilege in respect of the 
documents submitted in a sealed cover by one of the witnesses. The claim for privilege in regard to those documents 
has a significant bearing on the requirement of existence of ‘sufficient grounds’ since it has been argued that those 
documents contain extremely sensitive information regarding the unlawful and secessionist activities of JKLF-Y. 
Hence, it will be apposite to first rule on the claim for privilege raised by the Union of India. The issue regarding 
privilege claimed by the Central Government in respect of the documents disclosure whereof is injurious to public 
interest, is specifically envisaged in the UA(P) Rules, 1968. Rule 3 of the said UA(P) Rules is in the following terms: 


“3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence —(1) In holding an enquiry under 
sub-section (3) of Section 4 or disposing of any application under sub-section (4) of Section 7 or 
sub-section (8) of Section 8, the Tribunal or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall, subject to 
the provisions of sub-rule (2), follow, as far as practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), 
where any books of account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal or the 
Court of the District Judge by the Central Government and such books of account or other 
documents are claimed by that Government to be a confidential nature then, the Tribunal or the 
Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall not, -- 


(a) make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the proceedings 
before it; or 


(b) allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books 
of account or other documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings 
before it.” 


225. It can be seen that the Rule 3 (2) starts with a non-obstante clause providing that notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, where any books of account or other documents are sought to be produced 
by the Central Government and these documents are claimed to be of a confidential nature, then the Tribunal shall not 
make such documents a part of the records of the proceedings before it or allow inspection of or grant a copy of the 
same to any person other than the parties to the proceedings before it. 


226. Rule 5 of the UA(P) Rules, which provides for the documents which should accompany a reference to the 
Tribunal viz. a copy of the notification and all facts on which grounds specified in the notification are based, further 
provides that nothing in the said Rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact to the Tribunal which 
it considers against public interest to disclose. The said rule is in the following terms: 


“5. Documents which should accompany a reference to the Tribunal. — Every reference made to 
the Tribunal under sub-section (1) of Section 4 shall be accompanied by — 


(i) a copy of the notification made under sub-section (1) of Section 3, and 
(ii) all the facts on which the grounds specified in the said notification are based: 


Provided that nothing in this rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact to 
the Tribunal which that Government considers against the public interest to disclose.” 


227. The aforementioned provisions and the requirement of maintaining confidentiality of certain documents 
specifically came to be considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), wherein it was 
held as under: 


“22. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine in 
nature and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued 
confidentiality in public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such information, 
and, may be, also full particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. The scheme of 
the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder provide for 
maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in public interest. However, the non-disclosure of 
sensitive information and evidence to the association and its office-bearers, whenever justified in 
public interest, does not necessarily imply its non-disclosure to the Tribunal as well. In such cases 
where the Tribunal is satisfied that non-disclosure of such information to the association or its 
office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non-disclosure to the association or its office- 
bearers, but in order to perform its task of adjudication as required by the Act, the Tribunal can 
look into the same for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and satisfying itself 
that it can safely act on the same. In such a situation, the Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure 


48 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


whereby it can itself examine and test the credibility of such material before it decides to accept the 
same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. 
The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a procedure 
would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in controversy 
after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without abdicating its function 
by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a course would satisfy the 
minimum requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, while 
protecting the rights of the association and its members, without jeopardising the public interest. 
This would also ensure that the process of adjudication is not denuded of its content and the 
decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by it on all points in controversy after 
adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion already formed by the Central Government. 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer the United States Supreme Court, 
in a case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum requirements to be followed, as under: (L Ed 


pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They include (a) 
written notice of the claimed violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of evidence 
against him; (c) opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and 
documentary evidence; (d) the right to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses 
(unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing confrontation); (e) 
a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a traditional parole board, members of 
which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement by the factfinders 
as to the evidence relied on and reasons for revoking parole. We emphasise there is no 
thought to equate this second stage of parole revocation to a criminal prosecution in any 
sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the process should be flexible enough to consider evidence 
including letters, affidavits, and other material that would not be admissible in an 
adversary criminal trial.” 


24. In Paul Ivan Birzon v. Edward S. King placing reliance on Morrissey, while dealing with a 
similar situation, when confidential information had to be acted on, it was indicated that the 
credibility issue could be resolved by the Board retaining confidentiality of the information but 
assessing the credibility itself, and a modified procedure was indicated as under: 


बन 


. the board was required to decide whether it would believe the informants or the 
parolee and his witnesses. The infirmity that we see in the hearing and determination by the 
parole board is that it resolved the credibility issue solely on the basis of the State report, 
without itself taking the statements from the informants. Thus the board had no way of 
knowing how reliable the informants were and had no real basis on which to resolve the 
credibility issue against the parolee... 


We do not mean to intimate that the board should have taken testimony from the informants 
at the hearing and given the parolee the opportunity to cross-examine. What we do mean is 
that the board should have received the information directly from the informants (although 
not necessarily in the presence of the parolee), instead of relying solely on the State report. 
The board could then have reached its own conclusions about the relative reliability of the 
informants’ statements and those of the parolee and his witnesses. 


Similarly, the board could then have made its own decision about how realistic were the 
claims of potential danger to the informants or to State parole officers if their identity was 
disclosed, instead of placing exclusive reliance on the State report. Thus, we hold that, in 
relying exclusively on the written synopsis in the State report, which was the only evidence 
of a parole violation, in the face of the parolee's denial and his presentation of the 
testimony of other witnesses, the revocation of Satz's parole was fundamentally unfair to 
him and was a denial of due process of law.” 


25. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its source, in 
public interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the confidential 
information for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the conflicting evidence of 
the other side. This modified procedure satisfies the minimum requirements of natural justice and 
also retains the basic element of an adjudicatory process which involves objective determination of 
the factual basis of the action taken. 


26. An authorised restriction saved by Article 19(4) on the freedom conferred by Article 19(1)(c) of 
the Constitution has to be reasonable. In this statute, provision is made for the notification to 
become effective on its confirmation by a Tribunal constituted by a sitting High Court Judge, on 
adjudication, after a show-cause notice to the association, that sufficient cause exists for declaring it 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 49 


to be unlawful. The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a show-cause notice, of 
existence of sufficient cause to justify the declaration must necessarily imply and import into the 
inquiry, the minimum requirement of natural justice to ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is its 
own opinion, formed on the entire available material, and not a mere imprimatur of the Tribunal 
affixed to the opinion of the Central Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a fair procedure to 
prevent the vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure in a given case, would 
depend on the materials constituting the factual foundation of the notification and the manner in 
which the Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to be determined by the Tribunal keeping in 
view the nature of its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of natural justice, the fact that the 
materials in such matters are not confined to legal evidence in the strict sense, and that the scrutiny 
is not a criminal trial. The Tribunal should form its opinion on all the points in controversy after 
assessing for itself the credibility of the material relating to it, even though it may not be disclosed to 
the association, if the public interest so requires. 


27. It follows that, ordinarily, the material on which the Tribunal can place reliance for deciding 
the existence of sufficient cause to support the declaration, must be of the kind which is capable of 
judicial scrutiny. In this context, the claim of privilege on the ground of public interest by the 
Central Government would be permissible and the Tribunal is empowered to devise a procedure by 
which it can satisfy itself of the credibility of the material without disclosing the same to the 
association, when public interest so requires. The requirements of natural justice can be suitably 
modified by the Tribunal to examine the material itself in the manner it considers appropriate, to 
assess its credibility without disclosing the same to the association. This modified procedure would 
satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice and judicial scrutiny. The decision would then be 
that of the Tribunal itself.” 


228. The High Court of Andhra Pradesh in Deendar Anjuman v. Government of India, 2001 SCC OnLine AP 
663 after applying the test laid down in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra) upheld the ban imposed and further held that 
the entire material available on record itself need not be published or made available to the aggrieved person but what 
is required is disclosure of reasons and the grounds. Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“19. The expression “for reasons to be stated in writing” did not necessarily mean that the entire 
material available on record itself is to be published or made available to the aggrieved person. What 
is required is disclosure of reasons. The grounds must be disclosed. The notification issued under sub- 
section (1) of Section 3 alone is required to be referred to the Tribunal “for the purpose of 
adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” The 
Tribunal after such reference is required to issue notice to the affected association to show cause, why 
the association should not be declared unlawful. The Tribunal is required to hold an enquiry in the 
manner specified in Section 9 and after calling for such further information as it may consider 
necessary from the Central Government or from the association and then decide whether or not there 
is sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. The Tribunal is required “to 
adjudicate whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” As held by 
the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind v. Union of India the Tribunal is required to weigh the 
material on which the notification under sub-section (1) of Sec. 3 is issued by the Central Government 
after taking into account the cause shown by the Association in reply to the notice issued to it and by 
taking into consideration such further information which it may call for, to decide the existence of 
sufficient cause for declaring the action to be unlawful. The Tribunal is required to objectively 
determine the points in controversy. The Supreme Court further held that subject to non-disclosure of 
information which the Central Government considers to be against the public interest to disclose, all 
information and evidence relied on by the Central Government to support the declaration made by it 
of an association to be unlawful, has to be disclosed to the association to enable it to show cause 
against the same. The Tribunal is entitled to ascertain the credibility of conflicting evidence relating to 
the points in controversy. It is observed by the Supreme Court: 


“To satisfy the minimum requirements of a proper adjudication, it is necessary that the 
Tribunal should have the means to ascertain the credibility of conflicting evidence relating 
to the points in controversy. Unless such a means is available to the Tribunal to determine 
the credibility of the material before it, it cannot choose between conflicting material and 
decide which one to prefer and accept. In such a situation, the only option to it would be to 
accept the opinion of the Central Government, without any means to test the credibility of 
the material on which it is based. The adjudication made would cease to be an objective 
determination and be meaningless, equating the process with mere acceptance of the ipse 
dixit of the Central Government. The requirement of adjudication by the Tribunal 
contemplated under the Act does not permit abdication of its function by the Tribunal to the 
Central Government providing merely its stamp of approval to the opinion of the Central 
Government. The procedure to be followed by the Tribunal must, therefore, be such which 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


enables the Tribunal to itself assess the credibility of conflicting material on any point in 
controversy and evolve a process by which it can decide whether to accept the version of 
the Central Government or to reject it in the light of the other view asserted by the 
association. The difficulty in this sphere is likely to arise in relation to the evidence of 
material in respect of which the Central Government claims non-disclosure on the ground 
of public interest.” 


20. It is, therefore, evident that disclosure of all the facts and material available on record subject to 
the claim of any privilege in this regard by the Central Government is only after the reference of the 
notification issued under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal for the purpose of 
adjudication whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful. The 
material available on record may have to be revealed to the association or its members. In a case 
wherever any privilege is claimed, the Tribunal has to examine the material itself in the manner it 
considers appropriate, to assess its credibility without disclosing the same to the association. 
Therefore, there is no requirement to disclose the material itself and publish the same in the 
notification or provide to the association along with the notification issued in exercise of the power 
under proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 3 declaring the association to be unlawful with immediate 
effect. The requirement is disclosure of additional reasons and grounds and not the material. The 
notification issued in exercise of the power under proviso to sub-sec. (3) of Section 3 cannot be set 
aside on the ground that the material relied upon for stating the reasons is not communicated to the 
association concerned declaring it to be an unlawful association with immediate effect. Such 
notification would become vulnerable only when the reasons are not notified: The record should 
contain the reasons in writing and the same is required to be revealed and published in the 
notification or communicated to the association concerned. Such reasons are required to be distinct 
and different and cannot be the same for imposing ban under Section 3 of the Act. The reasons are 
required to be communicated but not the entire material. Disclosure of the material is only after 
reference of the notification issued under Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal.” 


229. The legal position which thus emerges, can be succinctly put in the following terms: 


a. The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder 
contemplates maintenance of confidentiality whenever required in public interest; 


b. The Tribunal can look into the confidential material without the same being disclosed to the 
Association or its office-bearers, for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and 
satisfying itself that the same is reliable; 


c. The Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure for itself for examining and testing the credibility of 
such material 


d. The requirement of natural justice can be suitably modified by the Tribunal in the manner it 
considers appropriate for the purpose of assessing/examining the confidential material/documents 
and arriving at a conclusion based on a perusal thereof. 


230. Further, the rigors prescribed by the Supreme Court in the case of S.P. Gupta (supra) have to be read in the 
context of the provisions of the UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder. In particular, it needs to be borne in mind 
that Rule 3(1) of the UA(P) Rules, 1968 expressly provides that in holding any inquiry under sub-section (3) of 
section 4 of the UA(P)A, the Tribunal shall follow “as far as practicable”, the rules of evidence laid down in the 
Indian Evidence Act. Thus, the rigors that have been contemplated in the context of Section 123 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, cannot ipso-facto be made applicable to these proceedings. The legislative intent in making the 
provisions of the Evidence Act, 1872 applicable only “as far as practicable” is evident from the nature of these 
proceedings. The proceedings before this Tribunal do not contemplate a full-fledged trial; rather the proceedings are in 
the nature of an “inquiry” as referred to in Section 4(3). 


231. Further, the Reference proceedings are time-bound and as has been laid down by the Supreme Court in the 
case of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), an appropriate procedure has to be devised/tailored by this Tribunal for the 
purpose of its inquiry. As such, any claim seeking privilege has to be assessed in terms of the in-built mechanism as 
provided under the UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder, and the Tribunal is mandated to grant privilege from 
disclosure where it finds that the disclosure would be against/injurious to public interest. Thus, the nature of the 
documents has to be assessed by the Tribunal to see whether it contains any sensitive information, disclosure of which 
would be against public interest. 


232. On perusal of the documents submitted by the Central Government in a sealed cover, it is found that the same 
contains intelligence reports, secret information collected from time to time by the investigating and intelligence 
agencies, notes/memos prepared by the investigating and intelligence agencies, information revealed on investigation 
including information as to the clandestine nature of the activities of the concerned association and its office-bearers 
and linkage of the association and its office-bearers with organizations and individuals outside of India. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 51 


233, This Tribunal finds from the perusal of these documents that the disclosure of these documents would be 
detrimental to the larger public interest and security of the State. One of the documents which is contained in the 
sealed cover, is a note prepared for consideration of the Cabinet Committee on Security, which contains sensitive 
information about activities of the Association and its inimical impact on national security. Clearly, the nature of these 
documents is such that it would be in public interest and in the interest of the security of the State to maintain 
confidentiality in regard thereto. 


234. This Tribunal also notes that the claim for privilege has been expressly stated by the concerned witness from 
the Ministry of Home Affairs (PW - 6) to be based on a specific approval/direction of the Union Home Secretary 
(Head of the department). The said position is also borne out from the relevant official/noting files shared with this 
Tribunal. 


235. In the circumstances, this Tribunal allows the claim for privilege in respect of the documents submitted in a 
sealed cover by the concerned witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs. Consequently, the Tribunal has proceeded 
to peruse the said documents, as contemplated in the Judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind 
(supra) and to assess the credibility thereof and the implications flowing therefrom for the purpose of the present 
inquiry. 

236. On the basis of the material placed on record and the evidence adduced by the Central Government, this 
Tribunal finds sufficient cause for declaring the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front — Md. Yasin Malik (‘JKLF-Y’) 
as an unlawful association which conclusion is drawn for the following reasons. 


237. The notification dated 15" March, 2024 issued under Section 3(1) of the Act inter alia mentions that (i) the 
members of the JKLF-Y have been at the fore-front of the secessionist activities in Jammu and Kashmir; (ii) the 
leaders or members of the JKLF-Y have been involved in raising funds through various sources including those in 
Pakistan for promoting unlawful activities, including supporting terrorist activities; (iii) JKLF-Y and its members have 
scant respect towards the constitutional authority and constitutional set-up of the country; (iv) JKLF-Y and its leaders 
or members, have been indulging in unlawful activities, which are prejudicial to the integrity, sovereignty, security 
and communal harmony of the country; and (v) there are linkages between JKLF-Y with banned terrorist 
organizations. 


238. The above grounds/justification cited in the Notification issued under Section 3(1) of the Act are borne out 
from the extensive evidence adduced by the Central Government. The said evidence can be broadly categorized into 3 
categories: 


a. Evidence adduced by officers (senior police officers) from Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir; 
b. Evidence in the form of Charge-sheet filed in NIA case no. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI; 

c. Evidence in the form of documents/material submitted in a sealed cover before this Tribunal; 

d. Evidence of money laundering for use of illegal/unexplained funds in separatist activities. 


Evidence adduced by officers from the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 


239. As many as 8 senior police officers/officials from the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir (PW1 to PW5, 
PW8 to PW10) have deposed as regards the series of violent and secessionist incidents involving JKLF-Y in the past 
several decades. The same clearly brings out that the concerned association has been relentlessly indulging in 
“unlawful activities”. 


240. The incidents with regard to which voluminous evidence has been adduced, inter alia involves: 
e. raising anti-India and pro-Pakistan slogans (evidence of PW 3); 


f. continuing with unlawful activities by JKLF—Y cadres even after the organization was declared 
unlawful in March 2019 (evidence of PW 1, PW 2, PW 3, PW 4, PW 10); 


g. inciting the people of Jammu and Kashmir to take resort to violence/pelting of stones on security 
forces (evidence of PW 6, PW 7 and PW 11); 


h. undermining the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India by demanding ‘azadi’ (evidence of PW 
5); 

i. instigating the general public intending to cause disaffection against India through violent means 
(evidence of PW 8, PW 9); 


j. raising of funds through various sources including for promoting unlawful activities, including 
supporting terrorism/ violence/ militancy, spreading secessionist ideology in Jammu and Kashmir 
(evidence of PW 7, PW 11). 


241. On a cumulative consideration of the various incidents/activities which are subject matters of the various 
FIRs with regard to which the aforesaid evidence has been led, it is evident that JKLF-Y has been indulging in 
“unlawful activities” and its cadres have posed a grave threat to the law & order situation in Jammu and Kashmir since 
the last 3 - 4 decades. 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


242. Although it is true that the investigation in most of the FIRs (with regard to which PW 1 to PW 5 and PW 8 
to 10 have deposed) has been protracted, 16. Addl. SG has sought to emphasize that the same was on account of hostile 
environment prevailing in Jammu and Kashmir over a long period of time. However, what is of relevance to this 
Tribunal is the clear pattern that is discernible as regards the nature of activities of the concerned association and its 
office bearers. The pattern of conduct is to incessantly encourage secession of the state of Jammu and Kashmir, 
questioning or seeking to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India, inciting the people of Jammu and 
Kashmir to take resort to violence/pelting of stones etc., and to disrupt peace in the region of Jammu and Kashmir. 
These activities continued unabated for a long period of time; and it is only in the last few years (post enactment of the 
Jammu & Kashmir Re-Organisation Act, 2019) that there has been a lull in the anti-national activities in Jammu & 
Kashmir, as is evident from the reduced instances of violence/disruption of law and order. 


243. This Tribunal also takes note of the fact that each of the senior police officers from the U.T. of Jammu and 
Kashmir, who have deposed before this Tribunal, during the course of their examination, strenuously emphasized 
from their own personal knowledge derived during the course of discharge of their official functions, that JKLF-Y 1.6. 
its chairmen, and members have been: 


k. incessantly encouraging and advocating claims for secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union 
of India and have been inciting the local population towards the same; 


l. promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the integrity and security of the 
country; 


m. tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir on religious lines and have sought to escalate the separatist movement; 


244. The compelling testimony of officers from various districts of Jammu and Kashmir cannot be disregarded. 
Moreso because in the cross-examination of these witnesses, nothing has been brought out which could convey that 
JKLF-Y is not linked or is not associated with illegal and unlawful activities which are aimed at secession of Jammu 
& Kashmir from the Indian Union. Even after the abovesaid organization was declared to be ‘unlawful’ in 2019 by the 
Central Govt., unlawful activities by its cadres have continued. PW 1 Hariprasad KK has deposed in regard to one 
such FIR i.e. FIR no. 23/2023 at P.S. Kothibagh which was registered in July 2023 under the relevant provisions of 
UA(P) Act and the IPC. During the course of investigation, residences of accused Mohd. Yaseen Bhat and Mohd. 
Rafiq Pahloo @ Nanaji were searched and seizure of objectionable content was made. One such seizure is of a 
resolution dt. 6.10.2022 which clearly indicates of efforts by JKLF—Y cadres to regroup and re-initiate their goal of 
attaining freedom. Further, analysis of the mobile phones of Mohd. Yaseen Bhat and Nanaji has led to discovery of a 
number of objectionable contents including videos which clearly demonstrate that JKLF—Y cadre is committed to their 
goal of attaining freedom for Kashmir. It is thus obvious that if left unattended, JKLF—Y is very likely to regroup and 
strengthen itself and come back with secessionist activities with a vengeance. Charge-sheet has also been filed in the 
above FIR which prima facie corroborates the allegations of unlawful activities by JKLF—Y as levelled in the FIR no. 
23/2023. The cross-examination of the above highlighted witness shows that Md. Yasin Malik did not even touch 
upon the veracity of the contents of the FIR. Additionally, in the cross-examination, Md. Yasin Malik by necessary 
implication, admitted that the main accused in the aforesaid FIR i.e. Mohd. Yaseen Bhat was a JKLF—-Y cadre. 
Further, PW 4 Shabir Ahmed in his testimony, deposed about FIR no. 44 of 2019 which was registered just after the 
ban was initially imposed on JKLF—Y. The said FIR pertains to continuation of the operation of the offices of JKLF— 
Y despite it being declared unlawful by the Central Govt. on 2271 March 2019. In cross-examination of this witness, 
no questions were put regarding the veracity of the allegations in the FIR. Majority of the questions put to the witness 
were relating to the history of JKLF—Y. In fact, one of the suggestions put to the witness was regarding arrest of any 
member of JKLF—Y other than Yasin Malik despite their being operative offices in J&K. This suggestion itself 
demonstrates that JKLF—Y continues with its operations even after the ban was imposed on it in 2019. Similarly, PW 
2 Saquib Gani and PW 3 Ramiz Rashid Bhat also deposed in regard to offices of JKLF—Y being operational for 
carrying out unlawful activities even after the ban was imposed on it in March 2019 and in which regard, FIR nos. 
61/2019 and 11/2019 were lodged in P.S. Budgam and P.S. Hajin respectively. Their cross-examinations were 
identical to that of the cross-examination of PW 4, and thus drawing the same conclusion that JKLF—Y continued with 
its operations even after the ban was imposed in March 2019. PW 5 deposed about unlawful activities including 
terrorist activities of JKLF—Y members even after the imposition of ban on it by the Central Govt. in 2019. In cross- 
examination, no question was asked from the witness for contradicting the contents of the FIR. PW 10 Ghulam 
Hassan deposed regarding members of JKLF—Y planning to give a ‘hartal’ call after the said organization was 
declared as unlawful in March 2019. An FIR was also lodged in this regard i.e. FIR no. 51 of 2019. In cross- 
examination of this witness also, nothing relevant concerning the contents of the FIR was asked from the witness. All 
these above facts clearly show the propensity of JKLF—Y cadres to persist with unlawful activities despite a ban 
having been imposed in March 2019. In his own cross-examination, Md. Yasin Malik admitted that offices of JKLF— 
Y are functioning abroad. This admission, coupled with the fact that at no stage has Yasin Malik has disassociated 
himself from the aim of secession/freedom of Jammu & Kashmir from the Indian Union, and the prima facie evidence 
led which shows that JKLF—Y continues with secessionist acts by use of violent means, furnishes sufficient ground to 
confirm the declaration of JKLF—Y being an unlawful association. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 53 


Evidence in the form of Charge-sheet filed in NIA case no. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI 

245. Even though Md. Yasin Malik repeatedly claimed during the course of proceedings that he had given up 
armed resistance and was following a Gandhian mode of struggle to achieve their professed aim since 1994, his 
proclivity to continue to engage with violent means and with entities/persons who are avowedly committed to violent 
means are too stark to be ignored. He has not only been engaging with wanted terrorists but has even admitted to 
having visited a terrorist camp in POK where he has been felicitated as well. In his reply cum affidavit, Md. Yasin 
Malik has sought to give an explanation to these aspects but the same is patently a superficial effort to offer an 
explanation just for the sake of it. Investigation conducted by the NIA and subsequently by Enforcement Directorate 
reveals that Yasin Malik has been at the forefront of using illegally mobilised funds for aiding violent activities in 
Jammu & Kashmir. Testimony of the witness from the NIA brings out how JKLF-—Y is intricately involved in the 
process of not only mobilising funds to further the secessionist aims of JKLF—Y but also in organizing violent protests 
across the Kashmir valley. The first charge-sheet dt. 18.01.2018 filed by the NIA in RC/10/2017/NIA/DLI brings out 
a well-organized hierarchical structure of the APHC leadership to continue with violent means to achieve secession of 
Jammu & Kashmir under the cloak of APHC’s socio-political umbrella. At the top of this hierarchical structure sit, 
amongst others, SAS Geelani, Md. Yasin Malik and Mirwaiz Umar Farooq who are the chief organizers of the 
resistance movement classified as Joint Resistance Leadership by the separatists. The 2" supp. charge-sheet filed by 
the NIA brings to fore the active role of JKLF—Y in fund mobilization from various regions and countries across the 
world such as Europe, UK, Dubai and Saudi Arabia. Investigation has revealed that fund mobilization is towards the 
sole purpose of carrying forward the secessionist agenda of separating Jammu & Kashmir from the Indian Union. 
Investigation into the digital sphere has also revealed exchange of emails between Yasin Malik and other JKLF—Y 
cadres, between Yasin Malik and terrorist organisations across the border and recovery of Whatsapp messages from 
the accounts of other accused arraigned in the 1*' charge-sheet filed by the NIA, all of which clearly bring out JKLF- 
Y’s committed stance to continue with secessionist activities vis-a-vis Kashmir and the Indian Union, and the linkage 
between fund mobilisation by JKLF—Y and organizing violent secessionist activities in Jammu & Kashmir by JKLF— 
Y which is headed by Yasin Malik. At this stage, it would be relevant to briefly highlight the emails exchanged 
between JKLF — Y cadre which buttresses the assertion and belief of the Central Govt. that if the activities of JKLF - 
Y are not restrained, this organization is bound to continue with its secessionist activities. These emails have been 
retrieved from the hotmail account of Yasin Malik. Following is the text of an email exchanged between Khawaja 
Manzoor Ahmed Chisthi, Secretary Finance-JKLF Riyadh and Tariq Sharif, Finance Coordinator, JKLF UK zone: 


“Solely, this financial plan is only to make our central offices, both in IOK & POK, powerful financially therefore 
it is neither an investment plan nor a business plan whereas the basic objective is to fulfil the basic needs and 
liabilities. 

If you read the code of conduct, thoroughly, you will come to know how the funds will be collected and how safely 
& securely we will utilize these funds. Here, for your convenience I would bring some major prints to you: 


A. We asked every zone to collect funds all together for a complete year and send it to the central office in 
Rawalpindi. FYI, our target is to achieve 10 million (PKR) from all zones and then this capital money will be 
saved in an Islamic bank which will give the interest rate about 8 to 10%. We can get about 70,000 (PKR) 
per month, if we consider 8% only, which will be enough for the monthly office expenditures whereas capital 
money will remain constant in the account. 


B. Above mentioned was our initial plan which can be modified with the more sophisticated & applicable 
suggestions. We have plan-B as well, in which we can buy a small permanent building approximately 200 
sq.m and this will save our monthly building rent and gives accommodation facility to our members/guests 
who might stay overnight in Rawalpindi office. In addition, the value of this property will go up with the 
passage of time. 


Now, I would like to brief you about the safety and accountability of the funded money. We have opened a joint 
account under the authorization of three reliable JKLF’s members namely Mr. Raja Haqnawaz Sahib, Mr. 
Hameed Sahib and Mr. Manzoor Khan Sahib. Even I cannot withdraw any money from this account but I would 
keep the check and balance on this money which will be taken on the name of this noble cause. Further, from 
each zone we will have 2 members to be considered as auditors and can investigate the utilization of this money 
at any time. 


Note: We have already collected funds from Saudi Arabia and submitted to central office Rawalpindi, 
approximately 32800 SR equivalent to 870,000 PKR and we are expecting more 20000 PKR from Saudi 
Arabia. Whereas rest of the fund from UAE etc. is not submitted yet. 


Being a party secretary finance, this is my core responsibility to raise the funds and to provide the better scheme 
for annual budget. Based on this annual budget, JKLF’s central office will distribute the money as per yearly 
calendar among different offices in IoK & PoK as per their needs and requirements. 


I hope you will understand the need of this project and we can easily cope with the financial issues if it is timely 
completed and implemented as discussed. 


54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Once again, I highly appreciate your inputs and hope you will work on it with while keeping in mind the noble 
cause as your brother was a great asset of JKLF and we expect the same from you as well. 


This will be much better if you kindly could arrange the meeting which can represent all UK’s units and I would 
then schedule my personal visit to UK accordingly. It will be better if you can manage it in next 2 to 3 months 
especially in April, 2015. 


246. Another email exchanged between Khawaja Manzoor Ahmed Chisthi, Secretary Finance-JKLF Riyadh and 
Tariq Sharif, Finance Coordinator, JKLF UK zone is reproduced below wherein there is discussion about financial 
code of conduct and plans for better utilization of funds collected from various zones. Khwaja Manzoor has discussed 
about a joint account under authorization of one ‘Raja Haq Nawaz Sahib’, ‘Hameed Sahib’ and ‘Manzoor Khan 
Sahib’. He concludes his mail with these words: 


“Once again, I reiterate that funds are very important to keep the movement alive and we are expecting a 
handsome amount from each individual member living abroad. I would like to make my personal visit to UK 
and for this as discussed if you can arrange a meeting representing all units in next 3 to 4 months where I 
can address to them as its really difficult to write down details on e-mails. 


Thank you for understanding the needs of the organization and working with positive approach for the 
development of the organization- JKLF. 


247. The 2™ supp. charge-sheet also contains details of other such emails wherein elaborate plans for mobilizing 
funds for secessionist aims of JKLF—Y have been discussed. In one such email dt. 03.05.2014, Khwaza Manzoor 
Chisthi has discussed plans to raise Rs. 15—20 lacs per year from Europe and had invited Yasin Malik to visit UK to 
strengthen the outfit. Needless to underscore that the above emails show as to how JKLF—Y activists mobilize funds 
in the name of ‘Kashmiri freedom’ in a very organized manner. These funds are collected abroad by JKLF-Y foreign 
offices and then routed to India through various illegal channels, to be utilized for violent secessionist activities in 
Jammu & Kashmir. It would be highly perilous to let such an organization function when patently it operates with 
such impunity and when there is clear evidence which has been unearthed through sustained investigation of the acts 
of such organization being avowedly anti-India and which directly affect the sovereignty of the nation. 


248. Further, admission of guilt by Md. Yasin Malik of the charges framed against him by the Special NIA Court 
puts to rest any doubt regarding the involvement of JKLF—Y in unlawful activities as defined in the UA(P) Act. Even 
though in regard to the allegation of use of hawala funds for organizing violent protests including stone pelting on 
security forces to further the secessionist aims, Yasin Malik argued that he has been confronted merely with the 
document recovered from the house of the accountant of the hawala operator and not with the alleged hawala operator 
himself i.e. Zahoor Ahmed Watali, his confession of guilt to the charge framed u/ss 120B IPC, 121 IPC, 121A IPC, 13 
UA(P) Act r/w sections 120B IPC, 15 UA(P) Act r/w sections 120B IPC, and sections 17, 18, 20, 38 & 39 of UA (P) 
Act renders his aforesaid argument/submission of no relevance. Relevant to highlight that in his reply cum affidavit, 
Md. Yasin Malik describes the exodus of minority Kashmiri pandits from the valley as a Govt. orchestrated move to 
unleash terror on Kashmiris sans the minority community when infact, it is an established fact that it were the acts of 
terror committed by organisations like JKLF—Y in the early 1990’s bordering a genocide which forced the minority 
community members to leave their homes and hearth behind in the middle of the night. The insensitivity spewing 
from the reply cum affidavit of Md. Yasin Malik only buttresses the belief that JKLF—Y spitefully believes in 
secession of Jammu & Kashmir through violent means. 


249. This Tribunal is conscious that the veracity of the contents of the aforesaid chargesheet/s which have been 
filed in the above-mentioned criminal cases which have been registered against the JKLF-Y and its cadres, is required 
to be established at the trial of the said cases but the scope of scrutiny of the material cited by the Central Government 
(which is the subject matter of present Reference) is not akin to a criminal trial, as has been held in para 26 of 
Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). For the purpose of these proceedings, the evidence adduced is in the nature of relevant 
material and liable to be considered, in terms of the dicta laid down by the Supreme Court in Khatri (supra) and 
Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). As mandated in terms of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind 
(supra), this Tribunal has examined the material cited by the Central Government for the purpose of making an 
“objective assessment” for the purpose of these proceedings and to assess whether the same supports the declaration 
made under section 3(1) of UA(P)A vide the notification dated 15" March 2024. 


250. It would also need a brief observation here that an ‘objective assessment’ by the Tribunal of the relevant 
material before the Central Govt. for carrying out the declaration vide the Notification in question would not translate 
into substituting the Tribunal’s satisfaction for that of the Central Govt. It has to be borne in mind that it is the Central 
Govt. which is in the best position to appraise whether the acts of an entity/organization are impinging upon the 
sovereignty and integrity of the country. The assessment process by the Tribunal therefore has to evaluate whether 
there was qualitative material before the Central Govt. before it proceeded ahead to declare an organization as 
unlawful. The ‘sufficiency’ aspect of inquiry into existence of grounds to carry out a declaration thus has to be 
construed accordingly and is not to be misconstrued as being an appellate authority over the decision making by the 
Central Govt. The Tribunal has thus to see whether the process of decision making by the Central Govt. was correctly 
arrived at in terms of the statutory provisions of the UA(P)A. When the evidence led before the Tribunal is assessed in 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 55 


the above backdrop, there appears to be no reason not to concur with the line of reasoning adopted by the Central 
Govt. in declaring JKLF—Y as an unlawful association. 


Evidence in the form of documents/material submitted in a sealed cover before this Tribunal 


251. As noted hereinabove, the documents submitted by the witness (PW 6) who has deposed on behalf of the 
Central Government, inter alia, includes reports of intelligence agencies and the note prepared for the Cabinet 
Committee on Security setting out the entire background of JKLF-Y and its activities, based on the information 
collated by the intelligence agencies and also bringing out linkage of JKLF-Y with cross-border 
agencies/establishments, and finally from inputs received from Criminal Investigation Department, Jammu and 
Kashmir (Srinagar). 


252. A perusal of the said documents has brought out in vivid detail the terrorist and secessionist activities of 
JKLF-Y in close coordination with inimical elements in Pakistan. The role of JKLF—Y in orchestrating public unrest 
and its manifestation through incidents of stone pelting, systematic public protests and hartals has prominently figured 
in the confidential documents. The systematic attempts to promote secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the territory 
of India, to undermine the sovereignty of India, to incite the local populace and to promote violence have been 
brought out in the said material/documents. Further, perusal of the file containing confidential documents/materials 
shows that the Central Govt. has applied its mind to the material placed before it and thereafter, taken the decision of 
approving the declaration of JKLF-Y to be an ‘unlawful association’. 


Evidence of money laundering for use of illegal/unexplained funds in separatist activities. 


253. Testimony of PW 11 who is a senior officer from the specialized agency of the Central Govt. which is 
specifically tasked with tracking down funds which are generated through illegal activities and then routed back into 
financial system as clean money also clearly brings about the role of JKLF—Y in use of illegally generated funds for 
use of secessionist activities. The complaint dt. 24.08.2020 filed by the Enforcement Directorate brings out startling 
facts of the modus to bring in funds from abroad by Zahoor Ahmed Watali (who is an accused in the FIR no. 
RC/10/2017/NIA/DLI and also in the ECIR investigated by the Enforcement Directorate) by setting up front 
companies. Though details of same have been mentioned in the complaint which has been exhibited by PW 11 as Ex. 
PW 11/3, it will be relevant at this stage to highlight one such instance of (alleged) money laundering to have an idea 
of how much funds were being generated illegally and through unexplained sources for eventual use in secessionist 
activities by Hurriyat activists in Jammu & Kashmir. Investigation has revealed that a company set up by Zahoor 
Ahmed Watali entered into a lease agreement with a person based in Dubai, posing as owner of a certain land near 
Srinagar. The lease was for a purported commercial project which was to be set up by the Dubai based person (who 
also is an accused in the ECIR). Pursuant to the lease agreement, close to Rs. 6 crores was transferred to the company 
set up by Zahoor Ahmed Watali when in fact, as the investigation has revealed, the land was never in the ownership of 
the company set up by Zahoor Watali. Further, on being questioned, the person from Dubai who has taken the land on 
lease i.e. Naval Kishore, could not offer any explanation as to the source of this huge amount of almost 6 crores. 
Further, a document which has been seized from the accountant of Zahoor Ahmed Watali i.e. Ghulam Bhat and which 
document has been signed by Zahoor Ahmed Watali (which fact has been confirmed by forensic analysis) shows that 
unexplained funds were being received by Zahoor Watali from foreign sources and a huge tranche from amongst these 
finds ice. Rs. 15 lacs was transferred/given to Yasin Malik. When confronted by the Enforcement Directorate 
regarding the purpose for receiving this amount from Zahoor Watali, Yasin Malik refused to comment on the same. 
Still further, he also could not explain the contents of an email which had been received on his email from Khwaja 
Manjoor Chistshi who is the finance co-ordinator of JKLF in Saudi Arabia and responsible for fund mobilization for 
JKLF-Y in the middle-east Asia region, wherein it has been mentioned that Khwaja Mnajoor wanted to send an 
amount of Rs. 10 lac PKR for JKLF but wanted a trustworthy person from Delhi to receive it because the said amount 
was to be sent through cargo. This email is in itself gravely incriminating in as much as cash was purportedly to sent 
through cargo which is impermissible under any national economic law. This email is thus another evidence of JKLF 
activists including Yasin Malik indulging in brazen money laundering and currency smuggling. 


CONCLUSION 


254. In conclusion, it is held that there is no denial to the assertions of the witnesses who have deposed on behalf 
of UOI that JKLF-Y has indulged in acts of secessionism and is still committed to the goal of secession of Jammu & 
Kashmir from the Indian Union, which directly and gravely impinges upon the territorial integrity of India. From the 
elaborate material/evidence placed on record in these proceedings and which has been discussed in the preceding 
paras, this Tribunal thus finds that there is ample justification to uphold the ban on the JKLF-Y and as a corollary, 
upholds the declaration of JKLF-Y as being an unlawful association, under the UA(P)A. Moreover, given the nature 
of activities of the JKLF-Y, the Central Government was justified in taking recourse to the proviso to Section 3 (3) of 
the UA(P)A. As noticed hereinabove, the activities of the concerned association have had a toxic effect on 
maintenance of law and order in the region of Jammu and Kashmir over the last several decades. The measure of 
stability that has come about after 2019 (as is evident from the reduced number of unconducive incidents) cannot be 
allowed to be jeopardized on account of continuing unlawful activities of JKLF-Y. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


255. In the framework of the Indian Constitution and the UA(P)A, there is no space for an association like the 
JKLF-Y which openly propagates secessionism, avowedly express dis-allegiance to the Constitution of India and 
undermines the territorial integrity and sovereignty of India. 


256. Thus, this Tribunal having followed the procedure laid down in the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, 1967 
and its Rules and having independently and objectively appreciated and evaluated the material and evidence on 
record, is of the firm and considered view that there is sufficient cause for declaring the JKLF-Y as an unlawful 
association under Section 3(1) of the UA(P)A, 1967, vide the Notification dated 15" March 2024. Thus, an order is 
passed under Section 4 (3) of the UA(P)A, 1967 confirming the declaration made in the Notification bearing no. S.O. 
1416 (8) published in the official gazette on 1570 March 2024 issued under section 3 (1) of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967. 


(JUSTICE NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA) 
UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL 


September 12", 2024” 


[F. No. 14017/57/2024-NI-MFO] 
ABHIJIT SINHA, Jt. Secy. 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 


GORAKHA 
NATH YADAVA 


