रजिस्ट्री Fe Ste Uer—( WA) 04/0007/2003—26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


JN क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-23032026-271201 
CG-DL-E-23032026-271201 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग ता — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


a 7] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, ard 23, 2026785 2, 1948 (शक) 


No. 7] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, MARCH 23, 2026/CHAITRA 2, 1948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 23rd March, 2026:— 
BILL No. 85 oF 2026 


A Bill further to amend the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 and the Companies 
Act, 2013. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Corporate Laws (Amendment) Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed 
for different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force 
of that provision. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


Amendment of 
section 11. 


Amendment of 
section 13. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


CHAPTER II 


AMENDMENTS TO THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008 


2. In the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (hereafter in this Chapter 
referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, in sub-section (/),— 


(i) after clause (m), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(ma) “International Financial Services Centre” shall have the 
same meaning as assigned to it in clause (g) of sub-section (/) of 
section 3 of the International Financial Services Centres Authority 
Act, 2019; 


(mb) “International Financial Services Centres Authority” means 
the Authority established under sub-section (/) of section 4 of the 
International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019;’; 


(ii) after clause (q), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(qa) “permitted foreign currency” means a currency which may 
be specified by the International Financial Services Centres Authority in 
consultation with the Central Government;’; 


(iii) after clause (ta), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(tb) “Specified International Financial Services Centre LLP” 
means a limited liability partnership which is set up in an International 
Financial Services Centre and regulated by the International Financial 
Services Centres Authority;’. 


3. In section 11 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for clause (c), the following clauses shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“(c) there shall be filed along with the incorporation document, a 
statement in such form, as may be prescribed, by any one person who 
subscribed his name to the incorporation document that all the 
requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder have been 
complied with, in respect of incorporation and matters precedent and 
incidental thereto; 


(d) a declaration in the prescribed form by an advocate, a chartered 
accountant, cost accountant or company secretary in practice, where a 
limited liability partnership engaged such professionals in its formation 
or incorporation.”; 


(6) in sub-section (2), in clause (2), the following proviso shall be 


inserted, namely: — 


“Provided that a Specified International Financial Services Centre 
LLP shall state its objects to undertake financial services activities, as 
permitted under clause (e) of sub-section (/) of section 3 of the 
International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 and any 
matter considered necessary in furtherance thereof, in accordance with 
the regulatory requirements specified by the International Financial 
Services Centres Authority;”. 


4. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that a Specified International Financial Services Centre LLP 


shall have its registered office at an International Financial Services Centre, at 
all times.” 


6 of 2009. 


50 of 2019. 


50 of 2019. 


50 of 2019. 


18 of 2013. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


5. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), the following proviso 


shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘Provided that a Specified International Financial Services Centre LLP 
shall have the suffix “International Financial Services Centre LLP” as part of 
its name.’. 


6. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following proviso 


shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that in case of a class or classes of limited liability 
partnerships regulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India, or by 
the International Financial Services Centres Authority, as may be prescribed, 
the requirement of filing any changes in the limited liability partnership 
agreement shall be such, as may be prescribed.”. 


7. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following proviso 


shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that in case of a class or classes of limited liability 
partnerships regulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India, or by 
the International Financial Services Centres Authority, as may be prescribed, 
there shall be a requirement to furnish the details of such changes to the 
Registrar on an annual basis, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.”. 


8. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following provisos 


shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the monetary value of contribution of each partner of a 
Specified International Financial Services Centre LLP shall be accounted for 
and disclosed in a permitted foreign currency in its accounts: 


Provided further that a limited liability partnership set up in an 
International Financial Services Centre prior to the commencement of the 
Corporate Laws (Amendment) Act, 2026 may convert monetary value of 
contribution of each of its partners from Indian rupee to a permitted foreign 
currency within such period and in such manner, as may be specified by the 
International Financial Services Centres Authority, in consultation with the 
Central Government: 


Provided also that a limited liability partnership referred to in the first 
proviso shall not be permitted after such commencement, to receive or accept 
monetary contribution from any partner, without converting its monetary 
contribution into a permitted foreign currency.”. 


9. After section 33 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


“33A. The provisions of section 247 of the Companies Act, 2013 shall 
mutatis mutandis apply for the valuation, required to be made in respect of 
contribution of a partner of a limited liability partnership, or of any property 
or assets or net worth of such limited liability partnership, or its liabilities 
under the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder.”. 


10. In section 34 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), the following provisos shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that a Specified International Financial Services Centre 
LLP, maintaining its contribution in a permitted foreign currency, shall 
prepare and maintain its books of account, books and papers, financial 
statement and all other records in the permitted foreign currency: 


Amendment of 
section 15. 


Amendment of 
section 23. 


Amendment of 
section 25. 


Amendment of 
section 32. 


Insertion of new 
section 33A. 


Provisions of 
Companies Act, 
2013 to apply 
for valuation. 


Amendment of 
section 34. 


Amendment of 
section 38. 


Insertion of new 
section 57A. 


Conversion from 
specified trust 
into limited 
liability 
partnership. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 58. 


Registration and 
effect of 
conversion. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Provided further that a Specified International Financial Services 
Centre LLP may be permitted to prepare its books of account, books and 
papers, financial statement and other records in Indian rupee, if so 
allowed by the International Financial Services Centres Authority.”; 


(6) in sub-section (5), for the word, brackets and figure 
“sub-section (3)’, the words, brackets and figures “sub-sections (/), (2) and 
(3)” shall be substituted; 


(c) in sub-section (6), the words, brackets and figures “sub-section (/), 
sub-section (2) and” shall be omitted. 


11. In section 38 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (3), the words “or requisition” shall be omitted; 


(6) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(4) Any person who, without lawful excuse, fails to comply with 
any requisition of the Registrar, other than summons, under this section, 
shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees.”. 


12. After section 57 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely: — 


“S7A. A specified trust may convert into a limited liability partnership 
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Fifth Schedule. 


Explanation.—F or the purposes of this section, the term “specified trust” 
means a trust established under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or under a Central 
Act or State Act, and registered by the Securities and Exchange Board of India, 
or by the International Financial Services Centres Authority, as the case may 
be, having such activities as may be prescribed.”. 


13. For section 58 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“58. (1) The Registrar, on satisfying that a firm, private company, 
unlisted public company or a specified trust, as the case may be, has complied 
with the provisions of the Second Schedule, the Third Schedule, the Fourth 
Schedule or the Fifth Schedule, as the case may be, shall, subject to the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, register the documents 
submitted under such Schedule and issue a certificate of registration in such 
form, as the Registrar may determine, stating that the limited liability 
partnership is, on and from the date specified in the certificate, registered 
under this Act: 


Provided that the limited liability partnership shall, within fifteen days 
of the date of registration, inform the concerned Registrar of Firms or 
Registrar of Companies or any other authority, as the case may be, with which 
it was registered or established under the provisions of the Indian Partnership 
Act, 1932 or the Companies Act, 2013, or any other law for the time being in 
force, as the case may be, about the conversion and of the particulars of the 
limited liability partnership in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Upon such conversion, the partners of the firm, the shareholders of 
private company or unlisted public company, or the trustees of the specified 
trust, as the case may be, the limited liability partnership to which such firm 
or such company or such specified trust has converted, and the partners of the 
limited liability partnership, shall be bound by the provisions of the Second 
Schedule, the Third Schedule, the Fourth Schedule or the Fifth Schedule, as 
the case may be, applicable to them. 


2 of 1882. 


9 of 1932. 
18 of 2013. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(3) Upon such conversion, on and from the date of certificate of registration, 
the effects of the conversion shall be such as specified in the Second Schedule, the 
Third Schedule, the Fourth Schedule or the Fifth Schedule, as the case may be. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, on and from the date of registration specified in the certificate 
of registration issued under the Second Schedule, the Third Schedule, the 
Fourth Schedule or the Fifth Schedule, as the case may be,— 


(a) there shall be a limited liability partnership by the name 
specified in the certificate of registration registered under this Act; 


(8) all tangible (movable or immovable) and intangible property 
vested in the firm, the company or the specified trust, as the case may 
be, all assets, interests, rights, privileges, liabilities, obligations relating 
to the firm, the company or the specified trust, as the case may be, and 
the whole of the undertaking of firm, the company or the specified trust, 
as the case may be, shall be transferred to and shall vest in the limited 
liability partnership without further assurance, act or deed; and 


(c) the firm, the company or the specified trust, as the case may be, 
shall be deemed to be dissolved and removed from the records of the 
Registrar of Firms or Registrar of Companies or such other authority, as 
the case may be.”. 


14. In section 68 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), the following provisos 


shall be inserted, namely: — 


“Provided that the Central Government may require that a Specified 
International Financial Services Centre LLP shall use permitted foreign 
currency for the purpose of filing, recording or registering any document under 
this section in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided further that such Specified International Financial Services 
Centre LLP shall pay fees, fines and penalties as provided in the relevant 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder in Indian rupees.”. 


15. After section 68A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely: — 


“68B. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar under section 
12 or section 16, may prefer an appeal to such officer of the Central Government, 
in such form and manner, and within such period, as may be prescribed.”. 


16. In section 76A of the principal Act,— 


(a) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(IA) A limited liability partnership or its partner or designated 
partner may make an application in such form and manner and on 
payment of such fees, as may be prescribed, under this section for 
adjudication of penalty.”; 

(6) after sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(10) On and from the commencement of the Corporate Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 2026, where a provision in respect of any offence 
provided in this Act has been amended to provide for adjudication under 
this section,— 


(a) the manner of withdrawal of the complaint; and 


(6) the manner of transfer of such matter for adjudication 
under this section, 


Amendment of 
section 68. 


Insertion of new 
section 68B. 


Appeal against 
decision of 
Registrar. 


Amendment of 
section 76A. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


in respect of such offence, whether pending in the Court or otherwise, 
shall be dealt with in accordance with such Scheme as the Central 
Government may notify in this behalf.”. 


Insertion of new 17. After the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule 
Huh उलीलेएप shall be inserted, namely:— 


“THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 57A) 
CONVERSION FROM SPECIFIED TRUST INTO LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP 
1. Interpretation —In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “convert”, in relation to a specified trust converting into a limited 
liability partnership, means a transfer of the property, assets, interests, rights, 
privileges, liabilities, obligations and the undertaking of the specified trust 
to the limited liability partnership in accordance with this Schedule; 


(5) “investor” means an investor to the funds of the specified trust 
in accordance with the relevant regulations made by the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India, or by the International Financial Services 
Centres Authority, as the case may be; and 


(c) “specified trust” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the 
Explanation to section 57A. 


2. Conversion from specified trust into limited liability partnership.— 
(1) A specified trust may convert into a limited liability partnership by 
complying with the requirements as to the conversion set out in this Schedule. 


(2) Upon such conversion, the trustees of the specified trust shall be 
bound by the provisions of this Schedule that are applicable to them. 


3. Eligibility for conversion.—A specified trust may apply to convert 
into a limited liability partnership in accordance with this Schedule, only if the 
partners of the limited liability partnership into which the specified trust is to 
be converted, are trustees of such specified trust and no one else. 


4. Statements to be filed—A specified trust may apply to convert into a 
limited liability partnership by filing with the Registrar,— 


(a) a statement by all of its trustees in such form and manner and 
accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed, containing the 
following particulars, namely:— 


(i) the name and registration number, if applicable, of the 
specified trust; 


(ii) the date on which the specified trust was established 
under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882) or under a Central 
Act or State Act; 


(iii) the date on which the specified trust was registered with 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India, or by the International 
Financial Services Centres Authority, as the case may be, in terms 
of the relevant regulations issued in this regard; and 


(iv) the consent of three-fourths of the investors of the trust; and 
(b) the incorporation document and statement referred to in section 11. 


5. Registration of conversion.—On receiving the documents referred to 
in paragraph 4, the Registrar shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, register 
the documents and issue a certificate of registration in such form, as the 
Registrar may determine, stating that the limited liability partnership is, on 
and from the date specified in the certificate, registered under this Act: 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


Provided that the limited liability partnership shall, within fifteen days 
of the date of registration, inform, the concerned authority with which 
specified trust was established under the provisions of the Indian Trusts 
Act, 1882 (2 of 1882) or under a Central Act or State Act, about the conversion 
and of the particulars of the limited liability partnership in such form and 
manner, as may be prescribed. 


6. Registrar may refuse to register —(/) Nothing in this Schedule shall 
be construed as to require the Registrar to register any limited liability 
partnership, if he is not satisfied with the particulars or other information 
furnished under the provisions of this Act: 


Provided that an appeal may be made before the Tribunal in case of 
refusal of registration by the Registrar. 


(2) The Registrar may, in any particular case, require the documents 
referred to in paragraph 4 to be verified in such manner, as he considers fit. 


7. Effect of registration.—On and from the date of registration specified 
in the certificate of registration issued under paragraph 5,— 


(a) there shall be a limited liability partnership by the name 
specified in the certificate of registration registered under this Act; 


(6) all tangible (movable and immovable) property as well as 
intangible property vested in the specified trust, all assets, interests, 
rights, privileges, liabilities, obligations relating to the specified trust 
and the whole of the undertaking of the specified trust shall be 
transferred to and shall vest in the limited liability partnership without 
further assurance, act or deed; and 


(c) the specified trust shall be deemed to be dissolved. 


8. Registration in relation to property.—If any property to which 
sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph 7 applies is registered with any authority, the 
limited liability partnership shall, as soon as practicable after the date of 
registration, take all necessary steps as required by the relevant authority to 
notify the authority of the conversion and of the particulars of the limited 
liability partnership in such medium and form, as the authority may specify. 


9. Pending proceedings —All proceedings by or against the specified trust 
or its trustee, on behalf of the specified trust, which are pending in any Court or 
Tribunal or before any authority on the date of registration may be continued, 
completed and enforced by or against the limited liability partnership. 


10. Continuance of conviction, ruling, order or judgment—Any 
conviction, ruling, order or judgment of any Court, Tribunal, or other authority, 
in favour of or against the specified trust, or its trustees, acting on behalf of the 
specified trust may be enforced by or against the limited liability partnership. 


11. Existing agreements——Every agreement, to which the specified trust 
was a party immediately before the date of registration, whether or not of such 
nature that the rights and liabilities thereunder could be assigned, shall have 
effect as from that date, as if— 


(a) the limited liability partnership were a party to such an 
agreement instead of the specified trust; and 


(6) for any reference to the specified trust, there were substituted 
in respect of anything to be done on or after the date of registration a 
reference to the limited liability partnership. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


12. Existing contracts, etc-—All deeds, contracts, schemes, bonds, 
agreements, applications, instruments and arrangements, subsisting 
immediately before the date of registration relating to the specified trust or to 
which the specified trust is a party, shall continue in force on and after that date 
as if they relate to the limited liability partnership and shall be enforceable by or 
against the limited liability partnership, as if the limited liability partnership 
were named therein or were a party thereto instead of the specified trust. 


13. Continuance of employment.—Every contract of employment to 
which paragraph 11 or paragraph 12 applies, shall continue to be in force on 
or after the date of registration, as if the limited liability partnership were the 
employer thereunder instead of the specified trust. 


14. Existing appointment, authority or power.—(/) Every appointment 
of the specified trust or its trustee in any role or capacity, which is in force 
immediately before the date of registration, shall take effect and operate from 
that date as if the limited liability partnership were appointed. 


(2) Any authority or power conferred on the specified trust or its trustee, 
which is in force immediately before the date of registration, shall take effect and 
operate from that date as if it were conferred on the limited liability partnership. 


15. Application of paragraphs 7 to 14.—The provisions of paragraphs 7 
to 14 (both inclusive) shall apply to any approval, permit or licence issued to 
the specified trust under any other Act, which is in force immediately before 
the date of registration of the limited liability partnership, subject to the 
provisions of such other Act under which such approval, permit or licence has 
been issued. 


16. Partner liable for liabilities and obligations of specified trust before 
conversion.—(/) Notwithstanding anything in paragraphs 7 to 14, every 
trustee of a specified trust that has converted into a limited liability 
partnership, shall continue to be personally liable (jointly and severally with 
the limited liability partnership) for the liabilities and obligations of the 
specified trust which were incurred prior to the conversion or which arose 
from any contract entered into prior to the conversion. 


(2) If any such trustee discharges any liability or obligation referred to 
in sub-paragraph (/), he shall be entitled (subject to any agreement with the 
limited liability partnership to the contrary) to be fully indemnified by the 
limited liability partnership in respect of such liability or obligation. 


17. Notice of conversion in correspondence.—(/) The limited liability 
partnership shall ensure that for a period of twelve months commencing not later 
than fourteen days after the date of registration, every official correspondence of 
the limited liability partnership bears the following, namely:-— 


(a) a statement that it was, as from the date of registration, 
converted from a specified trust into a limited liability partnership; and 


(6) the name and registration number, if applicable, of the specified 
trust, from which it was converted. 

(2) Any limited liability partnership which contravenes the provisions of 
sub-paragraph (/) shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten 
thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees and with a further fine 
which shall not be less than fifty rupees but which may extend to five hundred 
rupees for every day after the first day after which the default continues. ’. 


CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013 
18. In the Companies Act, 2013 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the 


principal Act), in section 2,— 


18 of 2013. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(7) in clause (28), for the words “the Cost and Works Accountants”, the 
words “the Cost Accountants” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (41), after the third proviso, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“Provided also that the Central Government may, on an application 
made in such form and manner as may be prescribed, by a company or 
body corporate referred to in the first proviso or, on commercial 
considerations, by any other company or body corporate, allow the 
company or body corporate to realign its financial year as the period 
ending on the 31st day of March of the following year;”; 


(iii) after clause (73), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(73A) “Regional Director” means a person appointed by the 
Central Government as a Regional Director for the purposes of this Act 
and includes an Additional Regional Director or a Joint Regional 
Director or a Deputy Regional Director under section 396;’; 


(iv) after clause (74), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(74A) “registered valuer” means a person who holds a certificate 
of registration granted under section 247;’; 


(v) in clause (85),— 


(a) in sub-clause (7), for the words “ten crore rupees”, the words 
“twenty crore rupees” shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-clause (ii), for the words “one hundred crore rupees”, 
the words “two hundred crore rupees” shall be substituted. 


19. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), in clause (४7), in 
sub-clause (a), for the words “which may extend to one lakh rupees”, the words 
“of fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 


20. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for clause (b), the 
following clauses shall be substituted, namely: — 


“(b) a declaration in the prescribed form by a person named in the articles 
as a director, manager or secretary of the company, that all the requirements of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder in respect of registration and matters 
precedent or incidental thereto have been complied with; 


(ba) a declaration in the prescribed form by an advocate, a chartered 
accountant, cost accountant or company secretary in practice, where a 
company engaged such professionals in its formation or incorporation;”. 


21. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


“12A, (1) The class or classes of companies, as may be prescribed, shall 
maintain a website, an e-mail address and other modes of communication in 
such form and manner, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The details of website, e-mail address and other modes of communication 
referred to in sub-section (/) and the changes, if any, therein, shall be intimated to 
the Registrar in such form and within such period, as may be prescribed.”. 


22. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the proviso, the 
following provisos shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Provided that the service of such class of documents by such class or 
classes of companies, as may be prescribed, to its members, shall take place only 
through electronic mode, in such manner as may be prescribed, and such service 
shall be deemed to be sufficient compliance for the purposes of this Act: 


Amendment of 
section 4. 


Amendment of 
section 7. 


Insertion of new 
section 12A. 


Certain class or 
classes of 
companies to 
maintain modes 
of 
communication 
and provide 
particulars. 


Amendment of 
section 20. 


Amendment of 
section 24. 


Amendment of 
section 26. 


Amendment of 
section 40. 


Amendment of 
section 42. 


Insertion of new 


section 43A. 


Share capital of 
company under 
International 
Financial 
Services Centre. 


10 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Provided further that a member may request for delivery of any 
document through a particular mode, for which he shall pay such fee as may 
be determined by the company in its general meeting.” 


23. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words, brackets 


and figures “and the matters delegated to it under proviso to sub-section (/) of 
section 458” shall be omitted. 


24. In section 26 of the principal Act, for sub-section (9), the following 


sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(9) If a prospectus is issued in contravention of the provisions of this 
section, the company and every person who is knowingly a party to the issue 
of such prospectus shall be liable to a penalty of two lakh rupees.”. 


25. In section 40 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (5), for the words “this section”, the word, brackets 
and figure “sub-section (3)” shall be substituted; 


(6) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(5A) If a default is made in complying with the provisions of this 
section, other than sub-section (3), the company shall be liable to a 
penalty of twenty-five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who 
is in default shall be liable to a penalty of two lakh rupees.”. 


26. In section 42 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “shares”, the word “securities” 
shall be substituted; 


(5) in sub-section (2), after the words “employees stock option”, the 
words “or such other scheme linked to the value of the share capital of a 
company,” shall be inserted; 


(c) in sub-section (/0), for the words “which may extend to”, the words 
“equivalent to” shall be substituted. 


27. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


‘43A. (1) A company, set up and incorporated in the International 
Financial Services Centre, shall issue and maintain its share capital in a 
permitted foreign currency: 


Provided that a company set up and incorporated in the International 
Financial Services Centre prior to the commencement of the Corporate Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 2026 may convert its share capital from Indian rupee to a 
permitted foreign currency within such period and in such manner, as may be 
specified by regulations by the International Financial Services Centres 
Authority, in consultation with the Central Government: 


Provided further that a company referred to in the first proviso shall not 
be permitted, after the commencement of the Corporate Laws (Amendment) 
Act, 2026, to issue any share capital without converting its share capital into 
a permitted foreign currency. 


(2) A company referred to in sub-section (/), maintaining its share 
capital in a permitted foreign currency shall prepare and maintain its books of 
account, and other relevant books and papers, financial statements and all 
other records in the permitted foreign currency: 


Provided that if the International Financial Services Centres Authority 
permits, such company may present such books of account and other relevant 
books and papers, financial statements and other records in Indian rupee. 


50 of 2019. 


50 of 2019. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


(3) The Central Government may, in such manner as may be prescribed, 


require that a company referred to in sub-section (/) shall use permitted 
foreign currency for the purpose of filing, submitting or delivering any 
documents under section 398. 


(4) Every company referred to in sub-section (/) shall pay fees, fines and 


penalties under this Act and the rules made thereunder in Indian rupees. 


(5) In this section, the expressions— 


(a) “International Financial Services Centre” shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it under clause (g) of sub-section (/) of 
section 3 of the International Financial Services Centres Authority 
Act, 2019; 


(0) “International Financial Services Centres Authority” shall have 
the same meaning as assigned to it under clause (8) of sub-section (/) of 
section 3 of the International Financial Services Centres Authority 
Act, 2019; and 


(c) “permitted foreign currency” means a currency which may be 
specified by the International Financial Services Centres Authority in 
consultation with the Central Government.’. 


28. In section 62 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in clause (0), after the 


words “under a scheme of employees’ stock option’, the words “or under such other 
scheme linked to the value of the share capital of the company” shall be inserted. 


29. In section 68 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2),— 


(i) in clause (2), for the proviso, the following provisos shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“Provided that in case of such class or classes of companies, as 
may be prescribed, the buy-back may be up to such per cent. of 
aggregate of paid-up capital and free reserves, as may be prescribed: 


Provided further that in respect of the buy-back of equity 
shares in any financial year, the reference to twenty-five per cent. 
or such other per cent., as the case may be, in this clause shall be 
construed with respect to its total paid-up equity capital in that 
financial year;”; 


(ii) in clause (g), after the existing proviso, the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided further that such class or classes of 
companies, as may be prescribed, may make up to two offers of 
buy-backs within a period of one year reckoned from the date of 
the closure of the preceding offer of buy-back, if any, if the 
second buy-back during the year is not made earlier than six 
months from the date of closure of the preceding offer for 
buy-back during the year.”; 


(0) in sub-section (5), in clause (c), after the words “sweat equity”, the 


words, brackets, letter and figures “, or a scheme linked to the value of the 
share capital of a company referred to in clause (0) of sub-section (/) of 
section 62” shall be inserted; 


(c) in sub-section (6), the words “and verified by an affidavit” shall be 


omitted; 


Amendment of 
section 62. 


Amendment of 
section 68. 


Amendment of 
section 77. 


Amendment of 
section 88. 


Amendment of 
section 96. 


Amendment of 
section 99. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(d) in sub-section (8), after the words “sweat equity”, the words, 
brackets, letter and figures “, or a scheme linked to the value of the share 
capital of a company referred to in clause (5) of sub-section (/) of section 62,” 
shall be inserted; 


(e) in sub-section (//),— 


(i) for the words “the company shall be punishable with fine which 
shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to three lakh 
rupees”, the words “it shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five lakh 
rupees if it is a listed company and two lakh rupees in case it is any other 
company” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words “who is in default shall be punishable with fine 
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to 
three lakh rupees”, the words, brackets and letters— 


“who is in default shall— 


(a) be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees in case of 
a listed company; and 


(5) be liable to a penalty of two lakh rupees in case of 
any other company” 


shall be substituted; 


(f) in Explanation I, after the words “employees’ stock option”, the 
words, brackets, letter and figures “, or any option under a scheme linked to 
the value of the share capital of a company referred to in clause (5) of 
sub-section (/) of section 62,” shall be inserted. 


30. In section 77 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the second 


proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘Provided also that for such class or classes of companies, as may be 
prescribed, the period of “sixty days” referred to in clause (9) of the second 


29,9 


proviso shall be read as “one hundred and twenty days”: 


31. In section 88 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(2A) No notice of any trust, whether express, implied or constructive, 
shall be entered in the register of members or debenture holders maintained 
under sub-section (/).”. 


32. In section 96 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(3) A company may hold its annual general meeting physically, or 
through video conferencing or other audio-visual means, either wholly or 
partly, in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions, as may 
be prescribed: 


Provided that if the number of members referred to in sub-section (2) of 
section 100 requisition the meeting to be held in a hybrid mode, the company 
shall hold the meeting in such mode: 


Provided further that every company shall hold its annual general 
meeting in physical mode at least once in every three years.”. 


33. In section 99 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the words and figures “Punishment for 
default in complying with provisions of sections 96 to 98”, the words and 
figures “Penalty for default in complying with provisions of section 96” shall 
be substituted; 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


(6) the words and figures “or section 97 or section 98 or in complying 
with any directions of the Tribunal” shall be omitted; 


(c) for the words “punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees and in the case of a continuing default, with a further fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such default 
continues”, the words “liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of 
continuing default, with a further penalty of five thousand rupees for each day 
during which such default continues, subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees 
in case of a company and fifty thousand rupees in case of an officer who is in 
default” shall be substituted. 


34. In section 100 of the principal Act, after sub-section (6), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(7) A company may hold its extraordinary general meeting physically, or 
through video conferencing or other audio-visual means, either wholly or partly, 
in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed: 


Provided that if the number of members referred to in sub-section (2) 
requisition the meeting to be held in a hybrid mode, the company shall hold 
the meeting in such mode.”. 


35. In section 101 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(a) in the proviso, for the words “Provided that”, the following words 
shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Provided that the extraordinary general meetings conducted 
wholly through video conferencing or audio-visual means under 
sub-section (7) of section 100, may be called by giving a notice of not 
less than seven days, or such other period, and in such manner, as may 
be prescribed: 


Provided further that”; 


(5) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further”, the words 
“Provided also” shall be substituted. 


36. In section 124 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (5), after the words “seven years from the date of such 
transfer”, the words, brackets and figure “, along with any dividend which has 
not been paid or claimed where such shares have been transferred by the 
company under sub-section (6),” shall be inserted; 


(5) in sub-section (6),— 
(i) after the word “Fund”, the word “Authority” shall be inserted; 


(ii) in the proviso, after the word “Fund”, the word “Authority” 
shall be inserted; 


(iii) in the Explanation, after the word “Fund”, the word 
“Authority” shall be inserted. 


37. In section 125 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (2),— 


(i) in clause (m), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be 
omitted; 


(ii) after clause (m), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ma) the amount in respect of shares bought back and 
extinguished, remaining unpaid or unclaimed for seven or more 
years; and”; 


Amendment of 
section 100. 


Amendment of 
section 101. 


Amendment of 
section 124. 


Amendment of 
section 125. 


Amendment of 
section 128. 


Amendment of 
section 131. 


Amendment of 
section 132. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(6) in sub-section (3), for clause (a), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“(a) the refund in respect of unclaimed dividends and amounts 
referred to in clauses (/) to (n) of sub-section (2), which is due for refund;”; 


(c) in sub-section (4), for the words, brackets and figure “may apply to 
the authority constituted under sub-section (5)”, the words “may apply, in 
accordance with such procedure and on submission of such documents, as may 
be prescribed” shall be substituted; 


(d) after sub-section (//), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(12) The authority may, by notification, delegate to any member, 
officer or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as may be 
specified in such notification, any of its powers and functions under this 
Act as it deems necessary.”. 


38. In section 128 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6),— 


(a) for the words “be punishable with fine which shall not be less than 
fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees”, the words 
“be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees in case of a listed company and fifty 
thousand rupees in case of any other company” shall be substituted; 


(6) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that where the contravention relates to sub-section (/) 
or sub-section (5), the person referred to in this sub-section shall be 
liable to a penalty of twenty lakh rupees in case of a listed company and 
five lakh rupees in case of any other company.”. 


39. In section 131 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in the long line, for 


the words “three preceding financial years”, the words “three immediately 
preceding financial years” shall be substituted. 


40. In section 132 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (1A), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(1A) The National Financial Reporting Authority shall be a body 
corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and 
to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.”; 


(5) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), after the words “class of companies”, 
the words “or bodies corporate” shall be inserted; 


(c) sub-section (3A) shall be omitted; 


(d) after sub-section (3B), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(3C) Save as otherwise provided, the Chairperson shall have the 
powers of general superintendence and direction of the affairs of the 
National Financial Reporting Authority and may exercise all powers and 
do all acts and things as may be delegated to him by the executive body. 


(3D) The executive body may, by general or special order in 
writing, delegate to the Chairperson or any full-time Member or officer 
of the National Financial Reporting Authority, or to a Committee 
comprising of one or more of the above, subject to such conditions, if 
any, as may be specified in the order, such powers of the executive body 
under this Act as may be deemed necessary.”’; 


38 of 1949. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


(e) in sub-section (4),— 


(i) in clause (a), for the words “in such manner as may be 
prescribed”, the words “, as may be prescribed, and in such manner as 
may be specified by regulations by the said Authority” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) in clause (c),— 


(J) in the opening portion, after the words “have the power to 
make order for”, the words “one or more of the following, 
namely:—’” shall be inserted; 


(77) after sub-clause (B), the following sub-clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(C) issuing an advisory, censure or warning to the 
member or the firm; 


(D) requiring additional professional training of the 
member or individual partners or employees of the firm; 


(£) referring the matter to the Central Government for 
taking action under the provisions of this Act or rules made 
thereunder.”; 


(iii) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


‘Explanation —For the purposes of this sub-section, the 
expression “professional or other misconduct” shall include the 
meaning assigned to it under section 22 of the Chartered 
Accountants Act, 1949, and shall further include such acts or 
omissions which constitute a contravention of the provisions of 
this Act, or the rules or regulations made thereunder, in so far as 
such provisions relate to matters within the jurisdiction, functions, 
or regulatory remit of the National Financial Reporting 
Authority.’; 


(f) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
amely:— 


“(4A) Any person who fails to comply with any order of the 
National Financial Reporting Authority under sub-section (4), or who 
fails to pay the penalty imposed under clause (c) of the said sub-section, 
within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of the order, or 
within such other period as stated in the order, shall,— 


(a) where the person against whom penalty has been 
imposed, fails to pay the penalty, without prejudice to the penalty 
that such person is liable to pay, be punishable— 


(7) with imprisonment which may extend to six months 
or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but 
which may extend to five lakh rupees, if such person is an 
individual; or 

(ii) with fine which shall not be less than five lakh 


rupees but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees, if 
such person is a firm; and 


(0) be liable for debarment under sub-clause (8) of clause (८) 
of sub-section (4) for such further period as the National Financial 
Reporting Authority may consider appropriate.”’; 


Insertion of new 
sections 132A, 
132B, 132C, 
132D, 132E, 
132F, 132G, 
132H, 132-1, 
132J and 132K. 


Intimation of 
registration 
details of 
auditors and 
filing of returns. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(g) in sub-section (/0), for the word “prescribed”, the words “specified 
by regulations by the said Authority” shall be substituted; 


(A) in sub-section (J 1),— 


(i) for the words “The Central Government”, the words “The 
National Financial Reporting Authority” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words “of functions by the National Financial Reporting 
Authority under this Act and the”, the words “of its functions under this 
Act and the salary, allowances and other” shall be substituted; 


(iii) for the word “prescribed”, the words “specified by regulations 
by the said Authority” shall be substituted; 


(i) after sub-section (/5), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(16) No act or proceeding of the National Financial Reporting 
Authority shall be invalid merely by the reason of— 


(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of such 
Authority; or 


(6) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a 
member of such Authority; or 


(c) any irregularity in the procedure of such Authority not 
affecting the merits of the case. 


(17) The National Financial Reporting Authority may, in such manner 
as may be specified by regulations, engage such number of experts and 
professionals who have special knowledge of, and experience in, accounting 
standards, auditing standards, economics, law, business or such other 
disciplines related to its functions, as it deems necessary to assist the said 
Authority in the discharge of its functions under this 0०.7, 


41. After section 132 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“132A. (J) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification, specify in this behalf, no individual or firm shall be appointed 
as auditor under section 139 in respect of companies or class of companies or 
bodies corporate referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 132, 
unless the individual or firm intimates the details of his or its registration with 
the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, to the National Financial 
Reporting Authority within such time, in such manner and along with such 
fees, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The auditors of companies or class of companies or bodies corporate 
referred to in sub-section (/), shall file such documents or returns or 
information with the National Financial Reporting Authority, in such form and 
manner, within such period, and on payment of such fees, as may be specified 
by regulations by the said Authority. 


(3) A person, required to furnish any document or return or any other 
information under sub-section (2), who fails to furnish any document or return 
or any other information, shall be liable to penalty of not less than twenty-five 
thousand rupees, but which may extend to five hundred rupees for each day 
during which such default continues, subject to a maximum of twenty-five 
lakh rupees, if such person is an auditor or an audit firm. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


(4) If any person, while fulfilling his obligations under this section,— 


(a) makes a statement or furnishes any document or return or any 
other information which he knows or has reason to believe to be false in 
any material particular; or 


(8) omits to state any material facts or particulars knowing them to 
be material; or 


(c) wilfully alters, suppresses or destroys any document, return or 
information, which is required to be furnished, 


then, without prejudice to any other action which may be taken under any law 
for the time being in force, such person shall be liable to a penalty of not less 
than fifty thousand rupees, but which may extend to one thousand rupees for 
each day during which such default continues, subject to a maximum of fifty 
lakh rupees, if such person is an auditor or an audit firm. 


132B. (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the National Financial Reporting 
Authority, grants of such sums of money as the Central Government may think 
fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 


(2) There shall be constituted a Fund, to be called the National Financial 
Reporting Authority Fund, wherein the following shall be credited, namely:— 


(a) grants made by the Central Government for the purposes of the 
National Financial Reporting Authority Fund; 


(b) all fees received by the said Authority under this Act; 


(c) all sums received by the said Authority from such other sources 
as may be decided by the Central Government; and 


(d) interest or other income received out of the investments made 
from the National Financial Reporting Authority Fund. 


(3) The Fund shall be applied for meeting the expenses of the National 
Financial Reporting Authority for the discharge of its functions and for the 
purposes of this Act and for such other purposes, as may be prescribed. 


132C. (/) In exercise of its functions under this Act, where the National 
Financial Reporting Authority is satisfied that it is necessary in public interest 
or the interest of investors or creditors or other persons concemed, it may give 
such directions to auditors of companies, class of companies or bodies 
corporate referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 132, as it may 
consider appropriate. 


(2) Whoever fails to comply with any direction given under 
sub-section (/), shall be liable to a penalty of not less than fifty thousand 
rupees but which may extend to one thousand rupees for each day during 
which such default continues, subject to a maximum of fifty lakh rupees in 
case of an auditor, or one crore rupees in case of an audit firm. 


132D. (J) The National Financial Reporting Authority may, after 
holding inquiry, in such manner as may be prescribed and after giving a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, impose such penalty under 
sub-section (4) of section 132A or sub-section (2) of section 132C, as it may 
consider appropriate. 


(2) While holding an inquiry, the National Financial Reporting Authority 
shall have power to summon and enforce the attendance of any person 
acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to 


Fund of 
Authority. 


Power of 
Authority to 
issue directions. 


Power of 
Authority to 
impose penalty. 


Civil courts not 
to have 
jurisdiction. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
give directions 
to Authority. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
supersede 
Authority. 


18 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


produce any document, which in the opinion of the said Authority, may be 
useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, 
it is satisfied that the person has failed to comply with the provisions of any of 
the sections specified in sub-section (/), it may impose such penalty as it 
considers appropriate in accordance with the provisions of any of those sections. 


(3) The amount of any penalty imposed under this section, if not paid, may 
be recovered by the National Financial Reporting Authority, in such manner as 
may be prescribed, as if it were an arrear of land revenue. 


(4) All sums realised by way of penalties under this section shall be 
credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. 


(5) Any person aggrieved by an order of the National Financial Reporting 
Authority under this section may prefer an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal 
within a period of forty-five days from the date on which a copy of the order of 
said Authority is made available, in such manner and on payment of such fee, 
as may be prescribed. 


132E. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter which the National Financial Reporting 
Authority is empowered to determine by or under this Act and no injunction 
shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or 
to be taken by the said Authority in pursuance of any power conferred by or 
under this Act. 


132F. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or the National Financial Reporting Authority or the 
chairperson or any member or any officer or other employee of Authority for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or 
the rules or regulations made thereunder. 


132G. Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the National 
Financial Reporting Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance 
of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of 
policy, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time: 


Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an 
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this section: 


Provided further that the decision of the Central Government, on whether 
a question is one of policy or not, shall be final. 


132H. (1) If at any time, the Central Government is of the opinion— 


(a) that on account of grave emergency, the National Financial 
Reporting Authority is unable to discharge the functions and duties 
imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or 


(b) that the National Financial Reporting Authority has persistently 
not complied with any direction given by the Central Government under 
this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act, and as a result of such non-compliance, 
the financial position or the administration of such Authority has 
deteriorated; or 


(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public 
interest so to do, 


the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the National Financial 
Reporting Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be 
specified in the notification. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (J) 
superseding the National Financial Reporting Authority,— 


(a) the Chairperson and all the members shall, as from the date of 
supersession, vacate their offices as such; 


(0) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the 
provisions of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the 
National Financial Reporting Authority shall, until the said Authority is 
reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by such 
person or persons as the Central Government may direct; and 


(c) all properties owned or controlled by the National Financial 
Reporting Authority shall, until the said Authority is reconstituted under 
sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government. 


(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the 
notification issued under sub-section (/), the Central Government may 
reconstitute the National Financial Reporting Authority by a fresh appointment, 
and in such case, any person or persons who vacated their offices under 
clause (a) of the said sub-section, shall not be deemed disqualified for 
appointment: 


Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the 
expiration of the period of supersession, take action under this sub-section. 


(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under 
sub-section (/) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the 
circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament 
at the earliest. 


132-I. (/) For the purposes of carrying out its functions under this Act, the 
National Financial Reporting Authority may levy such fees or other charges as 
may be specified by it by regulations, on the auditors of companies or class of 
companies or bodies corporate referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (4) of 
section 132. 


(2) The payment of such fees or other charges shall be in such manner as 
may be specified by regulations by the National Financial Reporting Authority. 


132J. (J) The National Financial Reporting Authority may, by 
notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, for carrying out its functions under this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
powers, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 


(a) the manner of investigation under clause (a) of sub-section (4) 
of section 132; 


(b) the place and time of meetings of the Authority and 
the procedure to be followed at such meetings under 
sub-section (/0) of section 132; 


(c) the manner of appointment, salary, allowances and other terms 
and conditions of service of the secretary and employees of the Authority 
under sub-section (//) of section 132; 


(d) the manner of engagement of experts and professionals under 
sub-section (/7) of section 132; 


(e) the documents, returns, or information, and the form, manner, 
period, and fees for filing the same under sub-section (2) of section 132A; 


Levy of fees or 
other charges by 
Authority. 


Power of 
Authority to 
make 
regulations. 


Transparency in 
making 
regulations. 


Amendment of 
section 134. 


Amendment of 
section 135. 


20 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(f) the manner of recovery of the amount of penalty under 
sub-section (3) of section 132D; and 


(g) the fees or other charges and the manner of payment thereof 
under section 132-I. 


(3) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the regulation, or both Houses agree that the 
regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that regulation. 


132K. The Authority shall, prior to issuing regulations under section 132J, 
ensure transparency by— 


(a) publishing the draft regulations along with all relevant details on 
its website and inviting public comments for such period as may be 
specified therein; and 


(b) reviewing such regulations at least once in three years: 


Provided that if the Authority is of the opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient to make, or amend, any regulations urgently in public interest, or 
where the subject matter of the regulations relates solely to the internal 
functioning of the Authority, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing for 
doing so, make or amend such regulations without following the procedure 
specified in clauses (a).”. 


42. In section 134 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),— 
(z) after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(fa) explanations or comments by the Board on every observation 
or comment of the auditors on financial transactions or matters which have 
any adverse effect on the functioning of the company under clause () of 
sub-section (3) of section 143 and any qualification, reservation or adverse 
remark relating to the maintenance of accounts and other matters 
connected therewith under clause (/) of the said sub-section in such form, 
as may be prescribed.” 


(ii) after clause (9), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(pa) composition of the Audit Committee and where the Board had 
not accepted any recommendation of the Audit Committee, a statement 
along with the reasons therefor;”. 


43. In section 135 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “five crore’, the words “‘ten crore, or 
such sum as may be prescribed” shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (6),— 


(7) for the words, brackets and figure “amount remaining unspent 
under sub-section (5)”, the words, brackets and figure “unspent amount 
under sub-section (5)” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words, “company within a period of thirty days’, the 
words “company within a period of ninety days” shall be substituted; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


(c) in sub-section (9), for the words “fifty lakh rupees”, the words 
“one crore rupees or such higher amount as may be prescribed” shall be 
substituted; 


(d) after sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(10) Such class or classes of companies which fulfil such 
conditions, as may be prescribed, shall not be required to comply with the 
provisions of this section.” 


44. In section 139 of the principal Act, after sub-section (//), the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(12) Such class or classes of companies which fulfil such 
conditions as may be prescribed shall not be required to appoint auditors under 
this Chapter.” 


45. In section 141 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the proviso, the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided further that every partner of the firm shall be a person who has 
been registered with a statutory institute or body established under a law in India 
having powers of such registration.” 


46. In section 144 of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the words “Provided 
1197, the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Provided that an auditor or audit firm of such class or classes of 
companies, as may be prescribed, shall not provide, directly or indirectly, any 
non-audit services to the company or its holding company or subsidiary: 


Provided further that the restriction under this section shall also apply for 
a period of three years after the auditor or audit firm has completed his or its 
term under sub-section (2) of section 139: 


Provided also that”. 
47. In section 147 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that in case of contravention of the provisions of 
sub-sections (/), (5) to (8) and (//) of section 139, sub-section (4) 
of section 140, sub-section (4) of section 141, sub-sections (/) and (2) of 
section 142 and section 146, the company shall be liable to a 
penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further 
penalty of five hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which 
such failure continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees 
and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a 
penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing 
failure, with a further penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, after 
the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of one 
lakh rupees.”; 


(0) in sub-section (2), for the words and figures “section 139, section 144 
or section 145”, the words, figures and brackets “section 139, section 143 [other 
than sub-section (/2)], section 144, section 145 or section 146” shall 
be substituted. 


Amendment of 
section 139. 


Amendment of 
section 141. 


Amendment of 
section 144. 


Amendment of 
section 147. 


Amendment of 
section 148. 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


48. In section 148 of the principal Act,— 


(a) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


“(1A) The Central Government may provide for such standards, as 
may be prescribed, of cost accounting or any addendum thereto, after 
examination of recommendations of the Institute of Cost Accountants of 
India, constituted under the Cost Accountants Act, 1959.”; 


(5) in sub-section (3),— 


(i) in the proviso, for the words “Provided that”, the following shall 
be substituted, namely:— 


“Provided that a firm whereof majority of partners practising 
in India who are qualified for appointment, may be appointed by 
its firm name to be the cost auditor of a company: 


Provided further that every partner of the firm shall be a 
person who is registered with a statutory institute or body 
established under a law in India, having powers of such 
registration: 


Provided also that”; 


(ii) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further”, the 
words “Provided also” shall be substituted; 


(iii) in the Explanation, for the words “the Cost and Works 
Accountants”, the words “the Cost Accountants” shall be substituted; 


(c) for sub-section (8), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


“(8) If the managing director, the whole-time director in charge of 
finance, the Chief Financial Officer or any other person of a company 
charged by the Board with duty of complying with the provisions of 
sub-section (/), contravenes such provisions, such managing director, 
whole-time director in charge of finance, Chief Financial Officer or such 
other person of the company, shall be liable to a penalty of five lakh 
rupees in case of a listed company and fifty thousand rupees in case of 
any other company. 


(9) If any default is made in complying with the provisions of 
sub-section (3) relating to appointment of Cost Accountant by the Board 
on such remuneration as may be determined by the members, or 
sub-section (6) or sub-section (7), the company shall be liable to a 
penalty of ten thousand rupees and in case of continuing default, with a 
further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day during which such 
failure continues, subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees and every 
officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of 
ten thousand rupees and in case of continuing default, with a further 
penalty of one hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which 
such default continues, subject to a maximum of fifty thousand rupees. 


(10) If any default is made in complying with provisions of this 
section, other than those referred to in sub-sections (8) and (9),— 


(a) the company and every officer of the company who is in 
default shall be punishable in the manner as provided in 
sub-section (/) of section 147; and 


23 of 1959. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


(5) the cost auditor of the company who is in default shall be 
punishable in the manner as provided in sub-sections (2) to (4) of 
the said section.”. 


49. In section 149 of the principal Act,— 
(४) in sub-section (6), in clause (e),— 


(a) in sub-clause (7), after the words “preceding the financial year”, 
the words “or during the current financial year” shall be inserted; 


(b) in sub-clause (ii),— 


(7) in the opening portion, after the words “preceding the 
financial year’, the words “or during the current financial year” 
shall be inserted; 


(ii) in item (A), for the words “company secretaries in 
practice”, the words “secretarial auditors” shall be substituted; 


(iii) in item (B), for the words “amounting to ten per cent. or 
more”, the words “amounting to ten per cent. or such lower 
per cent., as may be prescribed” shall be substituted; 


(ii) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(6A) Every independent director shall ensure that he continues to 
fulfil the requirements specified under sub-section (6) during the term of 
his appointment.”; 


(iii) in sub-section (//),— 


(a) in the proviso, after the word “company”, the words “or its 
holding, subsidiary or associate company” shall be inserted; 


(6) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided further that where the provisions of item (B) of 
sub-clause (7) of clause (e) of sub-section (6) apply to an 
independent director, he may continue as an employee or 
proprietor or partner of the legal or consulting firm, in case the 
transaction of such legal or consulting firm with the company, its 
holding or subsidiary or associate company is less than ten per 
cent. or the lower per cent. referred to in the said item, of the gross 
turnover of such firm.”; 


(2) the Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation 1 thereof 
and after Explanation 1 as so numbered, the following Explanation shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“Explanation 2.—For the purposes of sub-sections (/0) and 
(71), any period during which an independent director has served 
as an additional director of the company, shall be included in his 
tenure as an independent director.” 


50. In section 152 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),— 


(a) after the words “shall be appointed”, the words “or shall continue to 
function” shall be inserted; 


(6) after the word and figures “section 153”, the words “and the said 
Director Identification Number or the other number is not deactivated or 
cancelled” shall be inserted. 


Amendment of 
section 149. 


Amendment of 
section 152. 


Amendment of 
section 154. 


Amendment of 
section 159, 


Amendment of 
section 161. 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


51. Section 154 of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section (/) 


thereof and after sub-section (/) as so numbered, the following sub-sections shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“(2) A person who has been allotted Director Identification Number under 
sub-section (/) shall submit such information towards verification of his 
particulars to the Central Government or an officer authorised by that Government 
in this behalf at such intervals and in such manner, as may be prescribed. 


(3) Where— 


(a) the person referred to in sub-section (2) does not comply with 
the provisions of the said sub-section; or 


(b) the Director Identification Number has been allotted in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder; or 


(c) a director has incurred disqualification in one or more 
companies pursuant to the provisions of section 164, or where the 
Tribunal or any competent court has passed an order in this regard, 


the Director Identification Number allotted to him may be deactivated or 
cancelled, in such manner as may be prescribed, by the Central Government 
or the officer authorised by that Government in this behalf. 


(4) Where the Director Identification Number allotted to a director is 
deactivated, he shall not function as a director till it gets reactivated. 


(5) In case the Director Identification Number allotted to a director is 
cancelled, the office of such a director shall become vacant. 


(6) A person may surrender the Director Identification Number allotted 
to him in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(7) Where a Director Identification Number has been deactivated or 
cancelled or surrendered under sub-section (3) or sub-section (6), it may be 
reactivated or restored on fulfilment of such conditions and on payment of 
such fees and in such manner, as may be prescribed.”. 


52. In section 159 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the words “which may extend to”, the word “of” shall be 
substituted; 


(6) after the words “default continues”, the words “subject to a 
maximum of five lakh rupees” shall be inserted. 


53. In section 161 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “, other than a person who fails to get 
appointed as a director in a general meeting, as an additional director at any time 
who shall hold office up to the date of the next annual general meeting or the last 
date on which the annual general meeting should have been held, whichever is 
earlier’, the words “as an additional director at any time who shall hold office up 
to the date of the next general meeting or up to a period of three months from the 
date of his appointment, whichever is earlier” shall be substituted; 


(8) in sub-section (4), for the words “filled by the Board of Directors at a 
meeting of the Board which shall be subsequently approved by members in the 
immediate next general meeting”, the words “appointed by the Board of Directors 
at a meeting of the Board and the person so appointed shall hold office up to the 
date of the next general meeting or up to a period of three months from the date of 
his appointment, whichever is earlier” shall be substituted; 


31 of 2016. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


“(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (/) to (4), 


a person whose appointment as a director could not be considered or 
could not be approved in a general meeting, shall not be appointed by 
the Board as an additional director, or alternate director or a director 
against a casual vacancy under this section without the prior approval of 
its members.”. 


54. In section 164 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(7) in clause (g),— 


(A) for the words “dealing with related party transactions”, 
the words “or subjected to penalty for default” shall be substituted; 


(B) the word “or” occurring at the end shall be omitted; 


(ii) in clause (A), for the word and figures “section 152.”, the word 


and figures “section 152;” shall be substituted; 


(iii) after clause (i), the following shall be inserted, namely:— 


“() he has been an auditor or a secretarial auditor or a cost 
auditor or a registered valuer or an insolvency professional of the 
company or its holding, subsidiary or associate company 
discharging the functions as such under this Act or under the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 during the immediately 
preceding three financial years or during the current financial year. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this clause, where the 
audit or secretarial audit or cost audit of a company is conducted, 
or valuation services or insolvency professional services are 
provided, by a partnership firm or a limited liability partnership, 
such partner or partners of the partnership firm or a limited liability 
partnership, as the case may be, who conducted the audit or 
provided the valuation services or insolvency professional 
services, as the case may be, shall not be eligible for appointment 
as a director under this sub-section; or 


(k) he has not been assessed by the Board to be a fit and 
proper person in accordance with such criteria, as may be 
prescribed: 


Provided that different criteria for fit and proper person may 
be prescribed for different class or classes of companies.” 


(b) in sub-section (2),— 


“two 


(i) in clause (a), for the words “three financial years”, the words 
financial years” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in the longline, after the words “fails to do so”, the words, 


brackets and figures “and office of director shall become vacant as per 
the provisions of sub-section (/) of section 167” shall be inserted. 


55. In section 165 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(a) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided further that the Central Government may, by 


notification, specify a lower number under this sub-section for a class or 
classes of companies or a class or classes of directors.”; 


Amendment of 
section 164. 


Amendment of 
section 165. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(0) in Explanation II, for the words “of twenty companies”, the words 
“under this section” shall be substituted. 


Amendment of 56. In section 166 of the principal Act,— 
section 166. 


(a) in sub-section (7),— 
(i) for the words “provisions of this section”, the words, brackets 
and figure “provisions of sub-section (5),” shall be substituted; 


(ii) after the words “five lakh rupees”, the words, brackets and 
figure “and the court may also order such director to pay the amount of 
undue gains referred to in sub-section (5) to the company” shall be 
inserted; 


(6) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(8) Ifa director of the company makes default in complying with 
the provisions of this section [except sub-section (5)], he shall,— 


(i) in case of a listed company, be liable to a penalty of five 
lakh rupees; and 


(ii) in case of any other company, be liable to a penalty of 
two lakh rupees.”. 


‘Aiendmentor 57. In section 167 of the principal Act,— 


ne (a) in sub-section (/), in clause (a), for the proviso, the following shall 


be substituted, namely:— 


“Provided that where he incurs disqualification under 
sub-section (2) of section 164, the office of the director shall become 
vacant in every company, where he is a director (including the company 
which is in default under that sub-section), after six months from the date 
of incurring such disqualification or upon expiry of his tenure in such 
company, whichever is earlier. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this clause, the date of 
incurring the disqualification shall be the date on which the company 
fails to comply with the provisions of clause (a) or clause (b) of 
sub-section (2) of section 164.”; 


(0) in sub-section (2), for the words “he shall be punishable with fine 
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh 
rupees”, the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


“or that his Director Identification Number has been deactivated 
or cancelled, he shall,— 


(i) in case of listed company, be liable to a penalty of five lakh 
rupees; and 


(ii) in case of any other company, be liable to a penalty of 
two lakh rupees.”. 


Amendment of 58. In section 173 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the words “each 

300०७ half of a calendar year and the gap between the two meetings is not less than ninety 
days”, the words “a calendar year” shall be substituted. 

Amendment of 59. In section 184 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), the words “at the 

seopon Te: first meeting of the Board in every financial year or” shall be omitted. 

Amendment of 60. In section 185 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in clause (5), after 


section 185. the words “any firm”, the words “or limited liability partnership” shall be inserted. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


61. In section 186 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/3), after the words “the provisions of this section’, 
the brackets, words and figures “[except sub-sections (9) and (/0)]” shall be 
inserted; 


(6) after sub-section (13), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(14) If a company contravenes the provisions of sub-section (9) 
or sub-section (/0), the company shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh 
rupees and in case of continuing contravention, with a further penalty of 
five hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such 
contravention continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees and 
every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty 
of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing default, with a 
further penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, after the first during 
which such default continues, subject to a maximum of one lakh 
rupees.”. 


62. In section 189 of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(5A) Every company which fails to comply with the provisions of this 
section and the rules made thereunder shall be liable to a penalty of two lakh 
rupees.”. 


63. After section 203 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“203A. (1) A whole-time key managerial personnel of a company, who 
is not a director, may resign from his office by giving a notice in writing to the 
company, and the Board shall, on receipt of such notice, take note of the same 
and shall intimate the Registrar of such resignation in such form and manner 
and within such time, as may be prescribed: 


Provided that where the company fails to intimate the Registrar under 
this sub-section within such time the said key managerial personnel may 
forward a copy of his resignation along with detailed reasons for his 
resignation to the Registrar in such manner, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The resignation of a key managerial personnel under sub-section (/) 
shall take effect from the date on which the notice is received by the company 
or the date, if any, specified by such key managerial personnel in the notice, 
whichever is later: 


Provided that such key managerial personnel who has resigned shall be 
liable even after his resignation for the default for which he was liable during 
his tenure.”. 


64. In section 204 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “company secretary in practice”, the 
words “secretarial auditor” shall be substituted; 


(6) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(1A) A person shall be eligible for appointment as a secretarial 
auditor of a company only if he is a company secretary in practice: 


Provided that a firm, whereof majority of partners practising in 
India who are qualified for appointment, may be appointed by its firm 
name to be the secretarial auditor of a company: 


Amendment of 
section 186. 


Amendment of 
section 189. 


Insertion of new 
section 203A. 


Resignation of a 
whole-time key 
managerial 
personnel, who 
is not a director. 


Amendment of 
section 204. 


Amendment of 
section 206. 


Amendment of 
section 222. 


Amendment of 
section 230. 


Amendment of 
section 232. 


Amendment of 
section 233. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Provided further that every partner of the firm shall be a person 
who has been registered with a statutory institute or body established 
under a law in India having powers of such registration.”; 


(c) in sub-sections (2) to (4), for the words “company secretary in 
practice”, wherever they occur, the words “secretarial auditor” shall be 
substituted. 


65. In section 206 of the principal Act, for sub-section (7), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(7) If a company fails to furnish any information or explanation or 
produce any document required under this section, the company shall be liable 
to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further 
penalty of five hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such 
failure continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees and every officer 
of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five 
thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of 
two hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such failure 
continues, subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees.”. 


66. In section 222 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the brackets, figure and word “(/) Where”, the 
word “Where” shall be substituted; 


(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
67. In section 230 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(i) the words and figures “or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2016, as the case may be,” shall be omitted; 


(ii) before the Explanation, the following provisos shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that on and from the commencement of the 
Corporate Laws (Amendment) Act, 2026, every application to be 
made under this section or sections 231 to 233 to the Tribunal, shall 
be made to the Tribunal having jurisdiction over the transferee 
company or the resultant company, as the case may be, and such 
Tribunal shall exercise all the powers of the Tribunal referred to in 
such sections for all the companies involved in the schemes of 
compromise or arrangement or amalgamations: 


Provided further that any application pending before the 
Tribunal as on the date of commencement of the Corporate Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 2026, shall continue to be dealt with by 
the Tribunal in accordance with the provisions applicable before 
such commencement.”; 


(5) in sub-section (6), the words and figures “or under the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as the case may be” shall be omitted. 


68. In section 232 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (5), in the 
proviso, after the words “or extinguished” occurring at the end, the words “on the 
merger or amalgamation” shall be inserted. 


69. In section 233 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(i) for clause (0), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


31 of 2016. 


31 of 2016. 


18 of 2013. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


“(b) the objections and suggestions received are considered 
by the companies in their respective general meetings and the 
scheme is approved by a majority of members or class of members 
present and voting at the meeting held in such manner, as may be 
prescribed, who hold at least seventy-five per cent. of the value in 
shares held by such members present and voting;”; 


(ii) in clause (d), for the word “‘nine-tenths”, the words “at least 
three-fourths” shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the copy of the scheme need not be filed with the 
Official Liquidator in case it pertains to transfer or division of the 
undertaking of the company.”; 


(c) in sub-section (/3), after the words “of companies”, the words “on 
such terms and conditions and” shall be inserted. 


70. After section 233 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“233A. (1) Where a transferee company, as a result of a compromise or 
an arrangement which has taken place prior to the commencement of the 
Companies Act, 2013, has held any shares in its own name or in the name of 
any trust (whether on its behalf or on behalf of any of its subsidiary or associate 
companies), such shares shall, within a period not exceeding three years from 
the date of commencement of the Corporate Laws (Amendment) Act, 2026, 
be dealt with or disposed of in such manner, as may be prescribed. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if a company fails 
to deal with or dispose of the shares referred to in sub-section (/), such shares 
shall be cancelled and extinguished by the company in such manner, as may 
be prescribed, and such cancellation and extinguishment shall be deemed to 
be a reduction of the share capital of the company. 


(3) Ifthe company fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section (2), the 
company and every officer of the company who is in default, shall be liable to a 
penalty of ten thousand rupees for every day during which the default continues.”. 


71. In section 242 of the principal Act, sub-section (8) shall be omitted. 
72. In section 245 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the word, brackets 


and figure “sub-section (2)”, the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (3)” shall be 
substituted. 


73. In section 247 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “it shall be valued by a person 
having such qualifications and experience, registered as a valuer and being a 
member of an organisation recognised, in such manner, on such terms and 
conditions as may be prescribed and appointed by the audit committee or in 
its absence by the Board of Directors of that company”, the following shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“it shall be valued by a person, who— 


(a) has such qualifications and experience as may be 
specified by regulations by the Valuation Authority; 


(8) is a member of a recognised valuers’ organisation; and 
(c) holds a valid certificate of registration as a valuer.”; 


(6) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


Insertion of new 


section 233A. 


Treatment of 
certain shares 
held in a name 


of a company or 


trust. 


Amendment 
section 242. 
Amendment 
section 245. 


Amendment 
section 247. 


of 


of 


of 


30 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


“(1A) The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India established 
under section 188 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 shall be 
the Valuation Authority for the purposes of this section. 


(1B) The Valuation Authority shall— 


(a) grant or renew certificate of recognition to valuers’ 
organisations subject to such terms and conditions as may be 
specified by regulations by the Valuation Authority; 


(5) grant or renew certificate of registration to valuers subject 
to such terms and conditions as may be specified by regulations by 
the Valuation Authority; 


(c) make recommendations to the Central Government on the 
formulation and laying down of the valuation standards and 
policies; 


(d) monitor and enforce the compliance with valuation 
standards and policies in such manner, as may be specified by 
regulations by the Valuation Authority; 


(e) oversee the affairs and quality of service of the recognised 
valuers’ organisations and registered valuers referred to in 
sub-section (/); 


(f) perform such other functions relating to clauses (a) to (e), 
as may be prescribed. 


(1C) A valuation under this Act shall be undertaken only by a 
registered valuer who shall be appointed by the audit committee or in its 
absence, by the Board of Directors of that company, and in other cases, 
by such person, as may be prescribed.” 


(c) in sub-section (2),— 


(i) for the words, brackets and figure “The valuer appointed under 
sub-section (/)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter “The registered 
valuer appointed under sub-section (/C)” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (c), for the words “in accordance with such rules as 
may be prescribed”, the words “in accordance with such valuation 
standards and policies, as may be prescribed and in such manner as may 
be specified by the Valuation Authority” shall be substituted; 


(d) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


“(3) If a recognised valuers’ organisation contravenes the 
provisions of this section or rules or regulations made thereunder, the 
Valuation Authority may suspend or cancel its certificate, for a 
minimum period of six months or such higher period not exceeding 
ten years, in such manner as may be specified by regulations made 
by the Valuation Authority, or impose a penalty of up to one crore 
rupees, or both; 


(3A) If a registered valuer contravenes the provisions of this 
section or the rules or regulations made thereunder, the Valuation 
Authority may suspend or cancel the certificate of registration, for a 
minimum period of six months or such higher period not exceeding 
ten years in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by 
the Valuation Authority, or impose a penalty of up to ten lakh rupees, 
or both. 


31 of 2016. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31 


(3B) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Valuation Authority 
under sub-section (3) or (3A), may prefer an appeal before the Appellate 
Tribunal within a period of forty-five days from the date of receipt of 
such order by him, in such manner and on payment of such fees, as may 
be prescribed. 


(3C) A registered valuer, who has contravened the provisions of 
this section or rules or regulations made thereunder with the intention to 
defraud any person, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than 
fifty thousand rupees, but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees 
or eight times the remuneration of valuer, whichever is less. 


(3D) A recognised valuers’ organisation which has contravened 
the provisions of this section or the rules or regulations made thereunder 
with the intention to defraud any person, shall be punishable with fine 
which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees, but which may extend to 
one crore rupees and every officer of the organisation who is in default 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees, 
but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees. 


(3E) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
section 439, no court shall take cognizance of any offence under 
sub-section (3C) or sub-section (3D), which is alleged to have been 
committed by any recognised valuers’ organisation or any registered 
valuer, except on a complaint in writing by an officer authorised in this 
behalf by the Valuation Authority or by the Central Government.”; 


(e) in sub-section (4), in the opening portion, for the words, brackets and 


figure “under sub-section (3)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter “under 
sub-section (3C)” shall be substituted; 


(f) after sub-section (4), the following shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(5) The Valuation Authority shall make recommendations to the 
Central Government on the formulation and laying down of valuation 
policies and standards for adoption by companies or class of companies 
or such entities or class of entities, as may be prescribed. 


(6) After examination of the recommendations of the Valuation 
Authority, as may be prescribed, the Central Government may provide 
such valuation standards or valuation policies or any addendum thereto. 


(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the Valuation 
Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its 
functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of 
policy, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to 
time: 


Provided that the Valuation Authority shall, except for reasons to 
be recorded in writing, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this section: 


Provided further that the decision of the Central Government, on 
whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final. 


(8) The Valuation Authority may, by a notification, delegate to any 
member, officer or any other person, subject to such conditions, if any, 
as may be specified in the notification, such of its powers and functions 
under this section as it deems necessary. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(9) The Valuation Authority may, by notification, make 
regulations consistent with this Act and rules made thereunder, for 
carrying out its functions under this section and for matters incidental or 
connected thereto. 


(10) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing powers, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:— 


(a) qualifications and experience of valuers who may be 
registered under sub-section (/); 


(b) the terms and conditions under which an organisation 
may be recognised under sub-section (1B); 


(c) the terms and conditions under which the valuers may be 
registered under sub-section (1B); 


(d) the manner in which the valuation shall be made by the 
valuers under clause (c) of sub-section (2); 


(e) inspection and investigation of affairs of the organisations 
which are recognised and registered valuers under clause (e) of 
sub-section (/B); 


(f) manner of suspension or cancellation of certificate of 
registration of the valuer or certificate of recognition of the 
organisation, as the case may be, and imposition of penalty by the 
Valuation Authority under sub-section (3) or (3A); 


(g) manner of delegation of powers by the Valuation 
Authority to its members or officers under sub-section (8); 


(A) for any other matter for carrying out the provisions of this 
section. 


(11) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
regulation, or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, 
the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that regulation. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression 
“recognised valuers’ organisation” means an organisation which has 
been recognised under clause (a) of sub-section (/B).’. 
Amendment of 74. In section 248 of the principal Act,— 


section 248. है हि 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(7) in clause (c),— 


(A) after the words “preceding financial years”, the words 
“and in the current financial year, or has not made any significant 
accounting transaction during the preceding two financial years 
and in the current financial year, or has not filed financial 
statements or annual returns that were due to be filed for two 
consecutive financial years preceding the previous financial year” 
shall be inserted; 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


(B) after the words and figures “section 455; or’, the 
following shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘Illustration. 


Where, during examination in the month of June, 2025, 
it was found that a company had not filed the financial 
statements, or had not filed the annual returns, for the 
financial years 2022-23 and 2023-24, then a company would 
be covered under this clause. 


Explanation.—F or the purposes of this clause, the 
expression “significant accounting transaction” shall have 
the meaning assigned to it in clause (7) of the Explanation to 
sub-section (/) of section 455.’; 


(5) in sub-section (2),— 


(i) after the words “extinguishing all its liabilities”, the words “in 
such manner as may be prescribed,” shall be inserted; 


(ii) the words, brackets and figure “on all or any of the grounds 
specified in sub-section (/)” shall be omitted; 


(c) in sub-section (5),— 


(i) after the words “mentioned in the notice”, the words, brackets 
and figure “published under sub-section (4)” shall be inserted; 


(ii) after the words “is shown by the company”, the words “or by 
any other person” shall be inserted; 


(d) in sub-section (6),— 


(i) for the words “before passing an order”, the words “before 
striking off the name of the company” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in the proviso, for the words “date of the order removing the 
name”, the words “date of striking off the name” shall be substituted. 


75. In section 249 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words 


“punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees”, the words “liable to a 
penalty of fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 


76. In section 252 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “Tribunal”, the words 
“Regional Director or Tribunal” shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (/),— 


(i) for the word “Tribunal” wherever it occurs, the words 
“Regional Director” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words “it may order”, the words “the Regional Director 
may order” shall be substituted; 


(c) in sub-section (2), for the word “Tribunal”, the words, brackets and 
figures “Regional Director under sub-section (/) or the Tribunal under 
sub-section (3), as the case may be,” shall be substituted. 


77. In section 271 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in clause (a), the words “by the Tribunal” shall be omitted; 


(6) in clause (2), the words “by notification under this Act” shall be 
omitted. 


78. In section 361 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/),— 


Amendment of 
section 249. 


Amendment of 
section 252. 


Amendment of 
section 271. 


Amendment of 
section 361. 


Amendment of 
section 365. 


Insertion of new 
section 365A. 


Appeal under 
this Part. 


Amendment of 
section 366. 


Amendment of 
section 374. 


Amendment of 
section 378P. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(i) for the words “under this Chapter”, the words, brackets, letters 
and figures “in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter under the 
circumstances referred to in clauses (a), (6) and (d) of section 271” shall 
be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (i), for the word “and”, the word “or” shall be 
substituted; 


(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) Where an order under sub-section (/) is made, the Central 
Government shall— 


(a) appoint the Official Liquidator as the liquidator of the 
company; or 


(6) appoint an insolvency professional registered under the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as liquidator of the 
company to carry out the functions of Official Liquidator under 
this Part.”; 


(c) in sub-section (5),— 
(i) after the words “affairs of the company”, the words “by the 
Official Liquidator or any officer not below the rank of Assistant 


Director as may be authorised by the Central Government in this behalf” 
shall be inserted; 


(ii) for the words “as may be specified”, the words “as it may 
direct” shall be substituted; 


(d) in sub-section (6), for the words “under the provision”, the words 
“continued under the provision” shall be substituted; 


(e) after sub-section (6), the following Explanation shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


‘Explanation.—For the purposes of sections 361 to 365, the term 
“Official Liquidator” shall include an insolvency professional registered 
under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 who has been 
appointed under sub-section (2).’. 


79. In section 365 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the word 
“notification’’, the words “notice in the Official Gazette” shall be substituted. 

80. After section 365 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 

“365A. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Central Government 
under this Part, may prefer an appeal within a period of forty-five days from 
the date of receipt of such order by him, before the Appellate Tribunal in such 
manner and on payment of such fee, as may be prescribed.”. 

81. In section 366 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the words 
“co-operative society, society”, the words “, any non-trading company” shall 
be inserted. 

82. In section 374 of the principal Act, in clause (c),— 


(a) for the words “‘an affidavit, duly notarised”, the words “a declaration, 
in such form as may be prescribed” shall be substituted; 


(6) after the words “co-operative society, society”, the words “, any 
non-trading company” shall be inserted. 


83. In section 378P of the principal Act,— 
(a) sub-section (2) shall be omitted; 


31 of 2016. 


31 of 2016. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


(6) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(5) The directors of the Board shall be elected or appointed by the 
Members in the general meetings.”. 


84. In section 378Q of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in clause (0), for 
the words “ninety days”, the words “one hundred and eighty days” shall be 
substituted. 


85. In section 378Y of the principal Act, after the words “total membership”, 
the words “or one hundred members, whichever is less,” shall be inserted. 


86. In section 378ZA of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), in the proviso, for the words “Provided that”, the 
following shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Provided that in case of the first annual general meeting, it shall 
be held within a period of nine months from the date of closing of the 
first financial year of the company and in any other case, within a period 
of six months, from the date of closing of the financial year: 


Provided further that if a company holds such first annual general 
meeting, it shall not be necessary for the company to hold any annual 
general meeting in the year of its incorporation: 


Provided also that”; 
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted; 


(c) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The Members shall adopt the articles of the Producer 
Company referred to in clause (9) of sub-section (/) of section 3780 and 
appoint directors of its Board in the first annual general meeting.”; 


(d) in sub-section (9), for the words “members of the Producer Company 
shall”, the words “members or one hundred members of the Producer 
Company, whichever is less, shall” shall be substituted. 


87. For section 378ZF of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“378ZF. (1) Every Producer Company having an average annual 
turnover exceeding five crore rupees or such other amount, as may be 
prescribed, in each of the three consecutive financial years, shall be required 
to appoint an internal auditor, who shall either be a chartered accountant or a 
cost accountant, or such other professional as may be decided by the Board, 
to conduct internal audit of the functions and activities of the Producer 
Company. 


(2) The manner and the intervals in which the internal audit shall be 
conducted and reported to the Board, shall be such as may be prescribed.”. 


88. In section 378ZM of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “punishable with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees for every day during which such name has been 
used by him”, the words “liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of 
continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day, 
after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of 
five lakh rupees” shall be substituted; 


Amendment of 
section 378Q. 


Amendment of 


section 378Y. 


Amendment of 
section 378ZA. 


Amendment of 
section 378ZF. 


Amendment of 
section 378ZM. 


Amendment of 
section 378ZS. 


Amendment of 
section 392. 


Amendment of 
section 396. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(5) in sub-section (2), for the words “imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months and with fine equivalent to five per cent. of the tumover of 
that Company during the preceding financial year’, the words “a penalty of 
twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further 
penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such 
failure continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees” shall be substituted; 


(c) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(3) If a director or officer of a Producer Company— 


(a) fails to hand over the custody of books of account and 
other documents or property in his custody to the Producer 
Company of which he is a director or officer; or 


(8) fails to convene annual general meeting or other general 
meetings, 


he shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case 
of continuing failure, with a further penalty of two hundred rupees for 
each day, after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a 
maximum of one lakh rupees.”. 


89. In section 378ZS of the principal Act, for sub-section (6), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(6) If default is made in complying with sub-section (4), the company 
and every officer of the company, who is in default, shall be liable to a penalty 
of one hundred rupees, for each copy in respect of which default is made.”. 


90. In section 392 of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with “shall 
be punishable with fine” and ending with “may extend to five lakh rupees”, the 
words “shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing 
contravention, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day, after the 
first during which such contravention continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh 
rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty 
of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing contravention, with a 
further penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such 
failure continues, subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees” shall be substituted. 


91. In section 396 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “offices”, the words “and other 
offices” shall be substituted; 


(6) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(1A) The Central Government may appoint such number of Regional 
Directors, Additional Regional Directors or Joint Regional Directors or 
Deputy Regional Directors as it considers necessary for discharge of various 
functions under this Act, and the powers and duties that may be exercisable 
by such officers shall be such as may be prescribed.” 


(c) in sub-section (2), after the words “Assistant Registrars”, the words 
“or such other officers” shall be inserted; 


(d) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(2A) The Central Government may authorise one or more officers 
not below the rank of Assistant Director or Assistant Registrar of that 
Government to exercise such powers and duties of the Regional Director 
or the Registrar and to discharge such functions under this Act as it may 
specify, by notification.”. 


31 of 2016. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


92. After section 396 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely: — 


“396A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar under 
section 4 or section 7, may prefer an appeal to an officer not below the rank 
of the Joint Director as may be authorised by the Central Government, in such 
form and manner, and within such period as may be prescribed.”. 


93. In section 403 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(a) in the first proviso, for the words “shall not be less than one hundred 
rupees per day”, the words “shall not be less than such amount per day as may 
be prescribed” shall be substituted; 


(5) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further”, the following 
shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Provided further that the amount of additional fees shall not 
exceed two lakh rupees for such class or classes of companies, as may 
be prescribed: 


Provided also”. 


94. In section 410 of the principal Act, in clause (a), after the words “National 


Financial Reporting Authority”, the words “or of the Valuation Authority” shall be 
inserted. 


95. In section 418A of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(3) If the Members of a Bench of the Appellate Tribunal differ in 
opinion on any point or points, it shall be decided according to the majority, if 
there is a majority, but if the Members are equally divided, they shall state the 
point or points on which they differ, and the case shall be referred by the 
Chairperson for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other 
Members of the Appellate Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided 
according to the opinion of the majority of Members who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it.”. 


96. In section 419 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (4), for the words and figures “Part II of’, the words 
“any of the provisions of” shall be substituted; 


(6) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(4A) The President may, if he considers appropriate, constitute, in 
such manner as may be prescribed, one or more Special Benches of the 
Tribunal to exercise the powers of the Tribunal for the disposal of any 
case or cases under this Act, or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2016.”. 


97. In section 441 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in clause (8), for the 


words “does not exceed twenty-five lakh rupees”, the words “does not exceed one 


crore 


rupees” shall be substituted. 


98. In section 446B of the principal Act, for the words “liable to a penalty 


which shall not be more than one-half of the penalty”, the words “liable to a penalty 
of one-half, or such per cent. not exceeding one-half, as may be prescribed, of the 
penalty” shall be substituted. 


Insertion of new 
section 396A. 


Grievance 
mechanism 
against decision 
of Registrar 
under section 7. 


Amendment of 
section 403. 


Amendment of 
section 410. 


Amendment of 
section 418A. 


Amendment of 
section 419. 


Amendment of 
section 441. 


Amendment of 
section 446B. 


Amendment of 
section 447. 


Amendment of 
section 453. 


Amendment of 
section 454. 


38 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


99. In section 447 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the words “‘ten lakh rupees”, the words “twenty-five lakh rupees” 
shall be substituted; 


(b) in the second proviso, for the words “fifty lakh rupees”, the words 
“one crore rupees” shall be substituted. 


100. In section 453 of the principal Act, for the words “punishable with fine 


which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but may extend to two thousand 
rupees for every day’, the words “shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and 
in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each 
day, after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of 
five lakh rupees” shall be substituted. 


101. In section 454 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the word “Registrar,” the words “Assistant 
Registrar” shall be substituted; 


(6) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(1A) A company or its officer who is in default, may make an 
application in such form and manner and on payment of such fees, as 
may be prescribed under this section for adjudication of penalty.”; 


(c) in sub-section (5),— 


(i) after the words “Regional Director having jurisdiction in the 
matter”, the words “or to such Appellate Authority, as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify” shall be inserted; 


(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the Appellate Authority shall not be below the 
rank of Joint Director.”; 


(d) in sub-section (7), after the words “Regional Director’, the words, 
brackets and figure “or the Appellate Authority referred to in sub-section (5)” 
shall be inserted; 


(e) in sub-section (8),— 


(i) in clause (i), after the words “five lakh rupees”, the words “by 
a Court and the said Court shall also have the power to direct such 
company to pay the amount of penalty imposed by the said order” shall 
be inserted; 


(ii) in clause (ii), after the words “or with both”, the words “by a 
Court and the said Court shall also have the power to direct such officer 
or the other person to pay the amount of penalty imposed by the said 
order” shall be inserted; 


(f) after sub-section (8), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(9) The penalties realised under this section shall be credited to 
the Consolidated Fund of India. 


43 of 1961. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


(10) On and from the commencement of the Corporate Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 2026, where a provision in respect of any offence 
provided in this Act has been amended to provide for adjudication under 
this section,— 


(a) the manner of withdrawal of the complaint; and 


(6) the manner of transfer of such matter for adjudication 
under this section, 


in respect of such offence, whether pending in the Court or otherwise, 
shall be dealt with in accordance with such Scheme as the Central 
Government may notify in this behalf.”. 


102. In section 454A of the principal Act, after the words “Regional Director”, 


the words, brackets and figures “or the Appellate Authority referred to in 
sub-section (5) of section 454” shall be inserted. 


103. After section 454A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“45483. (/) If a person fails to pay the penalty imposed under this Act, 
the Recovery Officer may draw up under his signature a statement (herein 
referred to as certificate) in the specified form specifying the amount due from 
the person and shall proceed to recover from such person the amount specified 
in the certificate by one or more of the following modes, namely:— 


(a) attachment and sale of movable property of such person; 

(0) attachment of bank accounts of such person; 

(c) attachment and sale of immovable properties of such person; 
(d) arrest of that person and his detention in prison; 


(e) appointing a receiver for the management of such movable or 
immovable properties, 


and for this purpose, the provisions of sections 220 to 227, 228A, 229, 232, 
the Second Schedule and Third Schedule to the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the 
Income-tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 1962, as in force from time to 
time, in so far as may be, apply with necessary modifications as if the 
corresponding provisions of the said Act and the rules made thereunder were 
the provisions of this Act and referred to the amount due under this Act, 
instead of to income-tax under the Income-tax Act, 1961. 


Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the movable or 
immovable property or monies held in bank accounts of the person, shall 
include any property or monies held in bank accounts which has been 
transferred directly or indirectly on or after the date when the amount specified 
in the certificate had become due, by the person to his spouse or his minor 
child or son’s wife or son’s minor child, otherwise than for adequate 
consideration, and which is held by, or stands in the name of, any of his 
relations aforementioned; and so far as the movable or immovable property or 
monies held in bank accounts so transferred to his minor child or his son’s 
minor child is concerned, it shall, even after the date of attainment of majority 
by such minor child or son’s minor child, as the case may be, continue to be 
included in the movable or immovable property or monies held in bank 
accounts of such person for recovering any amount due from him under 
this Act. 


Amendment of 
section 454A. 


Insertion of new 
sections 454B, 
454C and 454D. 


Recovery of 
amounts. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Explanation 2.—Any reference under the provisions of the Second 
Schedule or the Third Schedule to the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the 43 of 1961. 
Income-tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 1962 to the assessee, shall be 
construed as a reference to the person specified in the certificate. 


Explanation 3.—Any reference to an appeal under Chapter XVIID and 
the Second Schedule to the Income-tax Act, 1961, shall be construed as a 43 of 1961. 
reference to an appeal before the Appellate Authority under sub-section (5) 
of section 454 of this Act. 


Explanation 4.—The interest referred to in section 220 of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961 shall commence from the date the amount became 43 of 1961. 
payable by the person. 


(2) The Recovery Officer shall have power to seek the assistance of the 
local district administration while exercising the powers under sub-section (/). 


Explanation—F¥or the purposes of this section, the expression 
“Recovery Officer” means an officer not below the rank of Assistant Registrar 
or Assistant Director authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, by 
general or special order in writing, to exercise the powers of a Recovery 
Officer. 


Settlement. 454C. (1) The contraventions which shall be liable for penalty under this 
Act may, subject to the provisions of this section, eligible for settlement. 


(2) The Central Government may constitute a Specified Authority 
comprising of an officer or group of officers of the Central Government which 
may discharge the functions of Specified Authority under this section. 


(3) Any person, against whom any proceeding has been initiated for 
contravention of any provision referred to in sub-section (/), may file an 
application in writing to the Specified Authority in such form and manner, as 
may be prescribed. 


(4) An application under sub-section (3) may be submitted at any time 
before the order of penalty is passed. 


(5) The Specified Authority may, after taking into consideration the 
nature, gravity and impact of contraventions, agree to the proposal for 
settlement, on payment of such sum by the applicant or on such other terms 
and manner of implementation of settlement and monitoring, as may be 
prescribed. 


(6) If the Specified Authority is of the opinion that the settlement offered 
is not appropriate in the circumstances, or if the Specified Authority and 
applicant concerned do not reach an agreement on the terms of the settlement 
within such time as may be prescribed, it shall by an order reject the 
application for settlement and the proceedings initiated against the applicant 
shall be continued. 


(7) The settlement proceedings under this section shall be conducted in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(8) No appeal shall lie against any order passed by the Specified 
Authority under this section. 


(9) All settlement amounts realised under this Act shall be credited to 
the Consolidated Fund of India. 


69: 4541). No appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in terms 


certain amount of an order of— 
before appeal is . . ढ़ है हि : 
entertained. (a) the National Financial Reporting Authority under section 132; or 


(b) the Valuation Authority under section 247; or 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 41 


(c) the adjudicating officer under section 454, 


shall be entertained by the Appellate Tribunal or Regional Director or the 
Appellate Authority referred to in sub-section (5) of section 454, as the case 
may be, unless the appellant has deposited ten per cent. of that amount in the 
manner as directed by the Appellate Tribunal or Regional Director or the 
Appellate Authority, as the case may be.’. 


Amendment of 
section 455. 


104. In section 455 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “or an inactive company may”, the 
words “or an inactive company shall” shall be substituted; 


(b) in the Explanation below sub-section (/),— 
(7) in clause (i)— 


(A) for the words “financial statements and”, the words 
“financial statements or” shall be substituted; 


(B) for the word “last” occurring at both the places, the word 
“preceding” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (ii),— 
(A) in sub-clause (c), the word “and” shall be omitted; 


(B) in sub-clause (d), for the word “record.”, the words 
“record; and” shall be substituted; 


(C) after sub-clause (d), the following sub-clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(e) receipt or payment not relatable to the business or 
operations of the company.”. 


105. In section 457 of the principal Act, in clause (a), after the word and Amendment of 
figures “section 210”, the words and figures “or section 212” shall be inserted. pene 


106. After section 466 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new 
inserted, namely:— section 466A. 


“466A. The Central Government may issue directions or guidelines or Central 
circulars, subject to such conditions, as may be necessary, for the following नह aise » 
issue directions, 
purposes, namely:— guidelines or 
ca . पु circulars. 
(a) clarifying the meaning or intent of any rule; and 


(6) laying down any procedural requirement ancillary to any rule: 


Provided that the Central Government shall hold consultation with 
expert bodies or individuals in such manner, as may be prescribed, before 
issuing directions or guidelines or circulars, under this section: 


Provided further that where the Central Government is of the opinion 
that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest that certain directions or 
guidelines or circulars are required to be made urgently for the purposes of 
effective implementation of the concerned rule, it may issue such directions 
or guidelines or circulars, without consulting the expert bodies or individuals 
and record the reasons for doing so in writing. 


Explanation —The directions or guidelines or circulars issued under this 
section shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any rule made under 
section 469 and in case of any conflict, the rule shall prevail.”. 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Amendment of 107. In section 469 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following 
section 469. sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(3) Any rule made under sub-section (/) may provide that in case of 
contravention thereof, the company, every officer of the company who is in 
default or any other person, shall be liable to a penalty of an amount, as may 
be prescribed, which shall not be more than five lakh rupees, and in case of 
continuing default, with a further penalty of such amount, as may be 
prescribed, which shall not be more than five thousand rupees for every day 
during which such default continues.”. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Companies Act, 2013 (the Companies Act) was enacted to consolidate 
and amend the laws relating to companies. The said Act introduced significant 
changes related to disclosures to stakeholders, accountability of directors, auditors 
and key managerial personnel, investor protection and corporate governance. The 
said Act was earlier amended in 2015, 2017, 2019 and 2020 to decriminalise certain 
offences, facilitate ease of doing business, rationalise compliance requirements and 
recognise new concepts. 


2. The Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (the LLP Act) was enacted to 
make provisions for the formation and regulation of limited liability partnerships 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. It aims to facilitate doing 
business in the form of an LLP which has the flexibility of a partnership firm but is 
constituted in the form of a body corporate structure with limited liability and 
perpetual succession. The LLP Act was amended in the year 2021 to facilitate ease 
of doing business and to decriminalise certain offences. 


3. In continuation of the Government’s constant endeavour to facilitate greater 
ease of doing business for corporates, the Company Law Committee (CLC) 
constituted by the Government submitted its last report in March, 2022. On the basis 
of the said report, consultations made with various stakeholders and the 
recommendations of the High Level Committee on Non-Financial Regulatory 
Reforms [HLC-NFRR], it is proposed to amend the Companies Act and the 
LLP Act. The proposed amendments are broadly aimed at— 


(7) promoting further ease of doing business and ease of living for corporates 
by decriminalising more provisions and amending certain other provisions; 


(ii) providing ease of compliance for One Person Companies, small 
companies, start-up companies and producer companies; 


(iii) streamlining existing regulatory practices to strengthen and improve 
the operational efficiency of the said enactments; 


(iv) recognising new concepts in light of rapidly evolving corporate 
landscape and changing business practices; and 


(v) carrying out drafting and clarificatory changes to remove 
ambiguities. 


4. Accordingly, it is proposed to introduce the Corporate Laws (Amendment) 
Bill, 2026, which, inter alia, provides for— 


(a) decriminalisation of various procedural defaults under the 
Companies Act and the LLP Act by replacing criminal provisions with civil 
penalties; 


(b) simplification of procedures relating to mergers and amalgamations 
through rationalisation of approval thresholds for fast-track mergers and 
enabling filing of applications before a single bench of the National Company 
Law Tribunal having jurisdiction over the transferee company; 


(c) providing further relaxations for small companies by providing 
exemption from mandatory Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), 
requirements related to auditor appointment for prescribed class of small 
companies, reduction in additional fees, etc.; 


(d) simplification of procedures relating to voluntary strike-off of 
companies to facilitate quicker and simpler closure or voluntary exit for 
companies; 


44 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(e) relaxations in CSR requirements through revision of eligibility 
thresholds and enhancing timelines for transfer of unspent amounts to a 
separate bank account relating to ongoing project and revising eligibility 
threshold with regard to constitution of CSR committees; 


(f) facilitating companies and limited liability partnerships operating in 
International Financial Services Centres by allowing them to issue and 
maintain share capital in foreign currency as permitted by the International 
Financial Services Centres Authority; 


(g) enabling companies to hold Annual General Meetings and 
Extraordinary General Meetings through video conferencing or other audio 
visual means with requirement for holding at least one Annual General 
Meeting in physical mode within a specified period; 


(h) replacement of certain affidavits required under the Act with 
self-declarations; 


(i) enabling multi-disciplinary partnerships for cost auditors and 
secretarial auditors in a similar manner as provided for financial auditors; 


(j) enhancing monetary thresholds of fines for compounding of offences 
by Regional Directors so as to reduce the burden on the National Company 
Law Tribunal; 


(k) making third party professional certification at the time of 
incorporation optional; 


(J) flexibility in buy-back of shares for prescribed classes of companies; 
(m) rationalisation of provisions relating to producer companies; 


(n) easing compliances for Alternative Investment Funds which are 
formed as limited liability partnerships; 


(०) strengthening the role of the National Financial Reporting Authority; 


(p) enabling constitution of special benches of the National Company 
Law Tribunal to hear specific matters under the Companies Act and the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016; 


(q) enabling conversion of specified non-trading entities registered with 
State Governments into section 8 companies; 


(r) clarification that compromise or arrangement under the Companies 
Act shall not be allowed, where process of liquidation has commenced under 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016; 


(s) recognising new forms of instruments linked to the value of share 
capital for executive compensation; 


(7) clarification that a trust shall be registered as a beneficial owner and 
trustee shall be registered as a member in the register of members of a 
company; and 


(४) further consequential amendments relating thereto. 
5. The notes on clauses explain, in detail, the provisions of the Bill. 


6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 
The 18th March, 2026. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


Notes on clauses 


Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 2 of the Limited 
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (hereinafter referred to as the LLP Act, 2008) by 
inserting new definitions for the terms “International Financial Services Centre’, 


“International Financial Services Centres Authority”, “permitted foreign currency” 
and “Specified International Financial Services Centre LLP” in the LLP Act, 2008. 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (c) and insert new clause (d) in 
sub-section (/) of section 11 of the LLP Act, 2008 to provide that the requirement 
of declaration by an advocate, chartered accountant, cost accountant or company 
secretary in practice during formation or incorporation of an LLP shall be applicable 
only when the LLP engages such professionals in its formation or incorporation. It 
further seeks to insert new proviso in clause (c) of sub-section (2) to enable a 
Specified International Financial Services Centre (Specified IFSC) LLP to 
undertake financial services activities as permitted under International Financial 
Services Centres Authority Act, 2019. 


Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert a new proviso in sub-section (/) of 
section 13 of the LLP Act, 2008 to provide that a Specified International Financial 
Services Centre LLP shall have its registered office at all times within an 
International Financial Services Centre. 


Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert a new proviso in sub-section (/) of 
section 15 of the LLP Act, 2008 to require that a Specified International Financial 
Services Centre LLP shall include the suffix “International Financial Services 
Centre LLP” as part of its name. 


Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert a new proviso to sub-section (2) of 
section 23 of the LLP Act, 2008 so as to provide that in case of prescribed class or 
classes of LLPs regulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (80881), or 
by the International Financial Services Centres Authority (IFSCA), as the case may 
be, the requirement of filing any changes in the LLP agreement shall be such as may 
be provided by rules. This amendment is to facilitate setting up of Alternative 
Investment Funds in LLP form. 


Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert a new proviso to sub-section (2) of 
section 25 of the LLP Act, 2008 so as to provide that in case of prescribed class or 
classes of LLPs regulated by SEBI or by the IFSCA, the requirement to furnish 
details of changes in partners to the Registrar shall be on annual basis in such form 
and manner as may be provided by rules. This amendment is to facilitate setting up 
of Alternative Investment Funds in LLP form. 


Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert new provisos in sub-section (2) of 
section 32 of the LLP Act, 2008 to provide that the monetary value of each partner’s 
contribution in a Specified International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) LLP shall 
be accounted for and disclosed in a permitted foreign currency. It further provides 
for the period and manner in which an LLP set up in IFSC prior to Corporate Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 2026 (CLAA-2026) may convert monetary value of contribution 
of each partner to permitted foreign currency. It further provides that an LLP 
referred to in the first proviso shall not be permitted to receive or accept monetary 
contribution from any partner, without converting its monetary contribution into a 
permitted foreign currency, after such commencement. 


Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 33A in the LLP Act, 2008 to 
provide that the provisions of section 247 of the Companies Act, 2013 shall mutatis 
mutandis apply for the valuation required in respect of a partner’s contribution in an 
LLP or of any property or assets or net worth of such limited liability partnership, 
or its liabilities under the provisions of LLP Act or rules made thereunder. 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to insert new provisos in sub-section (/) of 
section 34 of the LLP Act, 2008 to provide that a Specified IFSC LLP maintaining 
contribution in a permitted foreign currency shall prepare and maintain its books of 
account, books and papers, financial statements and all other records in the 
permitted foreign currency. It also provides that such IFSC LLP may be permitted 
to prepare its books of account, books and papers, financial statement and other 
records in Indian rupee, if so, allowed by the International Financial Services 
Centres Authority (IFSCA). It also proposes to decriminalise offences under 
sub-sections (/) and (2) of the said section. 


Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to insert new sub-section (4) in section 38 of the 
LLP Act, 2008 to provide that any person who, without lawful excuse, fails to 
comply with any requisition of the Registrar (other than summons) issued under this 
section shall be liable to penalty of ten thousand rupees. Accordingly, this aspect of 
offence is being decriminalised. 


Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 57A in the LLP Act, 2008 to 
allow conversion of a specified trust into a limited liability partnership in accordance 
with the provisions of Chapter X and the proposed Fifth Schedule in the said Act. It 
also seeks to insert an Explanation to the new section to clarify that, for the purposes 
of the section, the term “specified trust” means a trust established under the Indian 
Trusts Act, 1882 or under a Central Act or State Act, and registered by SEBI or by the 
IFSCA, having such activities as may be provided by rules. This amendment will 
facilitate conversion of Alternative Investment Funds formed as trusts into LLPs. 


Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to replace section 58 of the LLP Act, 2008 so as to 
include enabling provisions for the registration and legal effect of conversion of a 
specified trust into limited liability partnership also, in addition to firm, private 
company and unlisted public company already allowed in existing section 58. This 
amendment will facilitate conversion of Alternative Investment Funds formed as 
trusts into LLPs. 


Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to insert two new provisos in sub-section (/) of 
section 68 of the LLP Act, 2008 to provide that Central Government may require a 
Specified IFSC LLP to use permitted foreign currency for the purpose of filing, 
recording, or registering any document under the said section in the manner as may be 
provided by rules. It also seeks to provide that such IFSC LLP shall pay fees, fines and 
penalties as provided under the LLP Act or the rules made thereunder in Indian rupees. 


Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 68B in the LLP Act, 2008 to 
provide that any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar under section 12 or 
section 16 of the said Act may prefer an appeal to such officer of the Central Government, 
in such form and manner and within such period as may be provided by rules. 


Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (/A) in section 76A of 
the LLP Act, 2008 to provide that a LLP or its partner or designated partner may, 
suo moto, make an application for adjudication of penalty in such form and manner 
and on payment of such fees, as may be provided by rules. It also seeks to insert a 
new sub-section (/0) to provide that from the commencement of the proposed 
legislation, where a provision in respect of any offence provided in LLP Act has 
been amended to provide for adjudication under the said section, the manner of 
withdrawal of the complaint and the manner of transfer of such matter for adjudication 
under such section, whether pending in the Court or otherwise, shall be dealt with in 
accordance with such Scheme as may be notified by the Central Government. 


Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Schedule (Fifth Schedule) to the 
LLP Act, 2008 referred to in section 57A to specify the conditions which would 
need to be fulfilled before conversion of a specified trust into a limited liability 
partnership. The provisions of Fifth Schedule are similar to conditions provided 
under Second, Third and Fourth Schedules to the Act. This amendment will 
facilitate conversion of Alternative Investment Funds formed as trusts into LLPs. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to make amendment in section 2 of the Companies 
Act, 2013 (Companies Act) which defines various terms used in the said Act. It 
seeks to modify clause (28) to substitute reference to the appropriate title of “The 
Cost Accountants Act, 1959”. It seeks to insert new proviso to clause (4/) for 
empowering the Central Government to allow conversion of the financial year to 
the period ending on 31st March of the following year, on application by a company 
or a body corporate, referred to under the first proviso, or on the basis of commercial 
considerations, by any other company or body corporate, as the case may be. It also 
seeks to insert definition of “Regional Director” as a new clause (73.4) to mean a 
person appointed by the Central Government under section 396 as Regional Director 
for the purposes of the Companies Act who shall include an Additional Regional 
Director or Joint Regional Director, or Deputy Regional Director. It also seeks to 
insert new clause (74A) to define the term “Registered Valuer” to mean a person 
who holds a certificate of registration granted under section 247. The clause also seeks 
to amend sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (85) to expand the definition of small 
companies by increasing the existing upper limit of paid-up share capital to twenty 
crore rupees and existing upper limit of turnover to two hundred crore rupees. 


Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-clause (a) of clause (7) of 
sub-section (5) of section 4 of the Companies Act to provide for a fixed penalty 
amount of fifty thousand rupees where companies default in compliance with such 
provisions. 


Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (b) and insert new clause (ba) in 
sub-section (/) of section 7 of the Companies Act to provide that the requirement of 
declaration by an advocate, chartered accountant, cost accountant or company 
secretary in practice during formation or incorporation of a company shall be 
applicable only when the company engages such professionals in its formation or 
incorporation. 


Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 12A in the Companies Act 
to provide that the prescribed class or classes of companies shall maintain a website, 
an email address and other modes of communication in such form and manner as 
may be provided by rules. It further provides that the details of website, e-mail 
address and other modes of communication, and the changes therein shall be 
intimated to the Registrar in such form and within such period as may be provided 
by rules. The clause is sought to be made applicable to listed companies or other 
unlisted public companies meeting relevant thresholds to be provided by rules. 


Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to insert a proviso after sub-section (2) of 
section 20 of the Companies Act to provide that service of prescribed class of 
documents by prescribed class or classes of companies to their members shall take 
place only through electronic mode in such manner as may be provided by rules. 
Since electronic communication is cost-effective and convenient mode for 
dispatching and delivering documents the proposed amendments seeks to allow 
communication in such form. The manner in which members would be entitled to 
receive physical copies of the prescribed classes of documents would be provided 
in the rules. In the second proviso, it is proposed to replace the words “annual 
general meeting”, with the words “general meeting” to allow determination of fees 
for delivery of any document to a member through a particular mode in the 
extraordinary general meetings also. 


Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 24 of the 
Companies Act, to omit the words “and the matters delegated to it under proviso to 
sub-section (/) of section 458”. The proviso to sub-section (/) in section 458 referring 
to delegation of powers under sections 194 and 195 to the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India, as well as, sections 194 and 195 of the Companies Act were omitted 
in 2017. The reference to such proviso to sub-section (J) of section 458 in 
sub-section (2) of section 24, accordingly, is redundant and being omitted. 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (9) of section 26 of the 
Companies Act, to provide that if a prospectus is issued in contravention of such 
section, the company and every person who is knowingly a party to the issue of such 
prospectus shall be liable to a penalty of two lakh rupees. Accordingly, the offence 
is being decriminalised. 


Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (5) of section 40 of the 
Companies Act, to provide that punishment under such sub-section shall be applicable 
only for defaults under sub-section (3) thereby decriminalising offences under 
sub-sections (/), (2) and (4) of section 40. It further seeks to insert new sub-section (5A) 
to provide that in case of defaults (under sub-sections other than sub-section (3), penalty 
of twenty-five lakh rupees for every company and two lakh rupees for every officer of 
the company shall be leviable. 


Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to amend the marginal heading of section 42 of the 
Companies Act by substituting the word “shares” with the word “securities”. It 
further seeks to amend sub-section (2) to insert the words “or such other scheme 
linked to the value of the share capital of a company”’, after the words, “employee 
stock option’, in order to recognise instruments such as Restricted Stock Units and 
Stock Appreciation Rights, in addition to Employee Stock Option Plans, as 
executive compensation to be issued with approval of shareholders. It also seeks to 
amend sub-section (/0) to replace the words “which may extend to”, with the words 
“equivalent to” to bring in more transparency in levy of penalties. 


Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 43A in the Companies Act to 
provide for the requirements in respect of issue and maintenance of share capital, 
preparation and maintenance of books of account, etc., filing, submitting or 
delivering documents by companies set up and incorporated in the IFSC jurisdiction 
in a permitted foreign currency. Presently, the Companies Act does not include 
specific provisions to enable companies to prepare accounts or financial statements 
in foreign currencies. Taking into account the nature of companies set up in IFSC 
jurisdiction, such provisions are being included through new section 43A. It also 
seeks to clarify that such companies shall pay fees, fines and penalties under the 
Companies Act and the rules made thereunder in Indian rupees. 


Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (b) of sub-section (/) of section 62 of 
the Companies Act to include the words “or under such other scheme linked to the value 
of the share capital of the company’, after the words “under a scheme of employees’ 
stock option”, in order to recognise instruments such as Restricted Stock Units and Stock 
Appreciation Rights, in addition to Employee Stock Option Plans, as executive 
compensation to be issued with approval of shareholders. 


Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to replace existing proviso with two new provisos in 
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 68 of the Companies Act to provide that 
prescribed class or classes of companies may buy-back shares up to such per cent. of the 
aggregate of paid-up capital and free reserves as may be provided by rules. It also seeks 
to insert a proviso to clause (g) of sub-section (2) thereto to allow prescribed class or 
classes of companies to make up to two offers of buy-backs within a period of year in 
such a manner that the second buy-back during the year is not made earlier than six 
months from the date of closure of the preceding offer for buy-back during the year. 
Further, it seeks to amend clause (c) of sub-section (5) of section 68 of the Companies 
Act, 2013 to include the words “or a scheme linked to the value of the share capital of a 
company referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (/) of section 62” after the words “sweat 
equity”. Buy-back through tender offers is an efficient way of returning surplus funds to 
shareholders and it is proposed to allow prescribed class of companies to avail such 
mechanism. Further it is proposed that companies which are debt free can be considered 
to undertake more than one buy-back in a financial year. It also seeks to omit words 
“and verified by an affidavit” in sub-section (6) so that declaration of solvency to be 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


filed for the purposes need not be in the form of an affidavit. The punishment of fine 
provided under sub-section (/ /) is proposed to be converted into penalties as the offence 
is being decriminalised. 


Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to insert proviso in sub-section (/) of section 77 of 
the Companies Act to provide that for prescribed class or classes of companies (such 
as, small companies) the period of “sixty days” referred to in clause (b) of second 
proviso shall be replaced with “one hundred and twenty days” so that such class or 
classes of companies get 60 additional days for filing e-forms relating to the 
registration of charges, in the interest of ease of compliances. 


Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (2A) in section 88 of 
the Companies Act to provide that no notice of any trust, whether express, implied, 
or constructive, shall be entered in the register of members or debenture holders as 
maintained under sub-section (/) of the said section. 


Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (3) in section 96 of the 
Companies Act to allow companies to hold their annual general meetings (AGMs) 
physically or through video conferencing or other audio-visual means, either wholly 
or partly, in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions, as may be 
provided by rules. It also seeks to provide that if the number of members referred to 
in sub-section (2) of section 100 of the Companies Act requisition the meeting to be 
held in a hybrid mode, the company shall hold the meeting in such mode. It further 
seeks to provide that every company shall hold its annual general meeting in 
physical mode at least once in every three years. 


Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to amend the marginal heading of section 99 of the 
Companies Act to clarify that such section shall provide for penalty in respect of 
default in complying with section 96 of the Companies Act. The clause also seeks 
to omit the words and figures “or section 97 or section 98 or in complying with any 
directions of the Tribunal” appearing in such section. Section 425 of the Act relating 
to power to punish for contempt shall be applicable in case of non-compliance of 
directions of Tribunal under sections 97 and 98. It also seeks to provide that in case 
of default in complying with section 96, penalty as provided in the amended 
provision shall be leviable thereby decriminalising the offence. 


Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (7) in section 100 of 
the Companies Act to allow companies to hold their extraordinary general meetings 
(EGMs) physically or through video conferencing or other audio-visual means, 
either wholly or partly, in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions, as 
may be provided by rules. It seeks to provide that if the number of members referred 
to in sub-section (2) of section 100 of the Companies Act requisition the meeting to 
be held in a hybrid mode, the company shall hold the meeting in such mode. 


Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to amend the proviso to sub-section (/) of 
section 101 of the Companies Act to provide that EGMs conducted wholly through 
video conferencing or audio-visual means under sub-section (7) of section 100 may 
be called by giving a notice of at least seven days, or such other period, and in such 
manner as may be provided by rules. 


Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (5) of section 124 of the 
Companies Act to provide that “any dividend which has not been paid or claimed” 
shall also be transferred to Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) in cases 
where relevant shares have been transferred by the company under sub-section (6) 
of the said section to such Fund. It also seeks to amend sub-section (6) thereof, to 
insert the word “Authority” after the words “Investor Education and Protection 
Fund” appearing in the said sub-section. 


Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to insert a new clause (ma) in sub-section (2) of 
section 125 of the Companies Act to provide that the amounts in respect of shares 
bought back and extinguished, remaining unpaid or unclaimed for seven or more 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


years shall be credited to the IEPF. It further seeks to substitute clause (a) of 
sub-section (3) of the said section, to provide that the IEPF shall be utilised for the refund 
in respect of unclaimed dividends and amounts referred to in clauses (/) to () of 
sub-section (2) of the said section which is due for refund. It also seeks to amend 
sub-section (4) to provide that any person claiming to be entitled to the amount under 
sub-section (2) may apply in accordance with such procedure and on submission of such 
documents as may be provided by rules. It also seeks to insert a new sub-section (/2) 
to empower the IEPF Authority to delegate to any member, officer or any other person 
any of its powers and functions under the Companies Act, as it deems necessary. 


Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (6) of section 128 of the 
Companies Act to provide that in case of contravention of such section [except 
sub-section (/) or sub-section (5)] the managing director, the whole-time director in 
charge of finance, the Chief Financial Officer, or any other person of a company 
charged by the Board with the duty of complying with the provisions of this section, 
shall be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees in case of a listed company and fifty 
thousand rupees in case of any other company. It further seeks to insert a proviso to 
sub-section (6) to provide that in case of contravention relating to sub-section (/) or 
sub-section (5) the above persons shall be liable to a penalty of twenty lakh rupees 
in case of a listed company and five lakh rupees in case of any other company. 
Accordingly, the clause seeks to decriminalise offences under this section. 


Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to amend long line in clause (8) of sub-section (/) 
of section 131 of the Companies Act by inserting the word “immediately” before 
the words “preceding financial years”. 


Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (/A) of section 132 of the 
Companies Act to provide that the National Financial Reporting Authority (NFRA) 
shall be a body corporate, having perpetual succession and a common seal with 
powers to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and to sue or be 
sued in its own name. It further seeks to amend clause (a) of sub-section (2) to insert 
the words “or bodies corporate”, after the words “class of companies” to enable the 
authority to make recommendations for relevant bodies corporate also. It seeks to 
omit sub-section (3A). It also seeks to insert sub-section (3C) to provide that the 
Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence and direction of the 
affairs of the NFRA and may exercise all powers and do the acts delegated to him 
by the executive body. It seeks to insert sub-section (3D) to provide that the 
executive body may, by order, delegate to the Chairperson, or any full-time Member 
or officer of the NFRA, or to a Committee comprising of one or more of the above, 
subject to such conditions, such powers of the executive body under this Act as it 
may deem necessary. It also seeks to amend clause (a) of sub-section (4) to clarify 
that class of companies or bodies corporate which may be investigated under such 
provisions shall be prescribed by the Central Government and the manner of 
investigation shall be specified by regulations by the Authority. It also seeks to insert 
sub-clauses (C), (D), and (£) in clause (c) to sub-section (4) to provide NFRA with 
the powers for issuing an advisory, censure or warning to the member or the firm, 
requiring additional professional training of the member or individual partners or 
employees of the firm, and referring the matter to the Central Government for taking 
action under the provisions of the Companies Act or rules made thereunder. It also 
seeks to substitute the Explanation to sub-section (4) provide that “professional or 
other misconduct” shall also include acts or omissions that constitute a 
contravention of the provisions of the Companies Act or the rules or regulations 
made thereunder, insofar as they related to the matters within the jurisdiction, 
functions, or regulatory remit of the NFRA. It also seeks to insert sub-section (4A) 
to provide that any person who fails to comply with any order of the NFRA under 
sub-section (4), or fails to pay the penalty imposed shall be liable to punishment 
with imprisonment, fine and further period of debarment. It also seeks to amend 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 51 


sub-section (//) to provide that NFRA may appoint a secretary and such other 
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions 
under this Act and the terms and conditions thereof may be specified by regulations 
by NFRA. It also seeks to insert sub-section (16) to provide that no act or proceeding 
of the NFRA shall be invalid due to reasons of vacancy or defect in constitution of 
such Authority, any defect in appointing members of such Authority, or 
irregularities in the procedure of such Authority not affecting the merits of the case. 
It also seeks to insert sub-section (/7) to provide that NFRA may engage experts 
and professionals with special knowledge of accounting standards, auditing 
standards, economics, law, business, or such other disciplines related to its functions 
as it may deem necessary to assist the said Authority in discharge of its functions. 


Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 132A to 132K in the 
Companies Act relating to NFRA. It seeks to insert section 132A to provide for the 
intimation of registration details of auditors, and the filing of returns with NFRA. It 
further seeks to insert new section 132B to provide for the constitution of the NFRA 
Fund. It also seeks to insert a new section 132C to give the National Financial 
Reporting Authority the power to issue directions in public interest or interest of 
investors or creditors or other persons concerned. It also seeks to insert section 132D 
to empower NFRA to impose penalties after holding inquiry in such manner as may 
be provided by the rules after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard. It also 
seeks to insert section 132E to provide that no civil court shall have jurisdiction to 
entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which the NFRA is 
empowered to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other 
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken by the said Authority in 
pursuance of any power conferred by or under the Companies Act. It also seeks to 
insert a new section 132F to provide that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or the National Financial Reporting Authority 
or Chairperson or any member or officer or other employee of the said Authority for 
anything done in good faith, or intended to be done under the Companies Act or the 
rules or regulations made thereunder. It also seeks to insert a new section 132G to 
empower the Central Government to give directions on questions of policy, in writing, 
to the NFRA in certain cases. It also seeks to insert section 132H to provide for the 
circumstances and other requirements in respect of supersession of the NFRA. It also 
seeks to insert a new section 132-I to empower NFRA to levy fees or other charges as 
may be specified. It also seeks to insert a new section 132J to empower NFRA to make 
regulations. It also seeks to insert a new section 132K to provide the manner in which 
NFRA shall ensure transparency while specifying regulations. 


Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to insert clause (fa) in sub-section (3) of 
section 134 of the Companies Act to provide that report of Board shall include 
explanations or comments by the Board on every observation or comment of the 
auditors on financial transactions or matters which have any adverse effect on the 
functioning of the company and any qualification, reservation or adverse remark 
relating to the maintenance of accounts and other matters connected therewith in 
such form as may be provided by rules. It also seeks to insert clause (pa) to provide 
that Board’s report shall include details in respect of composition of the Audit 
Committee and where the Board had not accepted any recommendation of the Audit 
Committee, a statement along with the reasons for the same. 


Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 135 of the 
Companies Act to substitute the words “five crore” with the words “ten crore, or 
such sum as may be prescribed”. This is aimed at enhancing the applicability 
threshold under sub-section (/) of the said section relating to net profit. It seeks to 
replace the period of “thirty days” in sub-section (6) to “ninety days” to enable 
additional time period for transfer of unspent Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
amounts relating to ongoing projects to the Unspent Corporate Social Responsibility 
Account with the scheduled bank. It also seeks to amend sub-section (9) to replace 
the words “fifty lakh rupees” to “one crore rupees or such higher amount as may be 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


prescribed” to ensure that companies having CSR amount up to one crore rupees (or 
higher amount) need not constitute the Corporate Social Responsibility Committee. 
It also seeks to insert a new sub-section (/0) to provide that prescribed class or 
classes of companies which fulfil prescribed conditions shall not be required to 
comply with the said section. 


Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (/2) in section 139 of 
the Companies Act to provide that prescribed class or classes of companies which 
fulfil such conditions, as may be provided by rules, shall not be required to appoint 
auditors under Chapter X of the said Act. This amendment is aimed at facilitating 
ease of compliance for small companies. 


Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to insert a new proviso in sub-section (/) of 
section 141 of the Companies Act to provide that every partner of the firm shall be 
a person who has been registered with a statutory institute or body established under 
a law in India having powers of such registration. 


Clause 46 of the Bill seeks to insert new proviso to section 144 of the 
Companies Act to provide that an auditor or audit firm of prescribed class or classes of 
companies shall not provide, directly or indirectly, any non-audit services to the 
company or its holding company or subsidiary. It also seeks to provide that the 
restriction under this section shall also apply for a period of three years after the auditor 
or audit firm has completed his or its term under sub-section (2) of section 139. 


Clause 47 of the Bill seeks to insert a proviso after sub-section (/) of 
section 147 of the Companies Act to provide that in case of contravention of 
sub-sections (/), (5) to (8) and (//) of section 139, sub-section (4) of section 140, 
sub-section (4) of section 141, sub-sections (J) and (2) of section 142 and 
section 146 of the Companies Act, the company shall be liable to a penalty of one 
lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred 
rupees for each day subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees and every officer of 
the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand 
rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of two hundred rupees 
for each day subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees. The clause, accordingly, 
seeks to decriminalise relevant offences. It further seeks to amend sub-section (2) 
of section 147 to insert reference to “section 143 [other than sub-section (/2)]”, and 
“section 146” in the said sub-section. 


Clause 48 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (/A) in section 148 of 
the Companies Act to empower the Central Government to provide standards of cost 
accounting by rules, after examination of recommendations of the Institute of Cost 
Accountants of India. It further seeks to insert provisos in sub-section (3) to provide 
that a firm whose majority of partners practicing in India are qualified for 
appointment as cost auditor may be appointed by its firm name and to also provide 
that every partner of such firm shall be a person who is registered with a statutory 
institute or body established under a law in India having powers of such registration. 
It also seeks to amend punishment provisions under sub-section (8) so as to provide 
for payment of penalty in case of such defaults under section 148 which are of 
technical or procedural nature. For contravention of serious nature the existing 
punishment is being sought to be retained. Accordingly, certain offences under the 
section are being decriminalised. 


Clause 49 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-clauses (7) and (ii) of clause (e) of 
sub-section (6) of section 149 of the Companies Act to include the words “or during 
the current financial year”. It also seeks to substitute the words “secretarial auditors” 
for the words “company secretaries in practice” in item (A) of sub-clause (ii) of 
clause (e) of sub-section (6). It also seeks to amend item (9) in sub-clause (ii) of 
clause (e) of the said sub-section to replace the words “amounting to ten per cent. 
or more”, with the words “amounting to ten per cent. or such lower per cent., as may 
be prescribed” so that lower per cent. may be provided by rules in future with regard 
to the amounts of transactions which any legal or consulting firm may have with the 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


company or its holding, subsidiary or associate company in case any employee or 
proprietor or partner of such firm is independent director in the company. It also 
seeks to insert a new sub-section (6A) to provide that every independent director 
shall ensure that he continues to fulfil the requirements specified under 
sub-section (6) during the term of his appointment. It also seeks to amend 
sub-section (//) of section 149 of the Companies Act to include reference to 
“holding, subsidiary or associate company” also so that the restriction in respect of 
appointment or association in any other capacity during cooling off period of three 
years is applicable to the company as well as its holding, subsidiary or associate 
company. It also seeks to insert new proviso in sub-section (//) to provide that 
where the provisions of item (9) of sub-clause (7) of clause (e) of sub-section (6) 
applies to an independent director, he may continue as an employee or proprietor or 
partner of the legal or consulting firm, in case the transaction of such legal or consulting 
firm with the company, its holding or subsidiary or associate company is less than ten 
per cent. or the lower per cent. referred to in the said item, of the gross turnover of such 
firm. It also seeks to insert a new Explanation 2, in the said section, to provide that any 
period during which an independent director has served as an additional director of the 
company, shall be included in his tenure as an independent director. 


Clause 50 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 152 of the 
Companies Act to clarify that a person needs to have a valid Director Identification 
Number during the entire term of his functioning as director in any company. It 
seeks to provide that after the words “shall be appointed”, in sub-section (3), the 
words “or shall continue to function” shall be inserted. It also seeks to insert the 
words “and the said Director Identification Number or the other number is not 
deactivated or cancelled” at the end thereby providing clarity regarding the necessity 
of validity of the Director Identification Number (DIN) at the time of appointment 
as well as during entire tenure. The amendments seeks to ensure that only persons 
holding a valid and active identification number may be appointed and may continue 
to function as directors. 


Clause 51 of the Bill seeks to insert new sub-sections (2) to (7) in section 154 
of the Companies Act to, inter alia, provide for requirements in respect of 
(i) submission of information towards verification of particulars of a person holding 
a DIN to the Central Government, (7) the circumstances under which Director 
Identification Number may be deactivated or cancelled and the consequences 
thereof, (iii) manner of surrendering the DIN and (7०) conditions on fulfilment of 
which a DIN may be re-activated or restored. 


Clause 52 of the Bill seeks to amend section 159 of the Companies Act to 
replace the words “which may extend to” with the word “of? to bring in more 
transparency in levy of penalties. It also proposes to include maximum penalty 
amount of rupees five lakh for default in respect of this section. 


Clause 53 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 161 of the 
Companies Act to provide that an additional director may hold office up to the date of 
the next general meeting or up to a period of three months from the date of his 
appointment, whichever is earlier. It further seeks to amend sub-section (4) to provide 
for similar requirements in case of filing of casual vacancy of a director. It also seeks 
to insert a new sub-section (5) to provide that notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-sections (/) to (4), a person whose appointment as a director could not be 
considered or could not be approved in a general meeting, shall not be appointed by 
the Board as an additional director, or alternate director or a director against a casual 
vacancy under this section without the prior approval of its members. 


Clause 54 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (g) of sub-section (/) of 
section 164 of the Companies Act to cover cases where a person has been subjected 
to a penalty for default under the provisions of section 188 of the said Act which 
relates to related party transactions. It also seeks to insert a new clause (7) to provide 


54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


that a person shall not be eligible for appointment as a director of a company, if he 
has been an auditor or a secretarial auditor or a cost auditor or a registered valuer or 
an insolvency professional of the company or its holding, subsidiary or associate 
company discharging the functions as such under this Act or under the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 during the immediately preceding three financial years 
or during the current financial year. It also seeks to insert a new clause (k) to provide 
that a person shall not be eligible under the said section if he has not been assessed 
by the Board to be a fit and proper person in accordance with such criteria, as may 
be provided by rules. It also seeks to amend clause (a) of sub-section (2) to revise 
the period of non-filing of financial statements or annual returns from “three financial 
years” to “two financial years” so that companies are more diligent in filing such 
documents within time. It also seeks to amend the long line of sub-section (2) to 
clarify that where provisions of section 164(2) become applicable, the office of 
director shall become vacant as per provisions of sub-section (/) of section 167. 


Clause 55 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 165 of the 
Companies Act to empower the Central Government to specify a lower number for 
the purposes of the said section for a class or classes of companies or a class or 
classes of directors. It further seeks to amend Explanation वी to sub-section (/) to 
replace the words “of twenty companies” with the words “under this section” which 
is of consequential nature. 


Clause 56 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (7) of section 166 of the 
Companies Act to provide that such sub-section relating to punishment under the 
said section shall be applicable only for sub-section (5) and to further clarify that 
the court adjudicating such offence may also order concerned director to pay the 
amount of undue gains referred to in the said sub-section to the company. It further 
seeks to insert a new sub-section (8) to provide that if a director of a company 
contravenes the provisions of the said section [other than sub-section (5)] he shall 
be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees in case of a listed company and two lakh 
rupees in case of any other company. The clause seeks to decriminalise offences 
under section 166, except sub-section (5). 


Clause 57 of the Bill seeks to substitute the proviso to clause (a) of sub-section (/) 
of section 167 of the Companies Act to provide that where a director incurs 
disqualification under sub-section (2) of section 164, his office shall become vacant 
in every company where he is a director (including the company which is in default 
under that sub-section), after six months from the date of incurring such 
disqualification or upon expiry of his tenure in such company, whichever is earlier. It 
further seeks to add an Explanation to clarify that the date of incurring the 
disqualification shall be the date on which the company fails to comply with the 
provisions of clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 164. It also seeks to 
amend sub-section (2) to provide that if a person functions as a director even when he 
knows that the office of director held by him has become vacant on account of any of 
the disqualifications specified in sub-section (/) or that his Director Identification 
Number has been de-activated or cancelled, he shall be liable to a penalty of five lakh 
rupees, in case ofa listed company, and two lakh rupees, in case of any other company. 
The clause seeks to decriminalise offences under sub-section (2) of section 167. 


Clause 58 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (5) of section 173 of the 
Companies Act to provide that a One Person Company, small company and dormant 
company shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of the said section 
relating to meetings of Board of directors if at least one meeting of the Board of 
Directors has been conducted in a calendar year. 


Clause 59 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 184 of the 
Companies Act by omitting the words “at the first meeting of the Board in every 
financial year or’ to clarify that subsequent disclosures provided in such sub-section 
would be required only when there is any change in the disclosures made and not 
every financial year. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 55 


Clause 60 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (6) of sub-section (/) of 
section 185 of the Companies Act by providing that after the words “any firm’, the 
words “or limited liability partnership” shall be inserted so that limited liability 
partnerships are also covered within the purview of such provisions. 


Clause 61 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (13) of section 186 of the 
Companies Act to exclude contraventions of sub-sections (9) and (/0) of section 186 
from the scope of punishment provided therein. It further seeks to insert a new 
sub-section (/4) to provide that ifa company contravenes the provisions of sub-section (9) 
or sub-section (/0), the company shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in 
case of continuing contravention, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each 
day, after the first during which such contravention continues, subject to a maximum of 
five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a 
penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing default, with a further 
penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such default 
continues, subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees. The clause seeks to decriminalise 
offences under sub-sections (9) and (/0) of section 186. 


Clause 62 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (5A) in section 189 of 
the Companies Act to provide that every company which fails to comply with the 
provisions of such section and the rules made thereunder shall be liable to a penalty 
of two lakh rupees. 


Clause 63 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 203A in the Companies Act 
to provide for resignation of whole-time key managerial personnel (KMP) who are 
not a director in a company. Sub-section (/) of section 203A provides that a 
whole-time KMP, who is not a director, may resign from his office by giving a notice 
in writing to the company, and the Board shall, on receipt of such notice, take note of 
the same and intimate the Registrar of such resignation in such form and manner and 
within such time, as may be provided by rules. It further provides that where the 
company fails to intimate, the said KMP may forward a copy of his resignation to the 
Registrar in such manner as may be provided by rules. Sub-section (2) of section 203A 
provides that the resignation of a KMP shall take effect from the date on which the 
notice is received by the company or the date, if any, specified by him in the notice, 
whichever is later. It further provides that such KMP shall be liable even after his 
resignation for the default for which he was liable during his tenure. 


Clause 64 of the Bill seeks to amend section 204 of the Companies Act by 
substituting the words “secretarial auditors” for the words “company secretaries in 
practice”, wherever they occur. It further seeks to insert a new sub-section (/A) to 
provide that a person shall be eligible for appointment as a secretarial auditor of a 
company only if he is a company secretary in practice, provided that that a firm, 
whereof majority of partners practicing in India who are qualified for appointment, 
may be appointed by its firm name. It further seeks to provide that every partner of 
the firm shall be a person who has been registered with a statutory institute or body 
established under a law in India having powers of such registration. 


Clause 65 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (7) of section 206 of the 
Companies Act to provide that if a company fails to furnish any information or 
explanation or produce any document required under this section, the company 
shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with 
a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day, subject to a maximum of five 
lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a 
penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a 
further penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, subject to a maximum of one 
lakh rupees. The clause seeks to decriminalise offences under section 206. 


Clause 66 of the Bill seeks to omit offence referred to in sub-section (2) of 
section 222 of the Companies Act. Section 425 of the said Act relating to power to 
punish for contempt shall be applicable in such case. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Clause 67 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-sections (/) and (6) of section 230 of 
the Companies Act by omitting the words “or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2016” to clarify that a compromise or merger under the said Act is not allowed 
when the liquidation process under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 has 
been initiated. It further seeks to insert a new proviso to sub-section (/) of section 230 
to provide that on and from the commencement of the proposed legislation, every 
application to be made under this section or sections 231 to 233 to the National 
Company Law Tribunal (Tribunal), shall be made to the Tribunal having jurisdiction 
over the transferee company or the resultant company, as the case may be, and such 
Tribunal shall exercise all the powers of the Tribunal referred to in such sections for 
all the companies involved in the schemes of compromise or arrangement or 
amalgamations. It also seeks to provide that any application pending before the 
Tribunal as on the date of such commencement shall continue to be dealt with by the 
Tribunal in accordance with the provisions applicable before such commencement. 


Clause 68 of the Bill seeks to amend the proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (3) 
of section 232 of the Companies Act to provide that after the words “or extinguished” 
occurring at the end, the words “on the merger or amalgamation” shall be inserted. 
This change is of drafting nature. 


Clause 69 of the Bill seeks to substitute clause (b) of sub-section (/) of section 233 
of the Companies Act to provide that objections and suggestions received are considered 
by the companies in their respective general meetings and the scheme is approved by a 
majority of members or class of members present and voting at the meeting who hold at 
least seventy-five per cent. of the value in shares held by such members present and 
voting. This amendment seeks to aligns the approval requirements for such schemes 
with those applicable to schemes placed for sanction before the Tribunal under 
section 230. It further seeks to amend clause (व) of sub-section (/) on similar lines which 
relates to approval by creditors or class of creditors of the respective companies. It also 
seeks to amend sub-section (2) by inserting a new proviso to provide that the copy of 
the scheme need not be filed with the Official Liquidator in case it pertains to transfer 
or division (demerger) of the undertaking of the company. 


Clause 70 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 233A in the Companies Act 
relating to treatment of certain shares held in a name of a company or trust. 
Sub-section (/) seeks to provide that where a transferee company, as a result of a 
compromise or arrangement taken place before the commencement of the Companies 
Act, 2013, has held shares in its own name or in the name of any trust (whether on its 
behalf or on behalf of any of its subsidiary or associate companies), shall be required 
to deal with or dispose of such shares within a period of three years from the date of 
commencement of the proposed legislation in the manner as may be provided by rules. 
Sub-section (2) provides that if a company fails to deal with or dispose of such shares, 
these shall be cancelled and extinguished by the company in such manner, as may be 
provided by rules, and such cancellation and extinguishment shall be deemed to be a 
reduction of the share capital of the company. Sub-section (3) provides for penalty in 
case of failure to comply with these provisions. 


Clause 71 of the Bill seeks to omit offence referred to in sub-section (8) of 
section 242 of the Companies Act. Section 425 of the said Act relating to power to 
punish for contempt shall be applicable in such case. 


Clause 72 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 245 of the 
Companies Act by substituting the reference to “sub-section (2)” with “sub-section (3)” 
to correct the cross-reference. 


Clause 73 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 247 of the 
Companies Act to provide for qualifications and experience for registered valuers. It 
seeks to insert new sub-sections (/A), (JB) and (/C) in the said section to, inter alia, to 
provide 6) that the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (381) established under 
section 188 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 shall be the Valuation 
Authority for the purposes of the said section; (ii) for the manner of granting or renewing 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 57 


certificate of recognition to valuers’ organisations and certificate of registration to 
valuers (iii) for powers of Valuation Authority to make recommendations to the Central 
Government on the formulation and laying down of the valuation standards and policies, 
etc. (iv) that valuation under the Companies Act shall be undertaken only by a registered 
valuer who shall be appointed by the audit committee or in its absence, by the Board of 
Directors of that company, and in other cases, by such person, as may be provided by 
tules. It also seeks to provide for the circumstances, manner, period and consequences 
of suspension or cancellation of certificate of recognition or certificate of registration by 
Valuation Authority. Sub-section (3B) seeks to provide that any person aggrieved by 
an order of the Valuation Authority on suspension or cancellation may prefer an appeal 
before the Appellate Tribunal. Sub-section (3£) seeks to provide that no court shall take 
cognizance of any offence under sub-section (3C) or sub-section (3D) of section 247, 
which is alleged to have been committed by any recognised valuers’ organisation or any 
registered valuer, except on a complaint in writing by an officer authorised in this behalf 
by the Valuation Authority or by the Central Government. It also seeks to insert new 
sub-sections (5) and (6) to provide that the Valuation Authority shall make 
recommendations to the Central Government on the valuation standards and policies, 
and after examination of these recommendations, the Central Government may provide 
such valuation standards or valuation policies, as may be provided by rules. It also seeks 
to insert sub-section (7) to provide that the Valuation Authority shall be bound by such 
directions on questions of policy, as the Central Government may give in writing. It also 
seeks to insert sub-section (8) in the said section to provide that the Valuation Authority, 
by a notification, may delegate to any member, officer, or any other person, its powers 
and functions. It also seeks to insert sub-sections (9), (/0) and (//) in the said section to 
provide for the manner in which regulations may be made by the Valuation Authority. 


Clause 74 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (c) of sub-section (/) of 
section 248 of the Companies Act to rationalise the scope of ground for removal of 
name from register of companies provided under such clause. The grounds relating 
to 0) where the company has not made any significant accounting transaction during 
the preceding two financial years and in the current financial year and (7) where the 
company has not filed financial statements or annual returns for two consecutive 
financial years preceding the previous financial year have been proposed to be 
included in such clause. It further seeks to amend sub-section (2) to provide for the 
manner in which liabilities can be extinguished. It also seeks to omit the words “on 
all or any of the grounds specified in sub-section (/)” from sub-section (2) so that 
applications under the said sub-section can be made on independent grounds. It also 
seeks to make consequential amendments in sub-sections (5) and (6). 


Clause 75 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 249 of the 
Companies Act to replace the fine provided, that is, which may extend to one lakh 
rupees with penalty of fifty thousand rupees to decriminalise the offence under the 
provision. 


Clause 76 of the Bill seeks to amend the marginal heading of section 252 of 
the Companies Act to substitute the word “Tribunal” with the words “Regional 
Director or Tribunal”. It further seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 252 to 
substitute “Regional Director” for word “Tribunal”, to convey that appeals for 
restoration of names under such sub-section may be filed before Regional Directors. 


Clause 77 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (a) of section 271 of the 
Companies Act by omitting the words “by the Tribunal” in the said clause to enable 
use of this clause for summery liquidation under section 361 which is approved by 
the Central Government. It also seeks to omit the words “by notification under this 
Act” in clause (c) to remove the requirement of issue of notification for authorisation 
of any other person by the Central Government under the said provisions. 


58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Clause 78 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 361 of 
Companies Act to substitute the words “under this Chapter” with the words “in 
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter under the circumstances referred to 
in clauses (a), (b) and (d) of section 271” to clarify the specific circumstances under 
which such winding up may take place. It further seeks to substitute sub-section (2) 
to provide that the Central Government shall appoint the Official Liquidator or an 
insolvency professional registered under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 
as the liquidator of the company. It also seeks to amend sub-section (5) to provide 
that investigation referred to in the said sub-section may be conducted by either the 
Official Liquidator or any officer not below the rank of Assistant Director as may 
be authorised by the Central Government. 


Clause 79 of the Bill seeks to make consequential amendment in sub-section (3) 
of section 365 of the Companies Act by substituting the words “notice in the Official 
Gazette” for the word “notification”. 


Clause 80 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 365A in the Companies Act 
to provide that any person aggrieved by an order of the Central Government under 
Part IV may prefer an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal, within a period of 
forty-five days from the date of receipt of such order by him, in such manner and on 
payment of such fee, as may be provided by rules. 


Clause 81 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 366 of the 
Companies Act to insert the words “any non-trading company” after the words 
“co-operative society, society”, so as to enable such entities covered within the 
scope of companies capable of being registered under the said Act. 


Clause 82 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (c) of section 374 of the 
Companies Act by substituting the requirement of filing a “duly notarised affidavit”, 
with a “declaration”. This will facilitate ease of compliance. It further seeks to insert 
the words “any non-trading company” after the words “co-operative society, 
society”, to include such entities within the scope of the said provision. 


Clause 83 of the Bill seeks to amend section 378P of the Companies Act by 
omitting sub-section (2) and to substitute sub-section (5) to provide that the 
directors of the Board in a Producer Company shall be elected or appointed by the 
Members in the general meetings. 


Clause 84 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (4) of sub-section (/) of section 378Q 
of the Companies Act to replace the period of “ninety days” up to which the Producer 
Company may make default in repayment of advances or loans to “one hundred and 
eighty days” so that Producer companies get additional period in this regard. 


Clause 85 of the Bill seeks to amend section 378Y of the Companies Act to 
provide that the quorum for a general meeting for Producer Companies, shall be either 
one-fourth of the total membership or one hundred members, whichever is less. 


Clause 86 of the Bill seeks to amend section 378ZA of the Companies Act by 
inserting a new proviso in sub-section (/) to provide that the first annual general 
meeting shall be held within a period of nine months from the date of closing of the 
first financial year and in any other case, within a period of six months, from the 
date of closing of the financial year. Further, it provides that if a company holds 
such first annual general meeting, it shall not be necessary for the company to hold 
any annual general meeting in the year of its incorporation. Consequently, 
sub-section (2) of section 378ZA is proposed to be omitted. It further seeks to 
substitute sub-section (3) to provide that, in the first annual general meeting, the 
members shall adopt the articles of the Producer Company as referred to in 
clause (b) of sub-section (/) of section 3780 and appoint the directors of its Board. 
It also seeks to amend sub-section (9) to provide that the quorum for the annual 
general meeting shall be one-fourth of the total number of members or one hundred 
members of the Producer Company, whichever is less. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


Clause 87 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 378ZF of the Companies Act 
to provide for the requirements in respect of thresholds of turnover, qualification, 
manner of appointment of internal auditor and intervals in which the internal audit 
shall be conducted and reported to the Board by producer companies. 


Clause 88 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 378ZM of the 
Companies Act to modify the fine under this provision, with penalty. It further seeks 
to amend sub-section (2) to modify the punishment of imprisonment and fine to that 
of penalty. It also seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of the said section to provide 
that any director or officer of a Producer Company who fails to hand over custody 
of books of accounts or other documents or property in his custody; or fails to 
convene annual general meeting or general meetings, shall be liable to penalty. 
Accordingly, it is proposed to decriminalise the offence under this section. 


Clause 89 of the Bill seeks to substitute fine under sub-section (6) of 
section 378ZS of the Companies Act with penalty of one hundred rupees for each copy 
in respect of which default is made. Accordingly, it is proposed to decriminalise the 
offence under this section. 


Clause 90 of the Bill seeks to amend section 392 of the Companies Act to 
substitute the existing punishment of fine with a penalty for contravention of the 
provisions of that section. Accordingly, it is proposed to decriminalise the offence 
under this section. 


Clause 91 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “offices” with “and other 
offices” in the marginal heading in section 396 of the Companies Act to clarify that 
centralised offices for processing of e-forms, carrying out scrutiny, etc., can also be 
established within the scope of the section. It further seeks to insert a new 
sub-section (/A) in the said section to empower the Central Government to appoint 
such number of Regional Directors, Additional Regional Directors, or Joint 
Regional Directors or Deputy Regional Directors, as it considers necessary for the 
discharge of various functions under the Act. It also seeks to amend sub-section (2) 
to include the scope for appointment of other officers in additional to Registrars, 
Additional, Deputy, Assistant Registrars presently provided in the said section. It 
seeks to insert a new sub-section (24) to empower the Central Government to 
authorise one or more officers of that Government of appropriate rank to exercise 
the powers and duties of the Regional Director or the Registrar under the said Act. 


Clause 92 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 396A in the Companies Act 
to provide that any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar under section 4 
or section 7, may prefer an appeal to an officer not below the rank of the Joint Director 
as may be authorised by the Central Government, in such form and manner, and within 
such period as may be provided by rules. 


Clause 93 of the Bill seeks to amend the first proviso to sub-section (/) of 
section 403 of the Companies Act to substitute the minimum additional fee of “not less 
than one hundred rupees per day” in case of delayed filings under sections 92 and 137, 
with fee of “not less than such amount as may be prescribed” so that the amounts other 
than one hundred rupees can be provided under the said provisions for any class or 
classes of companies. It also seeks to provide that the additional fees shall be subject to 
a maximum limit of two lakh rupees for prescribed class or classes of companies. 


Clause 94 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (a) of section 410 of the 
Companies Act to insert the words “or of the Valuation Authority” so as to empower 
the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) to also hear appeals 
against any order of the Valuation Authority. 


Clause 95 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (3) in section 418A of 
the Companies Act to provide that if the Members of a Bench of the NCLAT differ 
in opinion on any point or points, it shall be decided according to the majority, if 
there is a majority, but if the Members are equally divided, they shall state the point 
or points on which they differ, and the case shall be referred by the Chairperson for 
hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other Members of the NCLAT 
and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of 
Members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it. 


60 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Clause 96 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 419 of the 
Companies Act to replace the words “Part II of’ with “any of the provisions of” so 
that benches of NCLT may be constituted in respect of jurisdiction, powers and 
authority of Adjudicating Authority for any provision of the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016. It further seeks to insert a new sub-section (4A) in the said 
section to provide that the President may constitute, in such manner as may be 
provided by rules, one or more special benches of the NCLT for the disposal of any 
case under the Companies Act or the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. 


Clause 97 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (6) of sub-section (/) of 
section 441 of the Companies Act to replace the words “does not exceed 
twenty-five lakh rupees”, with the words “does not exceed one crore rupees” to 
enhance the jurisdictional threshold for applications for compounding to the 
Regional Director or any officer authorised by the Central Government. 


Clause 98 of the Bill seeks to amend section 446B of the Companies Act to 
replace the words “liable to a penalty which shall not be more than one-half of the 
penalty”, with the words “liable to a penalty of one-half, or such per cent. not 
exceeding one-half, as may be prescribed, of the penalty”. This clause seeks to 
empower the Central Government to provide such per cent. less than one-half up to 
which penalty amount can be levied in case of defaults by One Person Company, 
small company, start-up company or Producer Company or their officers in default 
or any other person, by rules. 


Clause 99 of the Bill seeks to amend section 447 of the Companies Act to 
replace the words “ten lakh rupees”, with the words “twenty-five lakh rupees” and 
to replace the words “fifty lakh rupees”, with the words “one crore rupees”, which 
is consequential to the change made in section 441 of the said Act. 


Clause 100 of the Bill seeks to amend section 453 of the Companies Act to 
provide that in case of improper use of words “Limited” or “Private Limited”, the 
person or persons concerned shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in 
case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day 
subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees. Accordingly, it is proposed to 
decriminalise the offences under this section. 


Clause 101 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 454 of the 
Companies Act to replace the word “Registrar” with the words “Assistant Registrar” 
so that officers not below the rank of Assistant Registrars can be appointed as 
adjudicating officer. It further seeks to insert a new sub-section (/A) to provide that 
a company or its officer in default may make an application in such form, manner 
and on payment of such fees as may be provided by rules for adjudication of penalty. 
This is to ensure that the companies and officers in default may apply suo moto for 
adjudication of penalties. It also seeks to amend sub-section (5) to insert words “or 
to such Appellate Authority, as the Central Government may, by notification, 
specify” so that officers, other than Regional Directors, being not below the rank of 
Joint Director may also be appointed as Appellate Authority to hear appeal under 
section 454. It also seeks to amend clauses (7) and (ii) of sub-section (8) of the said 
section to provide that the Court concerned, while imposing fine or imprisonment, 
shall also have the power to direct companies or officers in default to pay the amount 
of penalty imposed under the said section in addition to fine or imprisonment to be 
imposed by the Court. It also seeks to insert a new sub-section (9) to provide that all 
penalties realised under the said section shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund 
of India. It also seeks to insert a new sub-section (/0) to provide that from the 
commencement of the proposed legislation, where a provision in respect of any 
offence provided in the Companies Act has been amended to provide for 
adjudication under the said section, the manner of withdrawal of the complaint and 
the manner of transfer of such matter for adjudication under the said section, 
whether pending in the Court or otherwise, shall be dealt with in accordance with 
such Scheme as may be notified by the Central Government. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 61 


Clause 102 of the Bill seeks to amend section 454A of the Companies Act to 
provide that after the words “Regional Director”, the words, brackets and figures 
“or the Appellate Authority referred to in sub-section (5) of section 454” shall be 
inserted, which is consequential in nature to change proposed in sub-section (5) of 
section 454. 


Clause 103 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 454B, 454C and 454D in 
the Companies Act. New section 454B seeks to provide the procedure for recovery 
of amounts by the Recovery Officer if a person fails to pay the penalty imposed 
under the Act. It, inter alia, provides that the Recovery Officer shall have the power 
to seek assistance of local district administration while exercising powers under this 
section. New section 454C seeks to provide for the procedure for settlement for the 
contraventions which shall be liable for a penalty under Companies Act. It, 
inter alia, provides that the Central Government may constitute a Specified 
Authority (comprising of an officer or group of Officers of Central Government) to 
discharge functions under this section. The clause also seeks to insert new section 
454D to provide that no appeal by a person who is required to pay any amount in 
terms of an order of the National Financial Reporting Authority, the Valuation 
Authority, or the adjudicating officer shall be entertained unless the person has 
deposited ten per cent. of that penalty amount in the manner as directed by the 
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal or Regional Director or the Appellate 
Authority as the case may be. 


Clause 104 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (/) of section 455 of the 
Companies Act to replace the words “or an inactive company may” with the words 
“or an inactive company shall” so that the provisions have mandatory force. It 
further seeks to amend clause (i) of the Explanation to sub-section (/) of 
section 455 to replace the words “financial statements and”, with the words 
“financial statements or’ to clarify that a company shall be treated as inactive, 
amongst other conditions, if it has not filed financial statements or annual returns 
during the preceding two financial years. It also seeks to amend clause (ii) of the 
Explanation to sub-section (/) to insert new sub-para (e) to include “receipt or 
payment not relatable to the business or operations of the company” as transactions 
which shall not be treated as “significant accounting transaction”. 


Clause 105 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (a) of section 457 of the 
Companies Act to provide that, after the word and figures “section 210”, the words 
and figures “or section 212” shall be inserted, which is consequential in nature. 


Clause 106 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 466A in the Companies 
Act to empower the Central Government to issue directions, guidelines or circulars 
for the purpose of clarifying the meaning or intent of any rule, or for laying down 
procedural requirements ancillary to any rules. 


Clause 107 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of section 469 to 
provide that any rule made under sub-section (/) may provide that in case of 
contravention thereof, the company, every officer of the company who is in default 
or any other person, shall be liable to a penalty of an amount, as may be prescribed, 
which shall not be more than five lakh rupees, and in case of continuing default, 
with a further penalty of such amount, as may be provided by rules, which shall not 
be more than five thousand rupees for every day during which such default 
continues. Accordingly, it is proposed to decriminalise to offences referred to in 
sub-section (3) of section 469 of the said Act. 


62 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 132B to provide for a fund 
to be called the National Financial Reporting Authority Fund. Sub-section (/) of the 
proposed new section 132B provides that the Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the National 
Financial Reporting Authority, grants of such sums of money as that Government 
may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. The other provisions of 
the Bill will not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature, on its 
enactment. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 63 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (/) of section 11 of the Limited Liability Partnership 
Act, 2008, in respect of the form of the statement to be filed along with the incorporation 
document, by any one person who subscribed his name to the incorporation document 
and the form of declaration to be filed by an advocate, a chartered accountant, cost 
accountant or company secretary in practice, where a limited liability partnership 
engaged such professionals in its formation or incorporation. 


Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under the 
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 23 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, 
in respect of the class or classes of limited liability partnerships regulated by the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), or by the International Financial 
Services Centres Authority (IFSCA), and the requirement of filing changes in the 
limited liability partnership agreement to the Registrar, by such limited liability 
partnerships. 


Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under the 
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 25 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, 
in respect of the class or classes of limited liability partnerships regulated by the SEBI, 
or the IFSCA, and the form and manner of furnishing the details of changes in partners 
to the Registrar on an annual basis, by such limited liability partnerships. 


Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
the explanation to section 57A of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, in 
respect of the activities that may be carried out by a “specified trust” established 
under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or under a Central Act or State Act, and registered 
by the SEBI, or by the IFSCA, as the case may be. 


Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under the 
proviso to sub-section (/) of section 58 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, 
in respect of information about conversion and the form and manner of the conversion 
and of the particulars of the limited liability partnership that are required to be 
intimated to the concerned Registrar of Firms or Registrar of Companies or any other 
authority, as the case may be, with which it was registered or established under the 
provisions of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 or the Companies Act, 2013, or any 
other law for the time being in force, as the case may be. 


Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
the proviso to sub-section (/) of section 68 of the Limited Liability Partnership 
Act, 2008, in respect of the manner in which a Specified International Financial 
Services Centres LLP shall use permitted foreign currency, for the purpose of filing, 
recording, or registering any document under the said section. 


Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
section 68B of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, in respect of the form and 
manner, and period within which any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar 
under section 12 or section 16 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 may 
prefer an appeal and to prescribe the officer of the Central Government to whom the 
appeal may be preferred. 


Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (JA) of section 764 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, in 
respect of the form and manner of making an application, and the fees payable by a 
limited liability partnership or its partner or designated partner for adjudication of 
penalties under section 76A. It also empowers the Central Government to notify a 
scheme to deal with the manner of withdrawal of the complaint and transfer of any 
matter thereto for adjudication under section 76A if such complaint or matter relates 
to those offences in respect of which, on and from the commencement of the 
Corporate Laws (Amendment) Act, 2026, the provision has been amended to 
provide for adjudication under section 76A. 


64 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
paragraph 4(a) of the Fifth Schedule of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, 
in respect of the form and manner, and such fee for the statement by all of its trustees, 
containing the particulars as given under paragraph 4(a). 


It further empowers the Central Government to make rules under paragraph 5 
of the Fifth Schedule, in respect of the form and manner in which the limited liability 
partnership shall inform the concerned authority about the conversion and of the 
particulars of the limited liability partnership. 


Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
clause (4/) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the form and 
manner of an application made to the Central Government by a company or body 
corporate referred to in the first proviso to clause (4/) of section (2) or, on 
commercial considerations, by any other company or body corporate, to realign its 
financial year as the period ending on the 31st day of March of the following year. 


Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
clauses (0) and (ba) of sub-section (/) of section 7 of the Companies Act, 2013, in 
respect of the form of the declaration by a person named in the articles as a director, 
manager or secretary of the company, and the form of a declaration by an advocate, 
a chartered accountant, cost accountant or company secretary in practice, where a 
company engaged such professionals in its formation or incorporation. 


Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (/) of section 12A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the class or 
classes of companies which shall maintain a website, an e-mail address and other 
modes of communication, and the form and manner for maintaining the same. It 
further seeks to empower the Central Government, under sub-section (2) of 
section 12A, to make rules, in respect of the form and period within which the details 
of such website, e-mail address and other modes of communication and any changes 
therein, shall be intimated to the Registrar. 


Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 20 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect 
of the class or classes of companies, the class of documents which may be serviced, 
and the manner of service of such documents by such companies. 


Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (3) of section 43A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner 
in which the Central Government may require that a company referred to in 
sub-section (/) of the said section shall use permitted foreign currency for the purpose 
of filing, submitting or delivering any documents under section 398 of the 
Companies Act, 2013. 


Clause 29 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
the proviso to clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 68 of the Companies Act, 2013, 
in respect of the class or classes of companies, and the percentage of the aggregate 
of paid-up capital and free reserves, up to which a buy-back may be made by such 
prescribed class or classes of companies. Further, it empowers the Central 
Government to make rules under the proviso to clause (g) of said sub-section (2) in 
respect of the class or classes of companies which may make up to two offers of 
buy-backs within a period of one year. 


Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
the proviso to sub-section (/) of section 77 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect 
of the class or classes of companies for which the period of “sixty days” in 
clause (5) of the second proviso shall be read as “one hundred and twenty days”. 


Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (3) of section 96 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner, 
terms and conditions for a company to hold its annual general meeting through video 
conferencing or other audio-visual means, either wholly or partly. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 65 


Clause 34 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (7) of section 100 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner, 
terms and conditions for a company to hold its extraordinary general meeting 
through video conferencing or other audio-visual means, either wholly or partly. 


Clause 35 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (/) of section 101 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the period 
for notice and the manner of issuing notice by a company conducting its 
extraordinary general meeting wholly through video conferencing or audio-visual 
means under sub-section (7) of section 100. 


Clause 37 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (4) of section 125 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the 
procedure for application and the documents which are required to be submitted by 
any person claiming to be entitled to the amount referred to in sub-section (2). It 
also empowers the Investor Education and Protection Fund Authority under 
sub-section (/2) of section 125 to delegate, by way of notification, to any member, 
officer or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, in such notification, 
any of its powers and functions under this Act as it deems necessary. 


Clause 40 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 132 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect 
of the class of body corporate or persons in respect of whom action may be taken 
under the said clause. 


Clause 41 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (/) of proposed section 132A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of 
the time, manner and fees for an individual or firm to intimate the details of his or 
its registration with the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, to the National 
Financial Reporting Authority. 


Clause 42 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
clause (fa) of sub-section (3) of section 134 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect 
of the form of the explanations or comments by the Board to be included within the 
report of the Board of Directors, on every observation or comment of the auditors 
on financial transactions or matters which have any adverse effect on the functioning 
of the company under clause (f) of sub-section (3) of section 143 and any 
qualification, reservation or adverse remark relating to the maintenance of accounts 
and other matters connected therewith under clause (h) of sub-section (3) of 
section 143. 


Clause 43 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (/) of section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the amount 
of net profit for constitution of the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
Committee. It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (9), in respect of higher amount which would need to be spent in 
pursuant of CSR Policy for the purpose of requirement of constitution of CSR 
Committee. It also empowers the Central Government under sub-section (/0) to 
make rules in respect of the class or classes of companies and the conditions which 
must be fulfilled by such companies, which shall not be required to comply with the 
provisions of section 135. 


Clause 44 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (/2) of section 139 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the class or 
classes of companies, and the conditions which must be fulfilled by such companies, 
which shall not be required to appoint auditors under Chapter X of the Companies 
Act, 2013. 


66 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Clause 46 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
the proviso to section 144 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the class or 
classes of companies, of which the auditor or audit firm, shall not provide, directly 
or indirectly, any non-audit services to the company or its holding or subsidiary. 


Clause 48 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (JA) of section 148 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the 
standards of cost accounting or any addendum thereto, after examination of 
recommendations of the Institute of Cost Accountants of India, constituted under 
the Cost Accountants Act, 1959. 


Clause 49 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
item (B) of sub-clause (ii) of clause (e) of sub-section (6) of section 149 of the 
Companies Act, 2013, in respect of such lower per cent. of the gross turnover of a 
legal or consulting firm having transactions with the company, its holding, 
subsidiary or associate company. 


Clause 51 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (2) of section 154 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the intervals 
and manner in which a person who has been allotted a Director Identification 
Number shall submit such information towards verification of his particulars to the 
Central Government or an officer authorised by that Government in this behalf. It 
further empowers the Central Government to make rules, under sub-section (3) of 
section 154, in respect of the manner in which the Director Identification Number 
allotted to a person may be deactivated or cancelled by the Central Government or 
the officer authorised by that Government in this behalf. It also empowers the 
Central Government to make rules under sub-section (6) of section 154, in respect 
of the manner in which a person may surrender the Director Identification Number 
allotted to him. It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (7) of section 154, in respect of the conditions, fees, and manner for 
reactivation or restoration of a Director Identification Number that has been 
deactivated or cancelled or surrendered under sub-section (3) or (6) of section 154. 


Clause 54 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
clause (k) of sub-section (/) of section 164 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect 
of the criteria for assessment by the Board in respect of a person being a fit and 
proper person, and to prescribe different criteria for fit and proper person for 
different class or classes of companies. 


Clause 63 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (/) of section 203A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the form and 
manner and the time within which the Board shall intimate the Registrar of the 
resignation of a whole-time key managerial personnel who is not a director. It further 
empowers the Central Government to make rules under the proviso to sub-section (/) 
of section 203A, in respect of the manner in which the said key managerial personnel 
may forward a copy of his resignation along with detailed reasons for his resignation to 
the Registrar. 


Clause 69 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
clause (b) of sub-section (/) of section 233 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect 
of the manner in which the meeting of members or class of members present and 
voting shall be held for approval of the scheme. 


Clause 70 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (/) of section 233A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the 
manner in which shares held by a transferee company in its own name or in the 
name of any trust (whether on its behalf or on behalf of any of its subsidiary or 
associate companies) shall be dealt with or disposed of. It further empowers the 
Central Government to make rules under sub-section (2) of section 233A, in respect 
of the manner in which shares shall be cancelled and extinguished by the company 
where it fails to deal with or dispose of the shares referred to in sub-section (/) of 
section 233A. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 67 


Clause 73 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
clause (f) of sub-section (JB) of section 247, such other functions relating to 
clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (/B) which may be performed by the Valuation 
Authority. It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (JC), the person who may appoint a registered valuer, in cases other 
than appointment by the audit committee or by the Board of Directors of that 
company. It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under clause (c) 
of sub-section (2), in respect of the valuation standards and policies. 


It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (3B) of section 247, the manner in which, and the fees on payment of 
which any person aggrieved by an order of the Valuation Authority, under 
sub-section (3) or (3A) of section 247 may prefer an appeal before the Appellate 
Tribunal. It further empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (5), companies or class of companies or such entities or class of entities 
who shall adopt valuation policies and standards formulated and laid down by the 
Central Government. It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (6), the valuation standards or valuation policies or any addendum 
thereto, after examination of the recommendations of the Valuation Authority. 


Clause 74 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (2) of section 248 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner 
in which a company may extinguish all its liabilities before filing an application to 
the Registrar for removing the name of the company from the register of companies. 


Clause 80 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
section 365A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner in which, and 
the fee on payment of which any person aggrieved by an order of the Central 
Government under Part IV of Chapter XX of the Companies Act, 2013, may prefer 
an appeal within a period of forty-five days from the date of receipt of such order 
by him. 


Clause 82 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
clause (c) of section 374 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the form of the 
declaration to be filed by all the members or partners in the event of registration 
under Part I of Chapter XXI of the Companies Act, 2013. 


Clause 87 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (/) of section 378ZF of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of such 
other amount of average annual turnover in each of the three consecutive financial 
years for requiring a Producer Company to appoint an internal auditor. It further 
empowers the Central Government to make rules under sub-section (2) of 
section 378ZF, in respect of the manner and the intervals in which the internal audit 
shall be conducted and reported to the Board. 


Clause 91 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (/A) of section 396 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the powers 
and duties that may be exercisable by the Regional Directors, Additional Regional 
Directors or Joint Regional Directors or Deputy Regional Directors, appointed by the 
Central Government for discharge of various functions under the Companies 
Act, 2013. 


Clause 92 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
section 396A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the form and manner in 
which and the period within which any person aggrieved by the decision of the 
Registrar under section 4 or section 7 of the Companies Act, 2013, may prefer an 
appeal to an officer not below the rank of the Joint Director, as may be authorised 
by the Central Government. 


68 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Clause 93 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
the first proviso to sub-section (/) of section 403 of the Companies Act, 2013, in 
respect of the amount per day payable for submitting, filing, registering or recording 
any document, fact or information after expiry of the period provided under 
sections 92 or 137. It further empowers the Central Government to make rules, 
under the second proviso to sub-section (/) of section 403, in respect of such class 
and classes of companies, for which the amount of additional fees shall not exceed 
two lakh rupees. 


Clause 96 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules through 
sub-section (4A) of section 419 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the 
manner in which the President may constitute one or more Special Benches of the 
Tribunal to exercise the powers of the Tribunal for the disposal of cases under the 
Companies Act, 2013 or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. 


Clause 98 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules through 
section 446B of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of such per cent., not exceeding 
one-half, of the penalty specified in such provisions payable for non-compliance by 
a One Person Company, small company, start-up company, or Producer Company, 
or any of its officer in default, or any other person in respect of such company. 


Clause 101 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (1A) of section 454 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the form 
and manner and such fees payable for making an application for adjudication of 
penalty under that section, by a company or its officer who is in default. It also 
empowers the Central Government to notify a scheme to deal with the manner of 
withdrawal of the complaint and transfer of any matter thereto for adjudication 
under that section if such complaint or matter relates to those offences in respect of 
which, on and from the commencement of the Corporate Laws (Amendment) 
Act, 2026, the provision has been amended to provide for adjudication under that 
section. 


Clause 103 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (3) of section 454C of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the form 
and manner of filing an application in writing to the Specified Authority by any 
person, against whom any proceeding has been initiated for contravention of any 
provision referred to in sub-section (/) of section 454C. It further empowers the 
Central Government to make rules under sub-section (5) of section 454C of the 
Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the terms and manner of implementation of 
settlement and monitoring, and the sum on payment of which the Specified 
Authority may agree to the proposal of settlement. 


It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under sub-section (6) 
of section 454C of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the time within which the 
Specified Authority and applicant concerned do not reach an agreement on the terms 
of settlement, before it rejects the application for settlement the proceedings initiated 
against the applicant are continued. 


It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under sub-section (7) 
of section 454C of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner in which the 
settlement proceedings under section 454C shall be conducted. 


Clause 106 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
the proviso to section 466A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner 
in which the Central Government shall hold consultation with expert bodies or 
individuals, before issuing directions or guidelines or circulars under 
section 466A. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 69 


Clause 107 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under 
sub-section (3) of section 469 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the amount 
of penalty, not exceeding five lakh rupees, and the amount of further penalty, not 
exceeding five thousand rupees for every day, which may be levied on any company 
or officer in default or any other person for contravention of any rule made under 
sub-section (/) of section 469. 


2. Further, clause 40 of the Bill empowers the National Financial Reporting 
Authority to make regulations to specify the manner in which such action may be 
undertaken. It further empowers the National Financial Reporting Authority to make 
regulations in respect of—(a) the times and places and manner of observing rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings under 
sub-section (/0); (0) salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of 
the secretary and employees under sub-section (//); (c) the manner in which it may 
engage experts and professionals under sub-section (/7). Clause 41 of the Bill also 
empowers the National Financial Reporting Authority to make regulations, under 
sub-section (2) of section 132A, in respect of the form and manner, the period, and 
the fees for filing of documents, returns or information by the auditors of relevant 
companies or bodies corporate. Clause 73 of the Bill also empowers the Valuation 
Authority to make regulations, under sub-section (/) of section 247 of the 
Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the qualifications and experience for a person 
who may conduct a valuation is required to be made under the provision of the 
Companies Act, 2013. It also empowers the Valuation Authority to make 
regulations in respect of the terms and conditions subject to which certificate of 
recognition may be granted or renewed to valuers’ organisations; terms and 
conditions subject to which certificate of registration may be granted or renewed to 
valuers; the manner in which compliance with valuation standards and policies shall 
be monitored and enforced; and the manner in which the valuer shall make the 
valuation. 


3. The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made are 
matters of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practical to 
provide for them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH, 
Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


Digitally signed 
KSHITIZ. vyksuinz 

MOHAN 
MOHAN 05७ 2026.03.23 

21:05:37 +05'30' 


MGIPMRND—682GI(S4)—23-03-2026. 


