रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 २८७0. No. 0. L.-33004/99 


WRa < राजजपत्र 
Che Gazette of -ऊतातव 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-06082024-256100 
CG-DL-E-06082024-256100 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग 1--खण्ड 3--उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART 1-8९९८ांणा 3—Sub-section (ii) 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


a. 2991] नई दिल्ली, मंगलवार, अगस्त 6, 2024/ श्रावण 15, 1946 
No. 2991] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, AUGUST 6, 2024/ SHRAVANA 15, 1946 


गृह मंत्रालय 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2024 


का.आ. 3135(अ).--केंद्रीय सरकार ने, विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिनियम, 1967 (1967 का 
37) (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिनियम कहा गया है) की धारा 3 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग 
करते हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग Il, खंड 3, उपखंड (ii), 
तारीख 29 जनवरी, 2024 में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 354(अ), तारीख 29 जनवरी, 2024 (जिसे इसमें 
इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिसूचना कहा गया है) के द्वारा स्टूडेंट्स इस्लामिक मूवमेंट ऑफ इंडिया (सिमी) को विधिविरुद्ध संगम 
के रूप में घोषित किया था; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (1) के साथ पठित धारा 5 की उपधारा (1) 
द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 722(अ), 
तारीख 16 फ़रवरी, 2024 के द्वारा विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त 
अधिकरण कहा गया है) का गठन किया था, जिसमें दिल्‍ली उच्च न्यायालय के न्यायाधीश न्यायमूर्ति श्री पुरुषेंद्र कुमार 
कौरव थे; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, 
इस न्यायनिर्णयन के प्रयोजन के लिए कि क्या स्टूडेंट्स इस्लामिक मूवमेंट ऑफ इंडिया (सिमी) को विधिविरुद्ध संगम के रूप 
में घोषित किए जाने का पर्याप्त कारण था या नहीं, तारीख 26 फ़रवरी, 2024 को उक्त अधिकरण को Set अधिसूचना 
निर्दिष्ट की थी; 


4891 GI/2024 (1) 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART IH—SEC. 3(11)] 


और, Tet अधिकरण ने, उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (3) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते 
हुए, Sed अधिसूचना में की गई घोषणा की पुष्टि करते हुए तारीख 24 जुलाई, 2024 को एक आदेश पारित किया था; 


अतः, अब, केंद्रीय सरकार उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (4) के अनुसरण में, उक्त अधिकरण के 
आदेश को प्रकाशित करती है, अर्थात्‌:- 


---: अधिकरण का आदेश अंग्रेजी भाग में छपा है :--- 
न्यायमूर्ति पुरुषेंद्र कुमार कौरव, विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण” 
[फा. सं. 14017/49/2024/एन.आई.-एम.एफ.ओ.] 
अभिजीत सिन्हा, संयुक्त सचिव 


MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 6th August, 2024 


S.O. 3135(E).— Whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of 
section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967) (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), 
declared the Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) as an unlawful association vide notification of the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, number S.O. 354(E), dated the 29" January, 2024 (hereinafter 
referred to as the said notification) published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (ii), 
dated the 29" January, 2024; 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 5 
read with sub-section (1) of section 4 of the said Act constituted the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal 
(hereinafter referred to as the said Tribunal) consisting of Justice Purushaindra Kumar Kaurav, Judge, High Court of 
Delhi vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, number S.O. 722(E), dated the 
167 February, 2024 published in the Gazette of India , Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (1), dated the 16" 
February, 2024; 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 4 of 
the said Act referred the said notification to the said Tribunal on 26" February, 2024 for the purpose of adjudicating 
whether or not there was sufficient cause for declaring the Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMD) as an unlawful 
association; 


And, whereas, the said Tribunal in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of section 4 of the said 
Act, passed an order on 24% July, 2024, confirming the declaration made in the said notification; 


Now, therefore, in pursuance of sub-section (4) of section 4 of the said Act, the Central Government hereby 
publishes the order of the said Tribunal, namely: - 


UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL 
HIGH COURT OF DELHI, AT NEW DELHI 


IN THE MATTER OF: 
Notification bearing No. 8.0. 354(E) dated 29th January, 2024, published in the Gazette of India: 


Extraordinary, declaring the Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) as an unlawful association in exercise 
of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. 


AND IN THE MATTER OF: 


Reference under Section 4(1) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 read with Rule 5 (i) 
and (ii) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 made to the Tribunal by the Government of India 
through Ministry of Home Affairs vide the letter bearing no. 14017/14/2024-NI-MFO dated 26th February, 
2024. 


CORAM: 
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PURUSHAINDRA KUMAR KAURAV 
Present: 


Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, Additional Solicitor General of India with 


[भाग U—eare 3(i1)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


Mr. Amit Prasad, Mr. Sabarish Subramanian, Ms. Poornima Singh, Ms. Manisha Chava, Mr. Uday Khanna, 
Mr. Padmesh Mishra, Mr. Rajat Nair, Mr. Annirudh Sharma, Mr. Pradeep Gehlot, and Mr. Abhijeet Singh, Advocates 
for Union of India. 


Mr. Shiv Mangal Sharma, Addl. Advocate General with Ms. Nidhi Jaswal and Mr. Deepak Verma, Advocates for the 
State of Rajasthan. 


Mr. Jay Prakash, Advocate for States of Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra. 

Mr. Vishnu Unnikrishnan & Mr. Naman Dwivedi, Advocates for State of Tamil Nadu. 
Ms. Madhumita Bhattacharya, Advocate for State of West Bengal. 

Ms. Madhusmita Bora and Mr. Dipankar Singh, Advocates for State of Jharkhand 

Mr. Nishe Rajen Shonker and Mr. Alim Anvar, Advocate for State of Kerala. 

Mr. K. A. Anas, Govt Pleader, High Court of Kerala, for State of Kerala. 

Mr. Vikram Singh, Special Prosecutor for ATS/ADPO, State of Madhya Pradesh. 

Mr. Brijesh Kumar Sharma, Under Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs. 


Mr. Manoj Kumar Singh, Assistant Director, Ministry of Home Affairs. 


Mr. Sameer Shukla, Assistant Section Officer, Ministry of Home Affairs. 


In attendance: Mr. Jitendra Pratap Singh, Registrar, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal. 


ORDER 


L This order hereinafter answers the reference made to this Tribunal for adjudicating “whether or not 
there is sufficient cause for declaring the Students Islamic Movement of India (for short ‘SIMI’) an unlawful 
association under the provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as 
UAPA or the Act).” 


I. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL 
2.1 The Central Government declared SIMI as an “Unlawful Association” vide the notification bearing 


No. S.O. 354 (E) dated 29th January, 2024 published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part I, Section 
3, Sub-section (ii). 


2.2 The Central Government constituted this Tribunal for the purpose of adjudicating whether or not 
there is sufficient cause for declaring SIMI as an “Unlawful Association”. A Notification bearing No. S.O. 
722 (E) dated 16th February, 2024 was published in this regard in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
Section 3, Sub-section (ii). 


TI. RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE DECLARATION OF AN ASSOCIATION 
AS UNLAWFUL ASSOCIATION AND REGARDING THE CONSTITUTION OF THE TRIBUNAL 

3.1 Section 2(p) of theUnlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (also referred to as UAPA or the Act, 
hereinafter) defines ‘Unlawful Association’ as under:- 


“2(p). ‘Unlawful Association’ means any association, - 


(i) Which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids persons to 
undertake any unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such activity; or 


(ii) Which has for its object any activity which is punishable under section 153A or section 153B 
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); or which encourages or aids person to undertake any 
such activity or of which the members undertake any such activity: 


3.2 Section 2(0) defines ‘Unlawful Activity’ as under:- 


“2(0). ‘Unlawful Activity’, in relation to an individual or association, means any action taken by 
such individual or association (whether by committing an act or by words, either spoken or 
written, or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise), - 


(i) Which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the 
cessation of a part of territory of India or secession of a part of the territory of India from the 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


Union, or which incites any individual or group of individuals to bring about such cessation or 
secession, or 


(ii) Which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty or territorial 
integrity of India, or 


(iii) Which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India.” 
3.3 Chapter II of the Act deals with the topic of unlawful associations. 
Section 3 under this Chapter provides for the declaration of an association as unlawful. It reads as follows: 


“3. Declaration of an association as unlawful.—(1) If the Central Government is of opinion that 
any association is, or has become, an unlawful association, it may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare such association to be unlawful. 


(2) Every such notification shall specify the grounds on which it is issued and such other 
particulars as the Central Government may consider necessary: Provided that nothing in this 
sub-section shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact which it considers to be 
against the public interest to disclose. 


(3) No such notification shall have effect until the Tribunal has, by an order made under section 
4, confirmed the declaration made therein and the order is published in the Official Gazette: 


Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances exist which render it 
necessary for that Government to declare an association to be unlawful with immediate effect, it 
may, for reasons to be stated in writing, direct that the notification shall, subject to any order that 
may be made under section 4, have effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette 


(4) Every such notification shall, in addition to its publication in the Official Gazette, be 
published in not less than one daily newspaper having circulation in the State in which the 
principal office, if any, of the association affected is situated, and shall also be served on such 
association in such manner as the Central Government may think fit and all or any of the 
following modes may be followed in effecting such service, namely:— 


(a) by affixing a copy of the notification to some conspicuous part of the office, if any, of the 
association; or 


(b) by serving a copy of the notification, where possible, on the principal office-bearers, if any, of 
the association; or 


(c) by proclaiming by beat of drum or by means of loudspeakers, the contents of the notification 
in the area in which the activities of the association are ordinarily carried on; or 


(d) in such other manner as may be prescribed.” 


3.4 Section 4 of the Act provides for the reference of the notification declaring an association as unlawful to 
Tribunal. It reads as follows: 


“4. Reference to Tribunal.—(1) Where any association has been declared unlawful by a 
notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 3, the Central Government shall, within thirty 
days from the date of the publication of the notification under the said sub-section, refer the 
notification to the Tribunal for the purpose of adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient 
cause for declaring the association unlawful. 


(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1), the Tribunal shall call upon the association 
affected by notice in writing to show cause, within thirty days from the date of the service of such 
notice, why the association should not be declared unlawful. 


(3) After considering the cause, if any, shown by the association or the office-bearers or 
members thereof, the Tribunal shall hold an inquiry in the manner specified in section 9 and after 
calling for such further information as it may consider necessary from the Central Government or 
from any office-bearer or member of the association, it shall decide whether or not there is 
sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful and make, as expeditiously as 
possible and in any case within a period of six months from the date of the issue of the 
notification under sub-section (1) of section 3, such order as it may deem fit either confirming the 
declaration made in the notification or cancelling the same. 


(4) The order of the Tribunal made under sub-section (3) shall be published in the Official 
Gazette.” 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(i1)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


3.5 


3.6 


IV. 


The Constitution of the Tribunal is provided under Section 5 of the Act which reads as follows: 


“ 5. Tribunal.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute, as and when necessary, a tribunal to be known as the “Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Tribunal” consisting of one person, to be appointed by the Central Government: 


Provided that no person shall be so appointed unless he is a Judge of a High Court. 


(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the 
presiding officer of the Tribunal, then, the Central Government shall appoint another person in 
accordance with the provisions of this section to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be 
continued before the Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled. 


(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Tribunal such staff as may be necessary 
for the discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


(5) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of its functions including the place or places 
at which it will hold its sittings. 


(6) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this Act, have the same powers 
as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a 
suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath; 


(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence; 


(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or office; 
(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses. 


(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of Sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code.” 


The proceedings of this Tribunal are guided by the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 (hereinafter 
also referred to as UAP Rules). 


GROUNDS FOR DECLARING 
NOTIFICATION DATED 29.01.2024 
Notification dated 297 January, 2024 refers to grounds (1) to (28) justifying why the Central Government 


believes that SIMI is indulging in the unlawful activities. The relevant extract of the notification is 
reproduced as under: 


“And whereas, the Central Government is of the opinion that SIMI is indulging in the 
activities which are prejudicial to the integrity and security of the country on the basis, inter 
alia , of the following grounds, namely:- 


1. Case Crime No. RC-31/2022/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation 
Agency (NIA) against Athar Parvej and Mohd. Jalaluddin of Phulawari Sharif, Patna relating to 
conspiracy of disrupting the visit of Hon’ble Prime Minister in July 2022. Both the accused were 
arrested and charge-sheeted under various provision including section 17, 18, 18A, 18B 38 and 
39 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; 


2. Case Crime No. RC-29/2023/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation 
Agency (NIA) against Saquib Nachan, ex-National General Secretary of SIMI. He was main 
conspirator and radicalising Muslims for violent Jihad or Hijarat. He was giving ‘Baith’ 
(Pledge and Allegiance to ISIS) to Muslim youths. Further, he motivated other persons to take 
‘Baith’ of ISIS. He is alleged to have established ‘Al Sham’ like area in Padga village, wherein 
sharia law is followed; 


3. Case Crime No. RC-04/2020/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation 
Agency (NIA) against Shihabudeen @ Sirajudeen @ Khalid @ Rajesh, ex-SIMI member. In May 
2019, he met Khaja Mohideen and others in a rented house at Annan Ninaivu Nagar, Puzhal and 


SIMI AN UNLAWFUL ASSOCIATION AS GIVEN IN THE 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


Joined the terrorist gang formed by Khaja Mohideen for establishing Khilafat or Islamic Rule in 
India, as part of furthering the objectives of the proscribed terrorist organisation ISIS/Daish in 
India. He has received funds from Khaja Mohideen for procurement of fire arms and 
ammunition. He was charge-sheeted on 9 th March, 2021; 


4. Case Crime No. RC-28/2023/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation 
Agency (NIA) against T. Naseer, ex-SIMI member, later joined Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), a 
proscribed terrorist organisation. He used to select newly lodged Under Trial prisoners and got 
them transferred to his barrack. He further convert, radicalise and recruit them for furthering 
the activities of LeT in Central Prison, Bengaluru from 2017 onwards. In furtherance to their 
conspiracy and on the instructions of T. Naseer, co-accused arranged arms and ammunitions 
and explosives in collusion with other accused. He was involved in raising funds in the Prison 
for furthering their activities of proscribed terrorist organisation. The accused has been charge- 
sheeted in the case under the provisions of the UAPA, 1967. He has been charge-sheeted on 12th 
January, 2024; 


5. Case Crime No. RC-16/2019/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation 
Agency (NIA) against Mohammed Ibrahim @Ibrahim Jamali, who is an ex-State Secretary of the 
proscribed organisation SIMI, was the main leader of the pro-jihadi jamaat formed in UAE with 
the intention of propagating violent extremist ideology of proscribed terrorist organisations 
including Al-Qaeda and ISIS. He has also subscribed and disseminated pro-ISIS/ Daish material 
advocating violent jihad and establishment of Islamic Khilafat, while delivering lectures on such 
topics during the meetings and classes organised by the unlawful jamaat in the United Arab 
Emirates. The accused has been charge-sheeted in the instant case on Ist January, 2020 before 
the NIA Special Court, Chennai; 


6. Case Crime No. RC-02/2019/NIA/KOC has been registered by the National Investigation 
Agency (NIA) against ex-SIMI cadre Sheik Hidayathullah Y @ Firoze Khan @ Firozy. Sheik 
Hidayathulla was a part of conspiracy in propagating the ideology of proscribed terrorist 
organisation ISIS/Daesh, and also recruiting vulnerable youths with a view to carry out terrorist 
attacks in South India especially in the cities of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. During the search 
conducted in his premise, various documents relating to SIMI were seized. He has been charge- 
sheeted in the instant case under section 38 and 39 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 
1967; 


7. Case Crime No. RC-06/2020/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation 
Agency (NIA) which pertains to the murder of Shri SSI Wilson on 8 th January, 2020. During 
investigation serious involvement of @S. Shahabudeen @Shihabudeen @Sirajudeen @Khalid 
was revealed which resulted in his arrest on 6 th January, 2021. It was also revealed that this 
accused has been continuing with covert anti national activities as the former SIMI member 
having association with hard core ISIS cadres. He was also involved in publication of 
provocative and highly objectionable material inciting others to commit terror acts; 


8. Case Crime No. RC-02/2022/NIA/KOC has been registered by the National Investigation 
Agency (NIA) against ex-SIMI leader Mohammed Ali @Kunhappu Haji @Kunjappu Sahib 
@Kunjappukka. The accused is an ex-SIMI member and former state vice-president of Popular 
Front of India (PFI), Kerala. He used to arrange and supervise arms training conducted at 
Periyar Valley campus Aluva on various occasions. He propagated violent jihad to the cadres of 
Popular Front of India and also justified the terrorist activities in Popular Front of India 
meetings. He has been charge-sheeted under various provisions including section 16, 18A, 18B, 
38 and 39 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; 


9. Case Crime No. RC-14/2022/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation 
Agency (NIA) against E.M. Abdul Rehman, ex-National Secretary, SIMI, E. Abubacker, ex-State 
President SIMI and founding chairman of Popular Front of India, P. Koya, ex-SIMI member and 
founding member of PFI, A. S. Ismail, ex-SIMI member and State President of PFI, Tamil Nadu. 
Accused were, conducted meetings for expansion of PFI (banned organisation) through 
radicalising and recruiting Muslims, providing weapons training classes across the country 
under the garb of ‘Beginners Course’ and other seemingly innocuous programs, collection of 
funds and facilitating funds to persons for commission of unlawful activities and was involved in 
conspiracy to commit violent unlawful and terrorist act. All the aforesaid accused were charge- 
sheeted on 18th March, 2023; 


10. Case Crime No. RC-01/2023/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation 
Agency (NIA) against ex-SIMI cadre A. R. Qureshi. He along with his associates hatched the 


[भाग U—eats 3(11)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


conspiracy to join the ISIS for the cause of Islamic Jihad and targeted killing in India. He has 
been charge-sheeted in the instant case under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; 


11. Case Crime No. ECIR/RPSZO/05/2020 dated 27th February, 2020 has been registered by 
the Directorate of Enforcement under the Prevention of Money Laundry Act, 2002, Umair 
Siddiqui and Others. Umair Siddiqui a suspicious activist of SIM, used to give shelter to various 
members of the banned organisation SIMI and Indian Mujahiddin terrorist organisation from 
the year 1999. Umair Siddiqui and his group organised a camp of SIMI in forest of 
Barnawapara and the purpose of the meeting was to strengthen the organisation SIMI and 
collect funds for aiding the terrorist of Indian Mujahiddin and SIMI; 


12. Case Crime No. ECIR/STF/17/2022 has been registered by the Directorate of Enforcement 
against the office bearers, Ex-SIMI members and cadres of PFI (now banned), along with others, 
for conspiring and raising or collecting funds within India and abroad through banking 
channels, Hawala, donations, etc. for committing or getting committed, terrorist acts across 
India. These cadres and members are also involved in activities supporting and furthering the 
proscribed terrorist organisations like SIMI and ISIS; 


13. Case Crime No. 203/2022 has been registered at Padgha Police Station, Thane (R) under 
Sections 153(a), 153(1)(a)(b) and 153(2) of the Indian Penal Code for writing of provocative text 
on Jamma (Moti) Mosque Padgha, Borivali, Thane to create a communal rift between two 
religions or communities and lead a violence and increase enmity between the two groups and 
disrupt social harmony. The case is pending trial in court; 


14. Case Crime No. 15/2023 has been registered at Padgha Police Station, Thane (R) under 
Sections 37(1)(3), 135 of the Maharashtra Police Act 1951, read with section 194(d), 129, 177 of 
the Motor Vehicle Act 1988, for raising slogans and hold rally for getting the bail to Atik 
Nachan in Ahemdabad NIA Court and violation of prohibition order of Collector and District 
Magistrate, Thane. The case is pending for trial in court; 


15. Case Crime No. 1/2023 has been registered at STF Police Station, Khandwa under Sections 
121, 121A, 122, 123, 120B of Indian Penal Code against Abdul Raqib, being a member of 
various pro-ISIS, pro-Caliphate telegram channels. He regularly watched videos related to ISIS 
and also downloaded the same; 


16. Case Crime No. 493/2019 has been registered at Kotwali Police Station, Gangapur, Sawai 
Madhopur under Sections 147, 341, 342, 323, 15A, 295A, 296, 298 of Indian Penal Code against 
Mohd. Salam @Salla for attackand pelting stones from the top of Jama Masjid on the rally of 
Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) on 25th August, 2019 on the occasion of its Foundation Day; 


17. Case Crime No. 488/2019 has been registered at Kotwarli Police Station, Gangapur, Sawai 
Madhopur under Sections 147, 148, 149, 332, 353, 427 of Indian Penal Code against Alim for 
attack and pelting stones from the top of Jama Masjid on the rally of Vishwa Hindu Parishad 
(VHP) on 25th August, 2019 on the occasion of its Foundation Day; 18. Two SIMI activists have 
been sentenced to two years imprisonment and a fine of rupees one thousand each under Section 
295A of Indian Penal Code by the court of Addl. District Magistrate, Jabalpur in Case Crime 
No. 706/2006 registered at Gohalpur Police Station, Jabalpur under section 153A, 34, 153B, 
195A, 124A of the Indian Penal Code; 


19. Three SIMI activists have been sentenced three years simple imprisonment and fine of 
rupees ten thousand each under section 419 of the Indian Penal Code, two years simple 
imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand each under section 10A of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967, seven years simple imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand each 
under section 13(1)(a), 13(1)(b) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967and five years 
simple imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand each under section 13(2) of the UAPA, 
1967 by the Court of Additional Chief Judge, Bhopal in Case Crime No. 95/2008 registered at 
Kotwali Police Station, Bhopal under section 419 of Indian Penal Code and section 10, 13 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; 


20. One SIMI activist has been sentenced three years imprisonment by the court of JMFC, 
Indore in Case Crime No. 192/2008 registered at Khazrana Police Station, Indore under section 
153A, 153B of Indian Penal Code and section 10, 11, 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Act, 1967; 


21. Two SIMI activists have been sentenced three years rigorous imprisonment under section 
419 of the Indian Penal Code by the court of District, Bhopal in Case Crime No. 205/2008 
registered at Shahjahanabad Police Station, Bhopal under section 419 of Indian Penal Code; 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


22. One SIMI activist has been sentenced ten years of imprisonment and fine of rupees ten 
thousand under section 394 of Indian Penal Code, five years imprisonment and fine of rupees 
fifty thousand under section 450 of the Indian Penal Code by the court of District, Indore in 
Case Crime No. 802/2008 registered at Khazrana Police Station, Indore under section 395, 397, 
506 of the Indian Penal Code and 25 and 27 of Arms Act, 1959. 


23. Three SIMI activist have been sentenced three years rigorous imprisonment and fine and two 
SIMI activist have been sentenced six months imprisonment and fine of rupees one thousand 
under section 143 of the Indian Penal Code, three years rigorous imprisonment and fine of 
rupees one thousand under section 153A of Indian Penal Code, three years rigorous 
imprisonment under section 153B of Indian Penal Code, two years rigorous imprisonment and 
fine of rupees one thousand under section 10 to the Unlawful Activities Amendment Act, 2004, 
three years rigorous imprisonment and fine of rupees one thousand condition to extra three 
months imprisonment in case of non-payment of fine under section 13 of the UAPA, 1967 by the 
court of Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Indore in Case Crime No. 05/2009 registered at 
STF/ATS Police Station, Bhopal under section 147, 149, 153A, 153B of Indian Penal Code and 
section 10, 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; 


24. Two SIMI activists have been sentenced life imprisonment and fine of one thousand each 
condition to extra six months imprisonment in case of non-payment of fine under section 395, 
397 of Indian Penal Code by the court of Special Judge, NIA, Bhopal in Case Crime No. 
456/2009 registered at BNP Police Station, Devas under section 395, 397 of Indian Penal Code 
and section 10, 13, 16, 17, 20, 21 of the UAPA, 1967 and section 25, 27 of the Arms Act, 1959; 


25. One SIMI activist has been sentenced two years imprisonment and another one SIMI activist 
has been sentenced ten years rigorous imprisonment by Additional Sessions Judge, Indore in 
Case Crime No. 13/2010 registered at Bhanwar Kuwan, Indore under section 395, 397, 450, 398 
of Indian Penal Code and section 25, 27 of Arms Act, 1959; 


26. One SIMI activist has been sentenced life imprisonment and fine under section 302, 307 of 
Indian Penal Code and section 16(1)(a) of the UAPA, 1967 by the court of Special Judge, NIA, 
Bhopal in Case Crime No. 35/2011 registered at GRP Ratlam Police Station, Indore (Rail) 
under section 307, 302, 34 of Indian Penal Code and section 10, 13, 16, 18 of the UAPA, 1967 
and 25, 27 of Arms Act, 1959; 


27. Four SIMI activists have been sentenced by the Special Judge, NIA, Bhopal in Case Crime 
No. 22/2013 registered at STF/ATS Police Station, Bhopal as details given below: - 


(i) One SIMI activist has been sentenced ten years rigorous imprisonment and fine of rupees ten 
thousand under section 307 of Indian Penal Code, three years rigorous imprisonment and fine of 
rupees two thousand under section 25(1-B) A, 27 of Arms Act, 1959; 


(ii) One SIMI activist has been sentenced ten years rigorous imprisonment and fine of rupees 
ten thousand under section 307 of Indian Penal Code, three years rigorous imprisonment and 
fine of rupees two thousand under section 25(1-B) A, 27 of Arms Act, 1959, seven-year rigorous 
imprisonment and fine of rupees five thousand under section 468 of the Indian Penal Code; 


(iii) One SIMI activist has been sentenced life imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand 
under section 120B of Indian Penal Code read with section 4(B) of Explosive Substances Act 
1908, life imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand under section 120B of Indian Penal 
Code read with section 5(B) of Explosive Substances Act 1908, seven years rigorous 
imprisonment and fine of rupees five thousand under section 468 of Indian Penal Code, life 
imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand under section 16 of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967; and 


(iv) One SIMI activist has been sentenced life imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand, 
separately under both section 4 and 5(B) of Explosive Substances Act 1908, life imprisonment 
and fine of rupees ten thousand under section 16 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 
1967; 


28. Five SIMI activists have been sentenced rigorous life imprisonment and fine of rupees two 
thousand under section 16B, 18 of the UAPA, 1967 along with Section 25 of Arms Act 1959 by 
the Special Judge, NIA, Bhopal in Case Crime No. 01/2014 registered at STF/ATS Police 
Station, Bhopal under section 307, 34, 120B, 107, 115 of Indian Penal Code and section 10, 
13(1), 13(2), 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 38, 39 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967and 
section 3, 4, 5, 6 of the Explosive Substances Act 1908 and section 25 of Arms Act, 1959; 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(i1)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


3.2 


And whereas, the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh have 


recommended for declaration of SIMI as an ‘unlawful association’ under the provisions of the 
Act; 


And whereas, the Central Government is further of the opinion that if the unlawful 
activities of the SIMI are not curbed and controlled immediately, it will take the opportunity to — 


(i) continue its subversive activities and re-organize its activists who are still absconding; 


(ii) disrupt the secular fabric of the country by polluting the minds of the people by creating 
communal disharmony; 


(iii) propagate anti-national sentiments; 
(iv) escalate secessionism by supporting militancy, and 
(v) undertake activities which are prejudicial to the integrity and security of the country; 


And whereas, the Central Government for the above-mentioned reasons is firmly of the 
opinion that having regard to the activities of the SIMI, it is necessary to declare the Students 
Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) as an ‘unlawful association’ with immediate effect; 


Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of the section 3 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967), the Central Government hereby 
declares the Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) as an unlawful association; 


The Central Government, having regard to the above circumstances, is of firm opinion 
that it is necessary to declare the Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) as an ‘unlawful 
association’ with immediate effect, and accordingly, in exercise of the powers conferred by the 
proviso to sub-section (3) of section 3 of the said Act, the Central Government hereby directs 
that this notification shall, subject to any order that may be made under section 4 of the said Act, 
have effect for a period of five years from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.” 


BACKGROUND NOTE 
The Reference letter bearing no. 14017/14/2024-NI-MFO dated 26th February, 2024 sent to this 


Tribunal by the Government of India is supported with the copy of the notifications dated 29.01.2024 
and 16.02.2024 and a background note mentioning the origin and subsequent actions of SIMI. 


The background note gives a brief introduction of the origin, aims and objectives of the SIMI. 
The relevant extract of the said note is reproduced as follows; 


A. BACKGROUND 


The Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) came into existence on 25.4.1977 in the 
Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh, as a front organisation of youth and 
students, having faith in Jamait-e-Islami-Hind (JEIH); The organisation declared itself 
independent in 1993 through a resolution. 


B. OBJECTIVES 

2. The stated objectives of the organisation (SIMI) are 

i) Governing of human life on the basis of Quran; 

ii) Propagation of Islam; 

iti) "Jehaad" (religious war) for the cause of Islam; 

iv) Destruction of Nationalism and establishment of Islamic Rule or Caliphate 


3. The SIMI aims to utilize students/youth in the propagation of Islam and obtain support for 
Jehaad. The organisation also emphasizes on the formation of "Shariat" based Islamic rule 
through "Islami Ingalab". The organisation does not believe in the nation state, as well as in 
the Constitution, or the secular order; it regards idol worship as a sin and its holy duty is to 
end it. 


4. The SIMI is known to have launched a country-wide campaign since November 1996 to 
mobilize support for the so-called Caliphate (Rule of Islam) for the Muslim community. SIMI 
is against Indian nationalism, and has the aim to replace it with the International Islamic 
Order. 


10 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


5. The Ministry of Home Affairs had been receiving reports of the activities and statements of 
the Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI)which were prejudicial to the maintenance of 
communal harmony, hurt the religious sentiments of other communities; incite religious 
fervour and violence; and question the territorial integrity of the country. On the basis of 


inputs received from the Intelligence agencies and the Governments of various States/UTs 
about SIMI activities, it was observed as under: - 


(a) Support to militancy in Kashmir and Punjab 


SIMI advocated self-determination in Kashmir and was in close touch with Kashmiri militant 
outfits including pro-Pak Hizb-ul-Mujahideen (HUM) and the Jammu & Kashmir Liberation 
Front (JKLF). The leadership of SIMI also extended full support to extremists and terrorists 
in Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir. 


(b) Militant & disruptive activities SIMI was involved in various militant/terrorist activities in 
the country especially in Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. 


6. Accordingly, the Central Government decided to ban SIMI by declaring it as an Unlawful 
Association under the provisions of the UAPA and the SIMI was banned for the first time in 
September, 2001. In view of the continuous activities of SIMI, the organisation was further 
banned from time to time. 


The status of details bans on the SIMI since 2001 is given below: - 


SIL No Date of issue of ban Notification Notification annexed at 

i) 27.09.2001 Annexure - I 

ii) 26.09.2003 Annexure - IT 

iii) 08.02.2006 Annexure - TIT 

iv) 07.02.2008 Annexure - IV 

v) 05.02.2010 Annexure -V 

vi) 03.02.2012 Annexure - VI 

vii) 01.02.2014 Annexure - VIT 
viii) 31.01.2019 Annexure - VIII 

5.3 The background note further mentions the activities of SIMI after declaration as unlawful association and 


5.4 


5.5 
5.5.1 


ends with the conclusion that since the SIMI activists continued its activities for which it was banned earlier, 
the Government imposed further ban on SIMI in January, 2024 vide Notification, published in the Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary No. S.O. 354(E) dated 29 January, 2024. It is mentioned in the note that the financial 
position of SIMI is sound. It raises funds through donation, from rich Muslim and sail of animal hides. It is 
stated that in a national meeting held in Delhi in year 2004, SIMI leadership emphasized on the need to raise 
funds and fixed quarterly targets for each division. In Maharashtra funds were raised from rich Muslims under 
the banner of 'Al Islam' (Malegaon) and 'Ishat-e-Deen' (Mumbai). The note mentions the Cases where the 
SIMI members had contacts in places like in Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Bangladesh. Being a group of 
students and youth, SIMI is easily influenced by hard-core Muslim terrorist organizations operating from 
within the country and abroad. Fundamentalist/terrorist outfits like the Pakistan based Hizb-ul-Mujahideen 
and Lashkar-e-Taiba have successfully penetrated into the SIMI Cadres to achieve their goals. 


The background note mentions the cases where the SIMI was found active in several States being Gujarat, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and 
National Capital Territory of Delhi. It is further stated that the SIMI activities has also been noticed in the 
States of Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand and Uttarakhand. 


UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES OF SIMI BEFORE IMPOSITION OF THE BAN IN 2001: 


As per the Background Note mentioned above, the activities and statements of the members/office bearers of 
the Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) are prejudicial to the maintenance of communal harmony; 
hurt the religious sentiments of other communities; incite religious fervor and violence and question the 
territorial integrity of the country. On the basis of the inputs received from the Intelligence Agencies and the 
Governments of various States/UTs about SIMI activities, it has been observed that SIMI had advocated self- 
determination in Kashmir and was in close touch with Kashmir militant outfits including pro-Pak Hizb-ul- 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 11 


5.6 


DF 


5.8 


3.9 


Mujahideen (HUM) and Jammu & Kashmir Liberation Front. The leadership of SIMI also extended full 
support to extremists and terrorists in Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir. SIMI was involved in various 
militant/terrorist activities in the country, especially in Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, 
Tamil Nadu and NCT Delhi. Accordingly, the Central Government decided to ban SIMI from time to time by 
declaring it an Unlawful Association under the provisions of the UAPA. The status of the said bans is as 
follows: 


FIRST BAN 


In the year 2001, keeping in view the gravity of the situation and deep conspiracy planned by the 
organization, the Union Government decided to ban SIMI under the provisions of the UAPA. Accordingly, 
Notification No. 5.0. 960 (E) dated 27th September, 2001 declaring SIMI as an unlawful association was 
issued. The detailed grounds for imposition of ban are indicated therein. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Tribunal was constituted, consisting of Justice S.K. Agarwal, Judge of Delhi High Court to adjudicate the ban 
notification. The Tribunal upheld the ban and stated in its order that ‘it is clear that members, office-bearers 
and activists of SIMI Association have been indulging in unlawful activities. There is sufficient material, 
justification and grounds for the Central Government for taking action under sub-section (1) of section 3 of 
the Act for declaring SIMI as an unlawful association’. The order of Tribunal was published in the Gazette of 
India vide Notification No. 8.0. 397 (E) dated 8th April, 2002. 


SECOND BAN 


The ban was re-imposed on SIMI in 2003, keeping in view that the organization continued to indulge 
in the activities for which the ban was imposed earlier. Accordingly, Notification No. $.0.1113 (E) dated 
26th September, 2003 declaring SIMI as an unlawful association was issued. The detailed grounds for 
imposition of ban were indicated therein. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal was constituted, 
consisting of Justice R.C. Chopra, Judge of Delhi High Court to adjudicate the ban notification. The Tribunal 
confirmed the ban notification dated 26th September, 2003 with a view that the Tribunal is satisfied that the 
activities of SIMI, its members, activists, sympathizers are disruptive in nature. The SIMI members/activists 
are in close contact with militant outfits and support the demand for secession of Kashmir. They support 
extremism and militancy in Jammu & Kashmir and as such, question the territorial integrity and sovereignty 
of India. They work for Islamization of the world and advocate Islamic rule in India as well as other 
countries. They use derogatory language against Hindu Gods and deities and exhort Muslims for Jehad. The 
SIMI activists have been publishing objectionable posters with a view to create hatred between Hindu and 
Muslims. The order of the Tribunal was published in the Gazette of India notification No S.0.499 (E) dated 
16th April, 2004. 


THIRD BAN 


The ban was re-imposed on SIMI in February, 2006 keeping in view that the organization continued 
to indulge in the activities for which the ban was imposed earlier. Accordingly, Notification No. $S.0.191 (E) 
dated 8th February, 2006 declaring SIMI as an unlawful association was issued. The detailed grounds for 
imposition of ban were indicated therein. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal was constituted 
consisting of Justice B.N. Chaturvedi, Judge of Delhi High Court to adjudicate the ban notification. The 
Tribunal confirmed the ban notification dated 8th February, 2006 with a view that the respondent- 
organization is indulging in activities which are detrimental and prejudicial to national-interest and have the 
potential of posing a threat to the integrity and sovereignty of the nation and also to communal harmony. The 
order of Tribunal was published in the Gazette of India notification No. 8.0. 1302 (E) dated 11th August, 
2006. 


FOURTH BAN 


Since the SIMI activists continued its activities for which it was banned earlier in September, 2001, 
in September, 2003 and again in February, 2006, the Government imposed a fresh ban in February, 2008 vide 
Notification No. 8.0. 276 (E) dated 7th February, 2008 published in the Gazette of India. The Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Tribunal consisting of Ms. Justice Gita Mittal of Delhi High Court did not confirm the 
ban. Against the order of the Tribunal dated 5th August, 2008, the Government of India filed SLP (C) 19845 
of 2008 before the Hon’ble Supreme Court seeking stay on the order of the Tribunal. The Supreme Court 
granted stay until further orders and referred the matter to be heard by a larger bench. The ban on SIMI 
continued. 


FIFTH BAN 


The ban was re-imposed on SIMI keeping in view that the organization continued to indulge in the 
activities for which the ban was imposed earlier. Accordingly, Notification No. 85.0. 260 (E) dated 
5th February, 2010 declaring SIMI as an unlawful association was issued. The detailed grounds for 
imposition of ban were indicated therein. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal was constituted 


12 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


consisting of Justice Sanjiv Khanna, Judge of Delhi High Court to adjudicate the ban notification. The 
Tribunal concluded that there is sufficient cause for declaring Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) as 
an unlawful association and an order was passed under Section 4(3) confirming the declaration made in the 
Notification of the Ministry of Home Affairs 5.0. No. 260(E) dated 5th February, 2010 read with the 
Notification 5.0. No. 544(E) dated 5th March, 2010, issued under Section 3(1) of the UAPA. The order of 
Tribunal was published in the Gazette of India notification No.S.O.1990 (E) dated 12th August, 2010. 
SIXTH BAN 

The ban was imposed on SIMI keeping in view that the organization continued to indulge in the 
activities for which the ban was imposed earlier. Accordingly, Notification No. 8.0. 224 (E) dated 3rd 
February, 2012 declaring SIMI as an unlawful association was issued. The detailed grounds for imposition of 
ban were indicated therein. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal was constituted consisting of 
Justice V.K. Shali, Judge of Delhi High Court to adjudicate the ban notification. The Tribunal confirmed the 
Notification dated 3rd February, 2012 and held in its order that in view of the evidence brought on record and 
the aforesaid discussion, the only conclusion possible is that SIMI and its cadres have continued to indulge in 
activities which are detrimental and prejudicial to the national interest and have the potential of posing a 
threat to the national integrity and sovereignty of the nation. SIMI cadres have continued to indulge in such 
anti-national activities by forming other front organization, like Indian Mujahidin, Wahdat-e-Islami, etc. It 
has continued to recruit and enroll fresh members in their cadres. The evidence brought on record and the 
cases registered after the report of the last Tribunal overwhelmingly prove that the organization is continuing 
to work surreptitiously, posing a threat and challenge to the sovereignty of the Indian nation. This is also 
established through the testimony of witnesses examined in Kerala, where it has been brought on record that 
the sympathizers/activities of this banned organization have supported the so called Jehad of Muslims of 
Kashmir against the alleged forced occupation of Kashmir where two operatives from Kerala got killed, even 
when they fully know that majority of Muslims of Kashmir are peace loving and have democratically elected 
their own representatives to rule them. Further, these persons have scant respect for innocent women lives and 
know the fact that the State of Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of India. 


For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal, in pursuance to the statutory reference made to the Tribunal 
under Section 4 of the Act, held that the Central Government had been able to establish that there was 
‘sufficient cause’ for declaring SIMI as an unlawful association. The order of Tribunal was published in the 
Gazette of India notification No. 5.0. 1745 (E) dated 6th August, 2012. 

SEVENTH BAN 

The ban was again imposed on SIMI in February, 2014, keeping in view that the organization 
continued to indulge in the activities for which the ban was imposed earlier. Accordingly, Notification No. 
5.0. 299 (E) dated Ist February, 2014 declaring SIMI as an unlawful association was issued. The detailed 
grounds for imposition of ban were indicated therein. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal was 
constituted consisting of Justice Suresh Kait, Judge of Delhi High Court to adjudicate the ban notification. 
The Tribunal confirmed the Notification dated 1st February, 2014 and held in his order that the evidence 
brought on record clearly and unambiguously establishes that despite being banned since 27th September, 
2001, except for a brief period in between, the SIMI activists are associating, meeting, conspiring, acquiring 
arms and ammunitions, and indulging in activities which are disruptive in character and capable of 
threatening the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. They are in regular touch with their associates 
and masters based in other countries. Their actions are capable of disrupting peace and communal harmony in 
the country. Their stated objectives are contrary to the laws of our country. Especially their object of 
establishing Islamic rule in India can, under no circumstances, be permitted to subsist. The Tribunal further 
stated that it is evident that SIMI association and its activists are continuing to indulge in unlawful activities 
within the meaning of Section 2(1)(0) of the Act. The Central Government has sufficient credible material 
and grounds for taking action under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Act for declaring SIMI as an Unlawful 
Association. The Tribunal, therefore, held that there exists “sufficient cause” to confirm the Notification 
issued under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Act, declaring SIMI to be an ‘Unlawful Association’. The 
order of Tribunal was published in the Gazette of India notification No. S.O. 2050 (E) dated 12th August, 
2014. 


EIGHTH BAN 


SIMI was declared an unlawful association by the Central Government for a period of five years by 
way of the notification No. 5.0. 564 (E) dated 317 January, 2019 published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary. The detailed grounds for imposition of the ban were indicated in the said notification. The 
Unlawful Activates (Prevention) Tribunal was constituted by the Central Government under Section 5(1) 
consisting of Ms. Justice Mukta Gupta, Judge of the High Court of Delhi vide notification of the Government 
of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs No. 5.0. 931 (E) dated 217 February, 2019 to adjudicate the ban 
notification. The Tribunal upheld the ban observing that there was sufficient material to hold that condition of 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 13 


VI. 
6.1 


6.2 


6.3 


6.4 


6.5 


Section 2(p)(i) and (ii) of UAPA were satisfied. It was held that there was sufficient cause for declaring 
Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) as an “unlawful association”. An order was passed under Section 
4 (3) of the UAPA confirming the declaration made in the notification of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
5.0. 564(E) dated 31st January, 2019 issued under Section 3(1) of the UAPA. 


NINTH / PRESENT BAN 

Defying the condition of ban imposed by Notification dated 31st January, 2019, ex-SIMI activists 
continued their unlawful activities in various parts of the country. The activities were noticed in the states of 
Bihar, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Madhya Pradesh. It has been found that the ex-SIMI 
members were involved in conspiracy to disrupt the visit of the Prime Minister of India to Patna, Bihar in the 
month of July, 2022. Their involvement has also been found in organizing and recruiting youth with an 
objective of establishing Khilafat or Islamic rule in India. The attempts to radicalize and recruit the youth and 
collection of funds in Central Prison of Bengaluru have also been revealed. Several prominent leaders of the 
organization such as Mohd. Ibrahim @ Ibramin Jamali and Sheik Hidayatulah Y @ Firoze Khan @ Firoze 
have been found to be involved in propagation of violent ideology of Al-Qaida and ISIS and in recruitment of 
youth. The involvement of its activists has also been found in the murder of Police Officials. It has been 
found that the sympathizers and formal members of this organization have been contacting proscribed 
terrorist organizations with the intention of propagating violent extremist ideology. After the last ban of 317 
January, 2019, several new cases have been registered against members of SIMI as well as convictions have 
been pronounced in many cases in various parts of the country. The cases have also been registered by the 
NIA. The list of such cases is enclosed asAnnexure - I. In addition to this, after the last ban imposed on 317 
January, 2019, there have been pronounced judgments by competent Courts of law in several cases resulting 
in conviction of SIMI activists/members tried in these cases as accused for several offences including Section 
153A and Section 153B of the IPC and Sections 10, 11, 13 and 16 of the UAPA. A list of such cases is 
annexed as Annexure — II. 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE TRIBUNAL 


As per Section 9 of the UAPA, the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding any inquiry under 
sub-section (3) of Section 4 shall, so far as may be, be the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, for the investigation of claims and the decision of the Tribunal shall be final. 


Furthermore, the UAP Rules, 1968 also deal with the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal. Rule 3, inter 
alia, provides that in holding an inquiry under sub-section (3) of Section 4, the Tribunal shall, subject to the 
provisions of sub-rule (2) follow, as far as practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872. Sub-rule (2) states that notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, 
where any books of account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal by the central 
government and such books of account or other documents are claimed by that government to be of a 
confidential nature then, the Tribunal shall not make such books of account or other documents a part of the 
records of the proceedings before it, or allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract 
from, such books of account or other documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings 
before it. 


Rule 6 provides the modes which may be followed by the Tribunal in effecting the service of notice referred 
to in Section 4 (2) of the UAPA. Rule 14 authorizes the Tribunal to sit in private and to admit at such sitting 
such persons whose presence is considered by the Tribunal to be necessary for the proper determination of 
the matter before it where any such request is made by the Central Government. Rule 15 provides that the 
provisions of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 shall, in so far as they relate to any other matter with regard to 
the service of summons, shall, as far as may be, apply to the service of any summons issued by a Tribunal 
under the Act. 


REFERENCE RECEIVED: In furtherance of the constitution of this Tribunal, the reference letter dated 
26.02.2024 bearing no. 14017/14/2024-NI-MFO issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), 
Government of India was received by the Tribunal. 


ISSUANCE OF NOTICE: Vide the order dated 29.02.2024, the Tribunal, after hearing the learned Additional 
Solicitor General for the Union of India (ASG) and after perusing the material placed on record by the 
Central Government, as detailed in the notification dated 29.01.2024, issued the notice under Section 4(2) of 
the Act to SIMI to show cause, within 30 days from the date of service of the notice, as to why it be not 
declared an ‘unlawful association’. The notices were directed to be served on SIMI in the following manner: 


1) By affixing a copy of the notification to some conspicuous part of the office(s), if any, of the 
Association; 


14 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


6.6 
6.6.1 


6.6.3 


6.6.4 


2) By serving a copy of the notification, wherever possible, on the principal office-bearers, if any, of 
the Association; 


3) By registered post/speed post/courier; 


4) By proclaiming by beat of drums or by means of loudspeakers, the contents of the notification, in 
the area in which the activities of the Association are ordinarily carried on; 


5) By making an announcement over the radio from the local or nearest broadcasting station of the 
All India Radio/Doordarshan; 


6) By pasting the notification on the Notice Board of the office of the Deputy Commissioners at the 
Headquarters of each of the Districts in the States, where the activities of the Association are 
undertaken; and 


7) By publication in two National Newspapers in English and in two vernacular newspapers of the 
States in India. 


In furtherance to the notice issued by the Tribunal, the following reports, arranged State wise, were received: 


Jammu and Kashmir: Letter dated 14.04.2024 of the Superintendent of Police, Headquarter Srinagar has 
been filed in compliance of the directions of this Tribunal. It is supported by the affidavit of the 
Superintendent of Police to the effect that notices issued by the Tribunal have been served in the manner as 
directed by the Tribunal. The affidavit is supported with the relevant documents, including the newspaper 
clippings, video and audio news clips, etc. 


Kerala: Affidavit dated 23.04.2024 has been filed on behalf of the state by Mr. Putta Vimaladitya, IPS, 
Deputy Inspector General, Anti-Terrorist Squad, Kerala Police Department, Government of Kerala who has 
stated that the notices issued by the Tribunal have been served in the manner as instructed. He has 
categorically stated that the notices have been published in the newspapers, the Times of India and the Hindu 
and in the vernacular newspapers Mathubhoomi and Desabhimani. He further stated that the announcements 
were also broadcasted over the All India Radio. The affidavit is accompanied by the supported documents, 
including the newspaper clippings. 


Uttar Pradesh: An affidavit dated 30.03.2024 of Mr. Kuldeep Tiwari, Deputy Superintendent of Police and 
Nodal Officer has been filed. He has stated that the notice issued by this Tribunal has been duly published in 
the newspapers, Amar Ujala, Times of India, Jagran, and Hindustan. It is further stated that the notice has 
also been affixed on the notice boards of the offices of the District Magistrates at the headquarters of each of 
the districts in the state where the activities of the association were found. The affidavit is accompanied with 
the pictures of affixation and Newspaper clippings. 


Tamil Nadu: Affidavit dated 03.04.2024 of Mr. Ara. Arularasu, IPS, Superintendent of Police, Special 
Division, Special Branch Criminal Investigation Department, Chennai has been filed. The affidavit states that 
the notices issued by the Tribunal have been served by affixation at the last known premises of the SIMI. The 
notice was also sent to the known office bearers of SIMI by Speed Post. They have also been published in the 
newspaper, the Hindu and the Times of India and the vernacular newspapers, Dina Thanthi and Dinakaran. It 
is further stated that the notice was also telecasted on the Doordarshan. The affidavit is accompanied by the 
relevant documents, including the compliance affidavits of the respective police officers regarding serving of 
show cause notice in the districts, postal receipts, newspaper clippings, and compliance letters from the 
Doordarshan and All India Radio and from the District Collectorates. 


Gujarat: Affidavit dated 08.04.2024 of Mr. S. L. Chaudhary, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Anti-Terrorist 
Squad, Gujarat State has been filed. He has stated that the steps were taken through the respective Police in 
charges of the districts, for serving the notice on the SIMI members and at the known offices of the 
organisation. The affidavit is accompanied by the compliance reports of the respective police officers of 
Ahmedabad City, Surat City, Vadodara City, Aravalli, District, Bharuch District, and Kutch Bhuj District. 
The affidavit is also supported with the photographs of service of notice and the relevant Newspaper 
clippings where the notice was published. 


Delhi: Affidavit dated 05.04.2024 has been filed on behalf of Mr. Harish H.P., Deputy Commissioner of 
Police, Legal Division, Police Headquarter, New Delhi. It is stated that the show cause notice has been 
published in the newspapers, the Times of India, Hindustan Times, Punjab Kesari and Navbharat Times and 
the announcements have also been made on the All India Radio. It is stated that the show cause notice has 
also been affixed on the wall of the last known head office of SIMI i.e. H. No. 151/C/9, Zakir Nagar, Delhi 
and the proclamation was also done at the same time by using loudspeaker. It is further stated that the copy of 
the show cause notice has also been served, on the accused, Mohammed Hanif Sheikh@ Hanif Hudai @ 
Mohammed Hanif lodged in Rohini Jail, as well as on another accused who is on bail. The affidavit is 
accompanied by the photographs, DD entries and receipts of speed post. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 15 


6.6.7 


6.6.10 


6.6.11 


6.6.12 


West Bengal: Affidavit dated 13.04.2024 of Shri Indrajit Basu, Superintendent of Police, Special Task Force, 
West Bengal has been filed where it has been stated that the copy of notice along with the Gazette 
notification dated 29.01.2024 has been published in the newspapers, the Times of India, Bartaman, Aajkal 
and Sanmarg. It is further stated that a copy of the notice and the Gazette notification has been affixed at all 
the prominent places as well as has been served upon the members of the Association who are on Court bail 
and available at their last known residential addresses. The notice details 14 such persons. It is further stated 
that the notice and the Gazette notification has been displayed on the notice board of the offices of the 
District Magistrates) SDO/ BDOs of the State of West Bengal. The affidavit is accompanied by the 
photographs and the newspaper clippings. 


Rajasthan:Rajasthan has filed the affidavit of Mr. Rajendra Prasad Khoth, Superintendent of Police, Anti- 
Terrorist Squad, Rajasthan. This affidavit dated 02.04.2024 states that the notices issued by this Tribunal 
were pasted on the old offices of SIMI in Rajasthan as well as on the notice boards of Collectors as well as 
Superintendents of Police of every district of Rajasthan. It is further stated that the copy of the notification 
was also served on the old office bearers of the said organisation against their signatures. The notices have 
also been published in the two national and two local newspapers apart from being broadcasted on radio. The 
affidavit is accompanied by the relevant documents, including the photographs and the newspaper clippings. 


Karnataka:Affidavit of Mr. Hariram Shankar, IPS, Nodal Officer and Deputy Director State Intelligence, 
Karnataka has been filed. It is stated that in furtherance of the direction of this Tribunal, the public notices 
have been published in the newspaper the Times of India and the Kannada newspapers, namely Vijaya 
Karnataka, Hosa Digantha and Prajavani. It is further stated that the notices have also been displayed on the 
notice boards in the offices of the Deputy Commissioners of the districts in Karnataka. The notices were also 
tried to be served on the 21 accused persons who were in custody and were lodged in Bengaluru Central 
prison. However, all the said accused persons refused to receive the notice. It is further stated that the notices 
were served on the SIMI activists who were on bail or acquitted, and the report of the concerned police 
officials has been filed in this regard. It is further stated that the notices have also been broadcasted on the All 
India Radio and Doordarshan. The affidavit is accompanied by relevant documents, including photographs, 
endorsement on the copies of the notices served and the newspaper clips. 


Assam: Letter dated 04.04.2024 has been filed by the Joint Secretary to the Government of Assam, Home and 
Political Department, Dispur. It is stated in the letter that the reports received from the District 
Superintendents of Police revealed that there was no known office, residence, active members of SIMI in the 
state of Assam, but service of show cause notice has been done in prominent places of respective district 
jurisdiction. The notice was also published in the national newspapers, namely the Hindu and the Pioneer and 
two regional/vernacular newspapers, namely the Assam Tribune, and the Niamiya Barta. The letter is 
accompanied by the newspaper clippings and the affidavit dated 04.04.2024 of Mr. Abhijeet Sinha, ACS, 
Joint Secretary to the Government of Assam, Home and Political Department, Assam, Dispur. The 
photographs of affixation of notice at prominent places and the reports of respective officers in charge of 
police in the districts of Assam have also been filed. 


Andhra Pradesh: Affidavit dated 22.04.2024 of Mr. Y. Rishanth Reddy, IPS, Superintendent of Police, 
Counter Intelligence Cell, FAC, DIG, Counter Intelligence Cell, Office of the DGP, Intelligence Department, 
Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh has been filed. It is stated that the orders for filing of affidavit for SIMI related 
matters were issued to the districts officials. He has furnished the details of four known activist/members of 
the SIMI on whom the notices were served. He has stated that the show cause notices were published in the 
daily national newspapers, the New Indian Express in English, Sakshi Newspaper in Telugu and the 
Rehnuma-E Deccan Newspaper in Urdu. It is stated that the notices were also affixed on the notice boards of 
the District Collectorates and Police Commissionerates. It is further stated that the notices were served on the 
office bearers/sympathisers, namely Syed Abdul Aziz and Sheikh Fayaz Ahmed against proper 
acknowledgment. It is further stated that no functional office of the SIMI was found at the place where it was 
earlier operating. The affidavit is accompanied with the relevant documents, including affidavits of the police 
officers, photographs of affixation and service and Newspaper Clips. 


Uttarakhand: Affidavit dated 22.03.2024 of Mr. Sukhbir Singh, Deputy Inspector General of Police, 
Intelligence, Intelligence, and Security Headquarters, Uttarakhand, Dehradun has been filed. It is stated in the 
affidavit that no office, officials, or activity of SIMI was found in the state of Uttarakhand. That the show 
cause notice has been broadcasted on the All India Radio and the Doordarshan, Dehradun. It is further stated 
that the copy of the notice was affixed on the notice board of the DIGP, Intelligence and Security 
Headquarter, Uttarakhand, every office of the District Magistrates and SSPs/SPs of Uttarakhand as well as on 
the official Facebook page and X handle of Uttarakhand Police. The notice has also been published in the two 
English national newspapers namely the Hindustan Times and the Pioneer as well as in two Hindi 
newspapers, namely Hindustan and Rashtriya Sahara. The affidavit is accompanied by relevant documents, 
including the photographs of affixation and the newspaper clippings. 


16 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


6.6.13 


6.6.14 


6.6.15 


6.6.16 


6.6.17 


6.6.18 


6.6.19 


6.7 


Bihar: Affidavit of Mr. Vinay Kumar Roy, DSP, ATS, Patna, Bihar has been filed. It is stated that as per 
the directions, the notice has been affixed at public places like railway stations and bus stand. It has also been 
published in the newspapers, the Hindustan, the Dainik Jagran, the Times of India, the Qaumi Tanzeem, and 
the Farookhi Tanzeem. The affidavit further mentions seven known SIMI ex-members who are on bail and 
state that they have been served the notice by registered post. It is further stated that the notice has also been 
pasted in the office of District Magistrates of various districts, and it has also been affixed and pasted at the 
known address of SIMI, Patna at Ameen Manzil, Kabadi Gali Exhibition Road, PS — Gandhi Maidan, district 
Patna. The affidavit is supported with relevant documents, including the photographs of affixation, newspaper 
clippings, and copies of acknowledgements. 


Jharkhand: Affidavit of Mr. Santosh Kumar Sinha, Joint Secretary, Department of Home, Prison and 
Disaster Management, Government of Jharkhand has been filed. This affidavit dated 19.04.2024 states that in 
compliance of the directions of this Tribunal, notice has been served on the members of SIMI through 
different modes. A report dated 06.04.2024 of the SP, ATS, Ranchi has been also filed in support of the said 
service. It is mentioned in the report that the notice has been affixed in the offices of the Superintendents of 
Police of each district of Jharkhand. The notice was also affixed at the house of SIMI member, namely 
Manzar Imam. It has been reported that the notice has also been broadcasted on All India Radio and 
Doorarshan. It is further stated that the publication of the notice was also made in the daily newspaper namely 
Hindustan, Prabhat Khabar and the Times of India. This affidavit is also accompanied by the relevant 
documents including clippings of the newspapers and photographs of affixation. 


Chhattisgarh: Affidavit of Ms. Rajshree Mishra, SP, ATS of Chhattisgarh State has been filed. In the said 
affidavit dated 06.04.2024, it is stated that in compliance of the orders of this Tribunal, the notices have been 
affixed on the public places like railway stations and bus stands in those areas of the State where the 
activities of the association were carried out. The notice has also been affixed on the notice board of the 
offices of the District Collectors at the headquarters of districts in the State. 


Telangana: Affidavit dated 28.03.2024 of Mr. R.Bhaaskaran, IPS, Superintendent of Police, Counter 
Intelligence Cell, Intelligence Department, Telangana state has been filed. It is stated in the affidavit that a 
copy of the show cause notice was pasted at the conspicuous places in the last known premises of the SIMI 
1.6. Masjid-e-Quwat Jung, H. No. 22—3—793, Darul Shifa, Hyderabad and at the Malakpet Metro Station, 
Hyderabad, which was constructed after demolishing the SIMI head office, Mahboob Mansion, Malakpet, 
Hyderabad. It is further stated that the notice was also got published in two vernacular newspapers, i.e. 
Andhra Jyoti, and Rehnuma-e-Deccan daily in addition to the English newspaper, the Pioneer. The contents 
of the notice were also proclaimed by beating of drums and by means of loudspeakers. The notices were also 
pasted on the notice board of the Collectorates, District/City Police Offices, Sub Divisional Offices etc. The 
affidavit is accompanied by the relevant documents, including the photographs of affixation and newspaper 
clippings. 


Goa: The State of Goa has filed the affidavit of Mr. Edwin M. S. Colaco, the Superintendent of Police, 
Anti-Terrorism Squad, Panaji. It is stated that there is no case pertaining to SIMI members in the State of Goa 
nor is there any known office of the said association and therefore no notice could be affixed. 


Madhya Pradesh: The State of Madhya Pradesh has filed the affidavit of Mr. Pranay S. Nagvanshi., SP, ATS, 
Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal. He has stated that the notice issued by this Tribunal has been served to the activists 
of the banned organisation SIMI in a proper manner. That the notice has been broadcasted over the All India 
Radio/Doordarshan. It has also been published in the newspapers Dainik Bhaskar and the Hindustan Times. 
He has filed the documents in support of service of notice on the known activists of the organisation and also 
the newspaper clippings. 


Maharashtra: The State of Maharashtra has filed the affidavit dated 01.04.2024 of Mr. Rajesh Shaligram 
Govil, Deputy Secretary to the Government of Maharashtra, Home Department in compliance of service of 
notice. It is stated that all District Magistrates of Maharashtra were directed to take necessary steps to serve 
notices on SIMI organisation and its members. The Director General of Police, Maharashtra State and 
Commissioner of Police, Mumbai were also directed by the State Government to take necessary steps. This 
affidavit is supported by the documents in the form of compliance reports from respective districts of 
Maharashtra, the photographs and newspaper for the clippings in support of service of notice. 


It is also relevant to mention that the Tribunal has directed the issuances of public notice in the 
newspapers (both in English and vernacular language) having circulation in the States other than Delhi where 
the Tribunal held hearings. The compliance of such directions has been reported by the respective States and 
the same is encapsulated in the following chart: 


S. No. Date and Place of Hearing 


Newspapers in which the public notice was 
published 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 17 
01 04.05.2024 Kochi, Kerala The New Indian Express (English) 
Malayalam Manorama (Regional language) 
02 22.05.2024 Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh The Sunday Times of India (English) 
Dainik Jagran (Hindi) 
03 24.05.2024 Lucknow, The Sunday Times of India, (English) 
Citar डर Dainik Jagran, (Hindi) 
04 06.06.2024 and 07.06.2024 Jabalpur, Madhya | Hindustan Times (English) 
Pradesh Dainik Bhaskar (Hindi) 
05 11.06.2024 Ahmedabad, Gujarat The Times of India (English) 
Divya Bhaskar (Regional language) 
| 18.06.2024 and 19.06.2024 Coonoor, Tamil The Hindu (English) 
Nadt Deccan Chronicle (English) 
Dina Thanthi (Regional Language) 
Dinakaran (Regional Language) 
07 25.06.2024 and 26.06.2024 Mumbai, Free Press Journal (English) 
Moharshia The Indian Express (English) 
Lokmat (Regional Language) 
Loksatta (Regional Language) 
Samna (Regional Language) 
| 28.06.2024 Nagpur, Maharashtra Dainik Bhaskar (English) 


The Hitavada (English) 
Tarun Bharat (Marathi) 


6.8 


Despite the above mentioned steps taken for serving notice upon the unlawful association and its 


office bearers/members, no one has approached this Tribunal to challenge the notification dated 
29.01.2024. Hence, the proceedings with respect to the association were conducted ex-parte. 


SUBSEQUENT PROCEEDINGS: 


proceedings conducted by this Tribunal: 


; aes 


है 


7 


Delhi 


The following table shows in chronological manner, 


the 


Remarks 


Notice issued under Section 4(2) of the 
UAPA to the association. 


a. Service of notice and compliance affidavits 
of the States were considered. 


b. Replies to the notice filed by some 
individuals from different parts of the country were 
considered. 


०. Mr. Humam Ahmed Siddiqui has filed a 
written submission to the effect that he shall not 
contest the notification dated 29.01.2024. 


a. Service of notice and affidavits of the 
States were considered. 


b. Replies to the notice filed by some 
individuals from different parts of the country 
were considered. 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


24.04.2024 1 a. Affidavits of evidence filed on behalf of 
some States and the NIA. 


5. 04.05.2024 Kochi, Kerala. a. Witnesses namely Mr. Putta Vimaladitya 
(PW1), Mr. Umesh Rai (PW2) and Mr. Abhilash M 
J (PW3) examined. 
| 1 | 06.05.2024 Delhi a. Dates for examining further witnesses 
fixed. 


10.05.2024 Delhi a. Further affidavits of evidence filed on 
behalf of a different States and the Central 
Government agencies. 
b. Witness namely Mr. Ved Prakash (PW4) 
examined. 
c. Dates for examining further witnesses 
fixed. 
15.05.2024 Delhi a. Further affidavits of evidence filed by the 
Central Government. 
22.05.2024 Prayagraj, Uttar a. Witnesses namely Mr. Vivek Yadav (PW5), Mr. 
Pradesh. Gaurav Sharma (PW6) and Ms. Shweta Kumari 
(PW7) examined. 
10. 24.05.2024 Lucknow, Uttar a. Witnesses namely Mr. Dharmendra Singh 
Pradesh. Raghuvanshi (PW8), Mr. Kuldeep Tiwari (PW9), 
Mr. Preetam Pal Singh (PW10) and Mr. Amrinder 
Singh (PW11) examined. 
11. 27.05.2024 Delhi a. Status of further evidence submitted by the 
Union. 
b. Letters sent by two recipients of the notice 
considered. 
12. 31.05.2024 Delhi a. Compliance of the directions issued 
regarding the evidence considered. 
b. Dates of examining the witnesses 
scheduled. 
13. 06.06.2024 Jabalpur, Madhya a. Witnesses namely Mr. Pranay S. Nagvanshi 
Pradesh. (PW12), Mr. Arvind Singh Tomar (PW13), Mr. 
Sanjay Sharma (PW14), Mr. R.K. Singh (PW15) 
and Ms. Anita Prabha Sharma (PW16) examined. 
07.06.2024 Jabalpur, Madhya a. Sealed envelope of intelligence inputs filed by the 
Pradesh witness Mr. Pranay S. Nagvanshi. 
11.06.2024 Ahmedabad, Gujarat. | a. Witness Mr. Harsh Upadhyay (PW17) examined 
18.06.2024 Coonoor, Tamil a. Witnesses namely Mr. Ara. Arularasu (PW18) 
Nadu. and Mr. R. Ranjith Singh (PW19) examined. 
19.06.2024 a. Dates fixed for examining further witnesses. 
Nadu. 


18. 25.06.2024 Mumbai, a. Witnesses namely Mr. Vinod Kadam (PW20), 
Maharashtra. Mr. Amol Nandkumar Salunkhe (PW21), Mr. 
Prakash Shivdas Chavan (PW22), Mr. Rahul 
Ramchandra Zalte (PW23), Mr. Nilesh Nanabhau 
Sonawane (PW24), Mr. Kishor Vasudeo Parab 
(PW25) and Mr. Vasant Jadhav (PW26) examined. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 19 


26.06.2024 Mumbai, a. Witnesses namely Mr. Pramod Abhiman Pawar 
Maharashtra. (PW27) and Mr. Siraj Hajratsaheb Inamdar (PW28) 
examined. 


28.06.2024 Nagpur, a. Witnesses namely Ms. Madhuri Dilip Baviskar 
Maharashtra. (PW29), Mr. Kundlik Rambhau Hore (PW30), Mr. 

Manohar Ramchandra Dabhade (PW31) and Mr. 
Maroti Dnyanoji Thorat (PW32) examined. 

01.07.2024 Delhi a. Witnesses namely Mr. Vipin Kumar 
(PW33), Mr. Ankur Sharma (PW34) and Mr. 
Shriram Meena (PW35) examined. 
b. Schedule fixed for further evidence and for 
arguments. 


10.07.2024 Delhi . Witness namely Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gupta 
(PW39) examined 


11.07.2024 Delhi a. Arguments of the Union of India heard 


12.07.2024 Delhi a. Submissions of Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gupta 
regarding the sealed cover documents considered. 
Matter reserved for orders. 


08.07.2024 Delhi a. Witnesses namely Ms. Susheela R. (PW36), Mr. 
Wanenlo Woch (PW37) and Mr. T. V. Rajesh 
(PW38) examined. 


24.07.2024 a. Order pronounced. 


Vi. EVIDENCE PRODUCED BY GOVERNMENT OF INDIA/STATES/UNION TERRITORIES. 


71. The following witnesses were examined by the Government to prove that the ban was imposed on 
SIMI for sufficient cause and reasonable grounds: 


S.No. Witness Examined on Documents relied upon in evidencce 
behalf of 
1. Mr. Putta Vimaladitya, IPS, Deputy | State of Kerala i. Copy of the order of the Special Court in 
Inspector General, Anti-Terrorist SC-2/2011 dated 14.05.2018, 85 Ex. 
Squad, Kerala Police Department, PWI1/B. 


रकम लत की erate EW T) i. Copy of the order of the Hon'ble 


Supreme Court of India in SLP (Crl.) No. 
5971/19 dated 21.09.2023, as Ex. PWI/C. 


iii. Copy of the order of High Court of 
Kerala in (हा. Apl.No. 1575/13 and other 
connected cases, dated 09.05.2022, as Ex. 
PWI/D. 


iv. Copy of FIR and its translation of crime 
No. 448/2010 of Kozhikode Town Police 
Station as Ex. PW1/E. 


v. Copy of charge sheet and its English 
translation in crime No.448/2010 of 
Kozhikode Town police station as Ex. 
PWI/F. 


vi. Copy of FIR and its English translation 
of crime No. 533/2013 of Nadakkavu 
Police Station as Ex. PW1/G 


vil. Copy of charge sheet and its English 
translation in crime No. 533/2013 of 
Nadakkavu police station as Ex. PW1/H. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


villi. Copy of FIR and its English translation 
of crime No. 697/2013 of Nadakkavu police 
station as Ex. PW1/I, and 


ix. Copy of charge sheet and its English 
translation in crime No, 697/2013 of 
Nadakkavu police station as Ex. PW1/J. 


2. Umesh Rai K. Inspector of Police, 
National Investigation Agency, 
Kochi. (PW2) 


NIA 


i. True copy of FIR 10. RC- 
02/2022/NIA/KOC dated 19.09.2022 along 
with the MHA order No. 
11011/84/2022/NIA dated 16.09.2022 as 
Ex. PW2/B. 


ii. True copy of the MHA order no. 
11011/82/2022/NIA (Part) dated 
19.12.2022 as Ex. PW2/C. 


iii. True copy of the final report dated 
17.03.2023 against accused Mohammed Ali 
@ Kunhappu Haji @ Kunhappu Sahib @ 
Kunjappukka and 58 others as Ex. PW2/D. 


iv. True copy of the list of witnesses, 
documents, material objects, prosecution 
sanction, protected witnesses and protected 
documents annexed in the final report dated 
17.03.2023, as Ex. PW2/E. 


v. True copy of redacted statement of the 
protected witnesses viz. Protected Witness 
1, 2, 3 and 14 respectively, as Ex. PW2/F. 


vi. True copy of the statements of the 
witnesses viz. CW - 610, CW- 611, CW- 
613, CW- 617, CW- 639 and CW - 641 as 
Ex. PW2/G. 


3. Mr. Abhilash MJ, Inspector of 
Police, National Investigation 
Agency, Kochi, Kerala. (PW3) 


State of Kerala 


i. Copy of FIR no. RC - 02/2019/NIA/KOC 
dated 30.05.2019 along with the MHA 
order No. 11011/24/2019/NIA dated 
28.05.2019 as Ex. PW3/B. 


ii. The Search List prepared during the 
house search of Shiek Hidayatullah (A-3 in 
the aforesaid case) as Ex. PW3/C. 


iii. True copy of English translation of one 
of the recovered materials (D-65, a SIMI 
magazine bearing name "Khilafa SIMI 
Monthly Magazine" dated September. 
2001) as Ex. PW3/D. 


iv. Copies of respective arrest memos of 
Mohammed Azaruddin and  Shiek 
Hidayatullah (both accused in the aforesaid 
case) as Ex. PW3/E and Ex. PW3/F. 


v. The copy of the chargesheet dated 
07.12.2019 of the above mentioned case, 
taken on record by the Special Court for 
Trial of NIA cases, Ernakulam as SC- 
3/2019/NIA as Ex. PW3/G. 


vi. Report along with the list of additional 
evidence collected during further 
investigation filed in the Special Court on 
26.10.2022 as Ex. PW3/H. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(9)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


21 


vii. Copy of the statements of the protected 
witnesses viz. Protected Witness-A, 
Protected Witness-B and _ Protected 
Witness-C as Ex. PW3/I, PW3/J and Ex. 
PW3/K, respectively. 


Mr. Ved Prakash, Asstt. 
Commissioner of Police, Special 
Cell, Southern Range 
(ACP/Spl.Cell/SR), Delhi Police. 
(PW4) 


GNCT of Delhi 


i. True copy of FIR no. 532/2001, P.S.- 
New Friends Colony as. Ex. PW4/B. 


ii. True copy of the supplementary charge 
sheet dated 24.04.2024 filed before the Ld. 
Special Court for the offences under 
Sections 153A, 153B, 120B, 34 & 174 of 
the IPC and Sections 3, 10 & 13 of the 
UAPA as Ex. PW4/C. 


iii. True copy of the statements of witnesses 
recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. as Ex. 
PW4/D. 


Mr. Vivek Yadav, A.C.P, Prayagraj, 
Uttar Pradesh. (PW5) 


State of 


Pradesh 


Uttar 


i. The copies of F.I.R and Charge sheet in 
regional language and _ its English 
translation of Crime No. 324 of 2001 
registered under Sections 153A, 225, 295 & 
1208 of LP.C. at P.S.- Colonelganj, 
District-Allahabad (Prayagraj) as Ex. 
PWS/B. 


ii. The copies of F.I.R and Charge sheet in 
regional language and _ its English 
translation of Case Crime No. 384 of 2001 
registered under Section 153A, 124A & 
295A I.P.C. and Sections 3(3), 10 & 13 of 
UAPA P.S. - Colonelganj, District- 
Prayagraj as Ex. PWS/C. 


iii. The true copies of F.I.R and Charge 
sheet in regional language and its English 
translation of Case Crime No. 246 of 2008 
registered 


under Sections 489A, 489B, 489C & 489D, 
at P.S- Ghoorpur, District- Prayagraj as Ex. 
PWS/D. 


iv. The true copy of the judgment and order 
dated 12.01.2012 passed by the District and 
Sessions Judge, Allahabad in Case Crime 
No. 246 of 2008 in regional language as Ex. 
PWS/E. 


v. True copy of the bail order dated 
21.05.2012 passed by the Allahabad High 
Court in Crl. Appeal No. 543 of 2012 as 
Ex. PWS/F. 


Mr. Gaurav Sharma, Circle Officer 
(CO) City, Azamgarh, Uttar 
Pradesh (PW6) 


State of 


Pradesh 


Uttar 


i. The copies of F.I.R and Charge sheet 
dated 12.02.2002 in regional language and 
its English translation of Case Crime No. 
129 of 2001registered under Sections 153A, 
1538 & 505 of L.P.C and 10 & 13 of UAPA 
at P.S.- Saraimeer, District- Azamgarh as 
Ex. PW6/B. 


ii. The copies of F.IL.R and Charge sheet 
dated 20.06.2002 in regional language and 
its English translation of Case Crime No. 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


186 of 2001 registered under Sections 
153A, 153B & 505 of I.P.C. and Sections 
3(1) 10 & 13 of UAPA at P.S.- Nijamabad, 
District- Azamgarh as Ex. PW6/C. 


iii. The true copies of F.I.R and Charge 
sheet dated 30.01.2019 in regional language 
and its English translation of Case Crime 
No.09 of 2019 registered under Sections 
420, 467, 468 & 471 of L.P.C. and Section 8 
of Notary Act, at P.S - Nijamabad, District- 
Azamgarh as Ex. PW6/D. 


iv. The true copies of F.I.R and Charge 
sheet dated 16.01.2001 in regional language 
and its English translation of Case Crime 
No. 1058 of 2000registered under Sections 
153A, 505, 295 & 1208 of LP.C. at 
P.SKotwali, District- Azamgarh as Ex. 
PWO/E; 


v. The true copies of F.I.R and Charge sheet 
dated 23.11.2001 in regional language and 
its English translation of Case Crime No. 
979 of 2001 registered under Sections 153, 
153A, 1538 & 505 of I.P.C. and 3(1), 10 & 
12 of UAPA at P.S - Kotwali Sadar, 
District- Azamgarh as Ex. PW6/F. 


Ms. Shweta Kumari, Assistant 
Commissioner of Police (ACP) 
Sisamau, Kanpur Nagar. (PW7) 


State 
Pradesh 


of 


Uttar 


i. True copy of the FIR, statements of 
witnesses and Charge sheet in regional 
language as well as its English translation 
of Case Crime No. 39 of 2001 registered 
under Sections - 188, 153A & 153B of 
I.P.C. and Section 10 of Criminal Law 
(Amendment) Act, 1932 at 7.8.- 
Chamanganj, District- Kanpur as_ Ex. 
PW7/B. 


ii. True copy of FIR and charge sheet of 
Case Crime No. 84/2001 registered under 
Sections 115, 120B, 121, 121A, 122, 123 & 
124 of I.P.C. at P.S.- Bajariya, District- 
Kanpur Nagar as Ex. PW7/C. 


iii. The copy of the statement of the witness 
Insp. Brajveer Singh and its English 
translation as recorded before the learned 
court during the trial of the case FIR no. 
84/2001 as Ex. PW7/D. 


Mr. Dharmendra 
Raghuvanshi, 
Commissioner 
Khala, District- 
Pradesh. (PW8) 


Singh 
Assistant 
of Police, Bazar 

Lucknow, Uttar 


State 
Pradesh 


of 


Uttar 


i. True Copy of the F.I.R of crime no. 25 of 
2003 dated 25.01.2003 registered under 
Sections 153A, 1538, 297 & 420 of LP.C. 
and section 7 Criminal Law (Amendment) 
Act at P.S.- Sahadatganj, District- Lucknow 
and recovery memo in regional language as 
well as its English translation as Ex. 
PW8/B. 


ii. True copy of the charge sheet dated 
29.01.2003 in regional language as well as 
its English translation as Ex. PW8/C. 


Mr. Kuldeep 
Superintendent 


Tiwari, 
of Police, 


Deputy 
Anti 


State 
Pradesh 


of 


Uttar 


i. True Copy of the FIR & charge sheet in 
regional language with its English 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 23 


Terror Squad-Uttar Pradesh, translation of Case Crime No. 449 of 2002 
Lucknow (PW9) registered under Sections 153A, 153B & 
420 of I.P.C. and Section 13 of UAPA at 
Police Station- G.R.P. Charbagh, Lucknow 
as Ex. PW9/B. 


ii. True Copy of FIR and charge sheet in 
regional language with its English 
translation of Case Crime No. 609 of 2001 
registered under Sections]153A, 1538, 
124A, 298, 505 & 120B IPC at Police 
Station-Kotwali Sadar, District-Gorakhpur 
as Ex. PW9/C. 


iii. True copy of the FIR and charge sheet 
in regional language with its English 
translation of Case Crime No. 510 of 2001 
registered under Section 153A IPC at 
Police Station-Mohammadabad,  District- 
Mau as Ex PW9/D. 


iv. True copy of the FIR and Charge sheet 
in regional language with its English 
translation of Case Crime No. 396 of 2001 
registered under Sections 153A, 153B & 
295Aof LP.C. and Sections 10 & 13 of 
UAPA at Police Station - Bhadohi, District 
- Sant Ravidas Nagar as Ex. PW9/E. 


v. True copy of the FIR and Charge sheet in 
its regional language with its English 
translation of Case Crime No. 733 of 2001 
registered under Sections 153A & 153B of 
I.P.C. and Section 7 of Criminal Law 
(Amendment) Act and Section 10 & 13 of 
UAPA at Police Station- Kotwali Mathura, 
District- Mathura as Ex. PW9/F. 


vi. Copy of the Judgment and order dated 
30.06.2022 (regional language and _ its 
English translation) delivered by the Court 
of the Addl. District & Sessions Judge, 
Court No. 3, Special Judge NIA/ATS, 
Lucknow in Sessions Trial no. 921/2015, 
922/2015, 923/2015 924/2015, 925/2015, 
926/2015, 927/2015 and 152/2018 as Ex. 


PW9/G. 
10. Mr. Peetam Pal Singh, Deputy State of Uttar i. True copy of the FIR and chargesheet in 
Superintendent of Police/CO, Pradesh regional language and _ its English 
Dhaurahara, District- Lakhimpur translation of Crime No. 1035 of 2001 
Khiri, Uttar Pradesh.(PW 10) registered under Sections 10 and 13, of 


UAPA, P.S.- Kotwali Nagar, District- 
Lakhimpur Khiri as Ex. PW10/B. 


ii. True copy of the statements of Tejpal 
Verma (complainant). Constable Subhash 
Chandra Yadav, Constable Rajendra Prasad 
and Constable Driver Vijay Kumar Shukla 
with English translation as recorded by the 
investigation officer as Ex. PWIO/C. 


iii. True copy of the FIR in regional 
language and its English translation of Case 
Crime No. 658 of 2000 registered under 
Sections 153A, 153B, 295A and 505(2) 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


IPC, at RS.- Kotwali, District- Lakhimpur 
as Ex. PW10/D. 


iv. Copy of the statements of witnesses 
namely Inspector Suraj Nath Yadav, Smt. 
Sudha Sharma, Smt. Raj Kumari Shukla, 
Umesh Kumar Mishra, Mistri Lal, Suraj 
Kumar and Kaushal Kishore recorded under 
section 161 Cr.P.C as Ex. PWIO/E. 


v. True copy of the chargesheet with its 
English translation of Case Crime No. 658 
of 2000 registered under Sections 153A, 
153B, 295B and 505(2) IPC, at P.S.- 
Kotwali, District- Lakhimpur as_ Ex. 
PWIO/F. 


11. 


Mr. Amrinder Singh, IPS, Circle 
Officer, Police Line, District- 
Moradabad, Uttar Pradesh. (PW11) 


State of Uttar Pradesh 


i. True Copy of the FIR & charge sheet in 
regional language, its translation and the 
present status of the case Crime No. 1197 
of 2001 registered under Sections 147, 
153A & 1538 of 1.P.C. and Sections 13(1) 
& 13(2) of UAPA at P.S.- Civil Line Sadar, 
District- Moradabad as Ex. PW11/B. 


ii. True Copy of FIR and charge sheet in 
regional language, its English translation 
and present status of the case Crime No. 
266 of 2001 registered under Sections 147, 
148, 504, 506, 153A & 1538 1.P.C. and 
Section 13(1) and 13(2) of UAPA, at P.S.- 
Mugalpura, District- Moradabad as Ex. 
PWILI/C. 


iii. True copy of the FIR and charge sheet 
in regional language, its English translation 
and the present status of the case Crime No. 
270 of 2001 registered under Sections 147, 
153A & 1538 LP.C. and _ Sections 
3(1),13(.) & 13(2) of UAPA, at PS - 
Mugalpura, District- Moradabad as Ex. 
PWII/D. 


iv. True copy of the FIR and Charge sheet 
in its regional language, its English 
translation and present status of the case 
Crime No. 572 of 2001 registered under 
Sections 153A& 153B I.P.C. and Sections 
13(1) & 13(2) of UAPA, at P.S - Nagfani, 
District- Moradabad as Ex. PW11/E. 


12. 


Mr. Pranay S. Nagvanshi, S.P. 
(A.T.S.), P.H.Q., Bhopal, Madhya 
Pradesh. (PW12) 


State of Madhya 
Pradesh 


i. True Copy of the order dated 04.07.2023 
as Ex. PW12/B. 


ii. True Copy of FIR of the Cr. No. 22/13 
registered at police station ATS/STF 
Bhopal and its English translation as Ex. 
PW12/C. 


iii. Copy of Charge sheet of Cr. No. 22/13 
as Ex. P W12/D. 


iv. Certified copy of judgment dated 
16.09.2022 passed in S.T. Reg. No. 
541/2014 and its English translation as Ex. 
PWI2/E. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 25 


v. True copy of the FIR of Cr. No. 01/2014 
registered at police station ATS/STF 
Bhopal and its English translation as Ex. 
PWI12/F. 


vi. Copy of charge sheet of Cr. No. 01/2014 
and its English translation as Ex. PW12/G. 


vii. Certified copy of the judgment dated 
28.02.2019 passed in S.T. Reg. No. 
9600502/2014 and its English translation as 
Ex. PW12/H. 


viii. Material in sealed cover. 


13. Mr. Arvind Singh Tomar, C.S.P. | State of Madhya | i. True Copy of the order dated 20.04.2024 
Khandwa, District - Khandwa, | Pradesh as Ex. PW13/B. 


Modbyairadech की मजे ii. True Copy of the FIR of the Cr. No. 
541/13 registered at PoliceStation Kotwali, 


Khandwa and its English translation as Ex. 
PW13/C. 


iii. True Copy of the charge sheet of Cr. 
No. 541/13 as Ex. PW13/D. 


iv. The certified copy of Judgment dated 
07.12.2023 in S.T. Reg. No. 9600154/2015 
and its English translation as Ex. PW13/E. 


14. Mr. Sanjay Sharma, Deputy State of Madhya | i. True Copy of the order dated 22.04.2024 
Superintendent of Police, (LR/HQ), | Pradesh as Ex. PW14/B. 


Dewas, Madhya trades lt) ii. True Copy of the Crime No. 456/09 


registered at Police Station - BNP, Dewas 
and its English translation as Ex. PW14/C. 


iii. True Copy of the charge sheet of Cr. 
No, 456/09 as Ex. PW14/D 


iv. Certified copy of judgment dated 
11.12.2020 in S.T. Reg. No. 9600223/2014 
and its English translation as Ex. PW14/E. 


15. Mr. R.K. Singh, DSP Railway, | State of Madhya | i. True Copy of the order dated 23.04.2024 
Indore, Madhya Pradesh. (PW15) Pradesh as Ex. PWI5/B. 


ii. True Copy of the Cr. No. 35/11 
registered at Police Station GRP, Ratlam 
and its English translation as Ex. PW15/C 


iii. True Copy of the charge sheet of Cr. 
No. 35/11 with its English translation as 
Ex.PW15/D 


iv. Certified copy of judgment dated 
15.03.2019 in S.T. Reg. No. 9600298/2014 
and its English translation as Ex. PW15/E. 


16. Mrs. Anita Prabha Sharma, A.C.P. | State of Madhya | i. True Copy of the order dated 22.04.2024 
Kotwali Sub Division Bhopal, | Pradesh as Ex. PW16/B. 


Madhya जज ले जी PW 16) ii. True Copy of the FIR of Cr. No.95/08 
registered at police station Kotwali, Bhopal 
along with its English translation as Ex. 
PWIO6/C. 


iii. True Copy of the charge sheet of Cr. 
No.95/08 as Ex. PW16/D. 


iv. True Copy of Judgment dated 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


22.06.2019 of RT No. 14638/09 with its 
English translation as Ex. PW16/E. 


17. 


Mr. Harsh Upadhyay, 
Superintendent of 


Deputy 


Police, | Anti-Terrorist | Squad, 
Gujarat State, Ahmedabad. (PW17) 


State of Gujarat 


i. Certified copy of the judgment of the case 
titled 'State of Gujarat v. Jahid @ Javed 
Kutubuddin Shaikh and others' delivered by 
the leamed Additional Sessions Judge 
(Special Designated Judge for Speedy Trial 
of Serial Bomb Blast Cases), Court No. 4, 
Ahmedabad, Gujarat on 18.02.2022 as Ex. 
PW-17/B. 


ii. The synopsis of the said judgment as Ex. 
PW-17/C. 


iii. Material in sealed cover. 


18. 


Mr. Ara.Arularasu, IPS, 
Superintendent of Police, Special 
Division, Special Branch Criminal 
Investigation Department, Chennai, 
Tamil Nadu. (PW18) 


State of Tamil Nadu 


i. True Copy of the Judgment dated 
29.02.2012 in Tamil passed by the Court of 
Ld. Additional District and Sessions Judge - 
Fast Track Court No. II, Coimbatore in S.C. 
No. 459 of 2011 and its English translation 
as Ex. PW18/B. 


ii. True Copy of the judgment dated 
19.12.2019 passed by the Hon'ble High 
Court of Madras in Crl. A. Nos. 306 & 392 
of 2012 &. (71. M.P. No. 59449 of 2019 as 
Ex. PW18/C. 


lil. The true copy of excerpts of the seized 
material recovered from the accused 
Shajahan in Tamil language and its English 
translation as Ex. PW18/D. 


19. 


Mr. R. Ranjith Singh, Deputy 
Superintendent of Police, National 
Investigation Agency (NIA), Chennai. 
PW-19) 


NIA 


i. True Copy of the FIR No. RC 
16/2019/NIA/DLI along with the MHA 


order No. 11011/34/2019/NIA ४85 Ex. 
PW19/B. 
il. True copy of Personal Search 


Memo of accused Mohamed Ibrahim 
prepared by the CIO at NIA HQ New Delhi 
on 13.07.2019 as Ex. PWI9/C. 


iil. True copy of the Book printed in 
Arabic language and seized during the 
personal search of accused Mohamed 
Ibrahim conducted by the CIO as Ex. 
PW19/D. 


iv. True copy of the Indian Passport 
bearing No.N7704953 in the name of the 
accused Mohamed Ibrahim seized during 
his personal search conducted by the CIO 
as Ex. PWI9/E. 


v. True copy of the Search list dated 
20.07.2019 prepared by Shri Umesh Rai, 
SI, NIA, Kochi of the search of the house of 
Mohamed Ibrahim as Ex. PW19/F. 


V1. True copy of Search list dated 
20.07.2019 prepared by Shri Umesh Rai, 
SI, NIA, Kochi of the search of the house of 
Mrs. Barakathunnisa, wife of the accused 
Mohamed Ibrahim as Ex. PW19/G. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(9)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


27 


Vii. True copy of Aadhaar Card of 
Barakathunnisa Mohamed Ibrahim, bearing 
No.704188090702 seized by Shri Umesh 
Rai, SI, NIA, Kochi on 20.07.2019 during 
the search conducted in her house as Ex. 
PW19/H. 


Viil. True copy of the Building tax 
receipt No. 133340 of House No.4/117, 
seized by Shri Umesh Rai, SI, NIA, Kochi 
on 20.07.2019 during the search conducted 
in the house of Barakathunnisa, as Ex. 
PWIOQ/L. 


Ix. True copy of United Arab Emirates 
Resident Identity Cards of Barakathunnisa 
Mohamed Ibrahim, ZainabJamali Mohamed 
Ibrahim and MariyamJamali Mohamed 
Ibrahim- seized by Shri Umesh Rai, SI, NIA, 
Kochi on 20.07.2019 during the search 
conducted in the house of Barakathunnisa, as 
Ex. PW19/J. 


x. True copy of the Disclosure cum 
Social Media Extraction proceedings of 
accused Mohamed Ibrahim dated 
24.07.2019 conducted by SI Amneeswari 
along with Certificates under Section 65B 
of Indian Evidence Act as Ex. PW19/K. 


x1. True Copy of the Charge Sheet 
dated 08.01.2020 filed before the NIA 
Special Court, Chennai against 11 accused 
persons, including Mohamed Ibrahim who 
was the State Secretary of SIMI in the State 
of Tamil Nadu as Ex. PW19/L. 


xii. True Copy of the statements of the 
Prosecution Witness viz. Mohamed Ithrees, 
the brother of Mohamed Ibrahim and Smt. 
Barakathunnisa, wife of Mohamed Ibrahim 
as Ex. PWI9/M and Ex. PW19/N 
respectively. 


xlil. True Copy of the FIR No. RC- 
06/2020/NIA/DLI and with the MHA order 
no. 11011/15/2020/NIA as Ex. PW19/N. 


XIV. True copy of Arrest Memo of 
accused Shihabuddin S. as Ex. PW19/O. 


XV. True copy of Personal Search 
Memo of acc 


used Shihabuddin S. as Ex. PW19/P. 


XV. True copy of Boarding Pass dated 
05.01.2021 of accused Shihabuddin S. as 
Ex. PW19/Q. 


XVii. True copy of Indian Passport of 
accused Shihabuddin S. as Ex. PW19/R. 


xviii. True copy of Search/ Seizure List 
dated 20.01.2021 of accused Shihabuddin 
S. as Ex. PW19/S. 


XIX. True copy of Tamil Book “Jihad 


28 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


Oru Islamic Paravi” as Ex. PW19/T. 


XX, True copy of translation of book 
titled “Jihad Oru Islamic Paravi?as Ex. 
PW19/U. 


XX1. True copy of the Urdu language 
book as Ex. PW19/V. 


जता, True copy of Book ‘Organisation 
of the Khilafah State’ as Ex. PW19/W. 


xxiii. True copy of Tamil Nadu 
Government Gazette as Ex. PW19/X. 


xxiv. True copy of Search List dated 
21.01.2021 as Ex. PW19/Y. 


XXV. True copy of story of Osama Bin 
Laden and Al- Qaeda in flight as Ex. 
PW19/Z. 


xxvi. True copy of Government of India 
Ministry of Home Affairs Order No 
11011/15/2020 dated 28.06.2020 as Ex. 
PWI9/AA. 


xxvil. True copy of production cum 
seizure memo dated 06.05.2021 as Ex. 
PW19/AB. 


xxvill. True copy of passenger manifest 
of GoAir dated 17.10.2019 85 Ex. 
PW19/AC. 


xxix. True copy of the charge sheet 
dated 02.07.2021 as Ex. PW19/AD 


XXX. The copy of the statements of the 
witnesses recorded under Sections 161 
Cr.P.C. as Ex. PW19/AE. 


20. 


Mr. Vinod Kadam, Dy. 
Superintendent of Police in 
theNational Investigation Agency, 
BO- Mumbai. (PW-20) 


NIA 


i. True copy of the FIR No. 243 of 2023 
dated 18.09.2023 registered under Sections 
43 & 120B of IPC at PS Special Cell, New 
Delhi, as Ex. PW20/B. 


ii. True copy of the Arrest Memos of 
Mohammad Rizwan Ashraf, Mohammad 
Arshad Warsi & Shahnawaj Alam as Ex. 
PW20/C. 


iii. True copy of the seizure memos dated 
02.10.2023 and 16.10.2023 as Ex. PW20/D. 


iv. True copy of the FIR No. RC- 
29/2023/NIA/DLI along with MHA Order 
No. 11011/84/2023/NIA dated 19.10.2023 
as Ex. PW20/E. 


v. True Copy of the Charge sheet U/s 173 
Cr.P.C. dated 21.03.2024 filed by NIA in 
FIR RC-29/2023/NIA/DLI as Ex. PW20/F. 


vi. True copies of the prosecution sanction 
under Section 45(1) of the UAPA, under 
Section 196 of Cr.P.C. issued by Under 
Secretary of MHA (Govt. of India), 
sanction under Section 39 of the Arms Act, 
1959, sanction under Section 7 of the 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(9)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


29 


Explosive Substances Act, 1908, list of 
witnesses, list of documents and list of 
seized articles in the Charge sheet dated 
21.3.2024 as Ex. PW20/G. 


vii. True copies of truncated statement of 
the Protected Witnesses viz. KW-5, KW-6, 
KW-7, KW-8 & KW-9 as Ex. PW20/H. 


viii. True copies of the statements of other 
important witnesses i.e., Abdullah Danish, 
Rehan Ali and Ajmal Farooqui as Ex. 
PW20/I. 


ix. True copy of supplementary charge 
sheet dated 03.06.2024 in the case RC- 
29/2023/NIA/DLI as Ex. PW20/J. 


21. 


Mr. Amol Nandkumar Salunkhe 
Assistant Police Inspector, PS 
Padgha, Thane (Rural), 
Maharashtra. (PW21) 


State of Maharashtra 


i. The copy of the FIR No. 15/2023 dated 
11.01.2023 P.S.- Padgha, with its English 
translation as Ex. PW21 /A. 


ii. The copy of Spot Panchnama dated 
12.01.2023 with its English translation as 
Ex. PW21/B 


iii. The copy of the Statement of Hanumant 
Krishna Kachare dated-13.01.2024 with its 
English translation as Ex. PW21 /C 


iv. The certified copy of the Charge Sheet 
dated 11.01.2023 in the said case FIR no. 
15/2023 with its English translation as Ex. 
PW21/D. 


v. Certified copy of the Confidential 
Activity Report of accused Kasib Sattar 
Balere maintained by PS-Padgha as Ex. 
PW21/E. 


22. 


Mr. Prakash Shivdas Chavan, Head 
Constable/2616, presently posted at 
PS- Kulgaon, Thane Rural, 
Maharashtra. (PW22) 


State of Maharashtra 


i. The copy of the FIR no. 100/2021 dated 
06.03.2021 PS- Padgha with its English 
Translation as Ex. PW22 /B. 


ii. The copy of the Judgment dated 
11.12.2021 delivered by the Ld. JMFC, 
Bhiwandi with its English translation as Ex. 
PW22/C. 


23. 


Mr. Rahul Ramchandra Zalte, 
Deputy Superintendent of Police, 
Ganeshpuri Division, Distt.-Thane 
(Rural) Maharashtra. (PW23) 


State of Maharashtra 


i. The true copy of the FIR No. 0203/2022 
dated 26.06.2022, P.S. — Padgha with its 
English translation as Ex. PW23/B. 


ii. The true copy of the Photograph of the 
hate writing in Urdu with its English 
translation as Ex. PW23/C. 


iii. The true copy of the seizure memo dated 
27.06.2022 with its English translation as 
Ex. PW23/D. 


iv. The true copy of the charge sheet dated- 
17.09.2022 with its English translation as 
Ex. PW23 /E. 


24. 


Mr. Nilesh Nanabhau Sonawane, 
Assistant Commissioner of Police, 
Detection-1, Crime Branch, Thane 


State of Maharashtra 


i. Copy of the statement dated 04.08.2012 
of Mr. Manoj Ratilal Raicha with its 
English translation as Ex. PW24 /B. 


30 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


City, Maharashtra. (PW24) 


ii. Copy of the Statement of Saquib Abdul | 
Nachan dated 08.08.2012 with its English 
translation as Ex. PW24 /C. 


iii. Copy of the Mobile seizure and house 
search Panchanamas recorded in the said 
case with their respective English 
translations as Ex. PW24/D. 


25. 


Statement of Mr. 
Parab, Assistant 
Police, Anti Terrorism 
Mumbai, Maharashtra (PW25) 


Kishor Vasudeo 
commissioner of 


Squad, 


State of Maharashtra 


i. The copy of operative part of Judgment in 
ATS CR. No. 06 of 2010 delivered by the 
Bombay High Court on 17.03.2016 in Crl. 
A. No. 755/2013 as Ex. PW25 /B. 


li. The copies of FSL report and C.A. 
Report in ATS LAC. No. 03 of 2006 as Ex. 
PW25/C. 


iii. The copies of Confession Statements of 
Accused persons along with English 
translation in ATS LAC. No. 03 of 2006 as 
Ex PW25/D. 


iv. The copy of operative part of Judgment 
in ATS LAC. No. 03 of 2006 delivered by 
the Ld. Special Judge, MCOC Act on 
30.09.2015 as Ex. PW25/E. 


v. The copy of operative part of Judgment 
in ATS CR. No. 05 of 2006 delivered by 
the Ld. ASJ, Bombay on 07.02.2018 as Ex. 
PW25/F. 


vi. The copy of Judgment in ATS CR. No. 
31 of 2011 delivered by the Ld. ASJ, 
Bombay on 07.02.2018 as Ex. PW25/G. 


vii. The First Information Report along with 
English translation of ATS CR. No. 02 of 
2012 as Ex. PW25/H. 


viii. The copy of charge sheet along with 
English translation of ATS CR. No. 02 of 
2012 as Ex. PW25/1. 


ix. The copy of supplementary charge sheet 
along- with English translation of ATS CR. 
No. 02 of 2012 as Ex. PW25/J. 


x. The First Information Report along with 
English translation of ATS LAC No. 04 of 
2006 as Ex. PW25/K. 


x1. The Copy of Judgment in ATS LAC No. 
04 of 2006 delivered by the Ld. ACMM, 
Mumbai on 21.10.2016 as Ex. PW25/L. 


xii. The copy of supplementary charge 
sheet dated 05.07.2017 along with English 
translation of ATS LAC No. 04 of 2006 as 
Ex. PW25/M. 


xiii. The copy of supplementary charge 
sheet dated 06.10.2018 along with English 
translation of ATS LAC No. 04 of 2006 as 
Ex. PW25/N. 


xiv. Material in a sealed envelope as Ex. 
PW25/0. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(9)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


31 


xv. Certified copies of judgment of CR 
No.05/2006 as Ex. PW25/P. 


xvi. Copy of the judgment case ATS, LAC 
No.03/2006 as Ex. PW25/Q. 


xvii. Judgment dated 18.04.2013 of the case 
CR No.06/2010 delivered by the court of 
Ld. ASJ, Pune as Ex. PW25/R. 


xviii. Order dated 17.03.2016 of the 
Bombay High Court in confirmation Case 
no.04/2013 as Ex. PW25/S. 


xix. Certified copies of confessional 
statements of the accused with its 
translation in the case LAC No.03/2006 as 
Ex. PW25/T. 


xx. Certified copy of FIR No.02/2012 PS: 
Kala Chowki, ATS and the seizure memos 
prepared in the said Case, the same is Ex. 
PW25/U. 


xxi. Forensic reports of the exhibits of LAC 
No. 03/2006 the same is PW25/V. 


xxli. Confessional statements of the 
accused along with thefinal report and FIR 
of LAC No.04/2006 the same is Ex. 
PW25/W. 


26. 


Mr. Vasant Jadhav, Deputy 
Commissioner, State Intelligence 
Department, Headquarters, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra. (PW 26) 


State of Maharashtra 


Confidential intelligence report in a sealed 
cover as Ex. PW26/B. 


2a 


Mr. Pramod Abhiman Pawar, 
Deputy Superintendent of Police, 
(Home), in the office of 
Superintendent of Police, Jalgaon, 
Dist. Jalgaon, Maharashtra. (PW27) 


State of Maharashtra 


i. The certified copy of the judgment dated 
19.05.2006 passed by the Ld. 2nd Ad-hoc 
Addl. Sessions Judge, Jalgaon in Sessions 
Case No. 126/2002 as Ex. PW27/B. 


ii. The certified copy of the judgment dated 
01.04.2017 passed by the Ld. District 
Judge-4 and Additional Sessions Judge, 
Jalgaon in Sessions Case No. 173/2006 as 
Ex. PW27/C. 


28. 


Mr. Siraj Hajaratsaheb Inamdar, 
Assistant Commissioner of Police, 
SB-1, CID, Mumbai _— City, 
Maharashtra. (PW 28) 


State of Maharashtra 


i. The true copy of the documents along 
with charge sheet related to the LAC no. 
1692/2001 PS - Dharavi, Mumbai as Ex. 
PW28/B. 


ii. The true copy of the documents along 
with charge sheet related to the C.R. 
No.152 of 2008 registered with D.C.B., 
CID, Mumbai city as Ex. PW28/C. 


iii. The true copy of the documents along 
with charge sheet related to the C.R. NO. 
275/2001, PS- Kurla as Ex. PW28/D. 


iv. The true copy of the documents along 
with charge sheet related to LAC no. 34 of 
2006 registered with DCB, CID, Mumbai 
and LAC no. 1106 of 2006, PS- Ghatkopar 
as Ex. PW28/E. 


v. The true copy of the documents along 


32 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


with charge sheet related to Special Case 
no. 2 of 2003, Mumbai as Ex. PW28/F. 


29. 


Ms. Madhuri Dilip Baviskar, Assistant 
ommissioner of Police, Sadar 
Division, Nagpur City, Maharashtra. 
PW29) 


State of Maharashtra 


i. Copy of the FIR / Case Cr. No. 3182/06, 
Sadar Police Station, Nagpur. City and its 
English translation as Ex. PW29/B. 


ii. Copies of the Statements of Shakil 
Warsi, Mohd. Rehan Khan, Shakir Ahmed 
@ Guddu, Jiyaur Rehman, Waquar Beg, 
Mohd. Abrar Arif, Imtiyaz Ahmed, Shekh 
Ahmed and Farukh recorded during the 
investigation of these cases with their 
respective English translations as_ Ex. 
PW29/C. 


iii. Copy of the charge sheet filed in the 
above mentioned case and its English 
translation as Ex. PW29/D. 


30. 


Mr. Kundlik Rambhau Hore, Range 
Forest Officer in Aundha Nagnath, 
Dist. Hingoli, Maharashtra. (PW30) 


State of Maharashtra 


i. The copy of the Preliminary Offence 
Report (POR) of the case crime no. 
WL04/2015 and its English translation as 
Ex. PW30/B. 


ii. The copies of the relevant documents 
pertaining to the communications made for 
seeking the previous criminal involvement 
of the accused persons of the above 
mentioned POR and English translation of 
the same as Ex. PW30/C. 


iii. The copy of the charge sheet filed in the 
said POR case and its English translation as 
Ex. PW30/D. 


31. 


Mr. Manohar Ramchandra 
Dabhade, Sub Divisional Police 
Officer, Murtijapur, Distt.- Akola, 
Maharashtra. (PW31) 


State of Maharashtra 


i. Copy of the FIR No. 3065/2009 dated 
19.07.2009, P.S. Murtijapur and its English 
translation as Ex. PW31/B. 


ii. The copy of the Statement of witnesses 
recorded during the investigation of this 
case on 22.07.2009 and 23.07.2009 with 
their respective English translation as Ex. 
PW31/C. 


iii. The Copy of the Charge sheet of FIR no. 
3065/2009 in regional language as Ex. 
PW31/D. 


iv. The copy of the seizure memos prepared 
in the said case with the relevant English 
translation as Ex. PW31/E. 


32. 


Mr. Maroti Dnyanoji Thorat, Sub 
Divisional Police Officer Basmath, 
Dist. Hingoli, Maharashtra. (PW32) 


State of Maharashtra 


i. True copy of the list of the SIMI 
members maintained by the district police 
administration of Hingoli with its English 
translation as Ex. PW32/B. 


li. Certified copy of the charge sheet with 
its English translation filed in Cr. 
No.117/2010 as Ex. PW32/C. 


iii. Copy of the judgment dated 16.03.2018 
delivered in Regular Criminal case no. 
149/10 by the learned JMFC, Aundha Court 
with its English translation as Ex. PW32/D. 


iv. Copy of the judgment dated 15.09.2023 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(9)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


33 


delivered in Crl. Appeal No. 10/2018 by the 
learned District Judge-2 and Additional 
Sessions Judge, Basmath, District-Hingoli 
as Ex. PW32/E. 


33. 


Mr. Vipin Kumar , _ Deputy 
Superintendent of Police, National 
Investigation Agency, New Delhi. 
(PW33) 


NIA 


i. True copy of the FIR No. RC- 
31/2022/NIA/DLI along with MHA order 
No. 11011/63/2022/NIA as Ex. PW33/B. 


ii. True Copies of the Seizure List marked 
as D-51 in the chargesheet of the FIR No. 
RC 31/2022/NIA/DLI as Ex. PW33/C. 


iii. True copy of the document named India 
2047 Towards Rule of Islam in India’ and 
marked as D-52 with the chargesheet as Ex. 
PW33/D. 


iv. True copy of the Seizure list marked as 
D-56 in the chargesheet as Ex. PW33/E-. 


v. True copy of the first chargesheet filed in 
the above-mentioned case as Ex. PW33/F. 


vi. True copy of the Seizure list marked as 
D-357 in the Supplementary chargesheet as 
Ex. PW33/G. 


vii. True copy of the 31 Supplementary 
chargesheet filed in the abovementioned 
case as Ex. PW33/H. 


viii. Material in sealed cover. 


34. 


Mr. Ankur Sharma, Assistant 
Director, Enforcement Directorate, 
STF-HQ, New Delhi. (PW34) 


Enforcement 
Directorate (ED) 


i. True copy of the Chargesheet of NIA in 
the predicate offence FIR No.RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI dated 13.04.2022 as Ex. 
PW-34 /B. 


35. 


Mr. Shriram Meena, Assistant 
Director, Enforcement Directorate, 
Raipur Zonal Office, Raipur(PW35) 


Enforcement 
Directorate (ED) 


i. True copy of the ECIR/RPSZO/01/2014 
dated 24/01/2014 recorded by the 
Enforcement Directorate, Raipur as Ex. 
PW35/B. 


ii. True copy of the FIR No. 567/2013 dated 
25.12.2013 registered by the Khamtarai 
Police Station, Raipur, Chhattisgarh as Ex. 
PW35/C. 


lil. True copy of the chargesheet/fmal report 
bearing no. 156/2014 dated 19.06.2014 
filed by Khamtarai Police Station, Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh as Ex. PW 35/D. 


iv. True copy of the statement of bank 
account No. 134801500942 of Dheeraj Sao 
with ICICI Bank, Raipur as Ex. PW35/E. 


v. True copy of the statement of bank 
account No. 197601500550 of Dheeraj Sao 
with ICICI Bank, Jamui, Bihar as Ex. 
PW35/F. 


vi. True copy of the statement of bank 
account No. 001405500087 with ICICI 
Bank, Mangalore, Karnataka in the name of 
Zubair Hussain as Ex. PW35/G. 


vii. True copy of the statement of bank 
account No.001405500086 with ICICI 


34 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


Bank Mangalore, Karnataka in the name of ] 
Aysha Banu as Ex PW35/H. 


viii. True copy of the charge sheet no. 
11/2014 dated 03.02.2014 in FIR No. 
454/2013 dated 07.11.2013 of Kavaiya 
Thana, Lakhisarai, Bihar against Zubair 
Flussain, Aysha Banu and others as Ex. 
PW35/I. 


ix. True copy of confirmation order of 
Adjudicating Authority dated 22.01.2018 in 
Original Complaint no. 849/2017 filed by 
Enforcement Directorate for confirmation 
of provisional attachment order bearing 
no.05/2017 dated 13.10.2017 issued u/s 
5(1) of PMLA, 2002 attaching properties 
worth Rs. 2,81,156 belonging 10 the 
accused Aysha Banu and others as Ex. 
PW35/J. 


x. True copy of Prosecution Complaint 
dated 30.06.2018 filed by Enforcement 
Directorate against Dheeraj Sao, Avinash 
Ranjan, Shrawan Mandal, Pappu Mandal, 
Raju Khan, Aysha Banu, Zubair Hussain 
and Khalid before Special Court (PMLA) 
Raipur as Ex. PW35/K. 


xi. True copy of order dated 08.11.2019 
passed by the Special Court (PMLA) taking 
cognizance of the PMLA case as Ex. 
PW35/L. 


xii. True copy of Judgment/order dated 
24.11.2021 passed by the Special Court in 
Special Session Trial case No 01/2020 of 
State Police case as Ex. PW35/M. 


जा, Copy of charge framing order dated 
08.09.2023 passed by the Special Court 
(PMLA), Raipur as Ex.35/N. 


36 


Ms. Susheela_R., Deputy 
Superintendent of Police, National 
Investigation Agency, Bengaluru, 
Karnataka. (PW36) 


NIA 


i. True Copy of the FIR No. RC- 
28/2023/NIA/DLI and MHA order F.No. 
11011/83/2023/NIA as Ex. PW36/B. 


ii. True Copy of the Chargesheet No. 
01/2024 filed in the said case as Ex. PW 
36/C. 


iii. True Copy of the Seizure/Recovery 
Memo of seized articles (07 pistols, 45 live 
rounds, one magazine, 02 walkie-talkies 
and other digital gadgets) as Ex. PW 36/D. 


iv. Copy of the Arrest Memos of accused 
Syed Suhail Khan (A-3), Mohammed Umar 
(A-4), Zahid Tabrez (A-5), Syed Mudassir 
Pasha (A-6) and Mohammed Faisal 
Rabbani (A-7) as Ex. PW 36/E. 


v. Copy of the Seizure/Recovery Memo of 
seized articles {voice samples of accused T. 
Naseer (A-1), Mohammed Umar (A-4), 
Zahid Tabrez (A- 5), Syed Mudassir Pasha 
(A-6) and Mohammed Faisal Rabbani (A- 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(9)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


35 


7)} along with relevant evidence showing 
sample sent to SFSL as Ex. PW 36/F. 


vi. Copy of the Seizure/Recovery Memo of 
seized articles (remnants of hand-grenades) 
along with relevant evidence showing 
sample sent to SFSL as Ex. PW 36/G. 


vil. Copy of the Seizure/Recovery Memo of 
seized articles (mobile phones of accused 
persons) along with relevant evidence 
showing sample sent to SFSL as Ex. PW 
36/H. 


viii. Copy of examination report no. 
FSL/FLMS/PS/193. & 213/2023 dated 
14.09.2023 of digital devices of accused 
persons as Ex. PW 36/1. 


ix. Copy of Examination Report No. 
FSL/FLMS/FAS/134/2023 dated 19.09.2023 
provided by SFSL, Madiwala of the seized 
arms and ammunitions as Ex. PW 36/J. 


x. Copy of the FIR No. RC- 
04/2020/NIA/DLI and the MHA order 
No.11011/11/2020/NIA as Ex. PW 36/K. 


x1. Copy of the Supplementary chargesheet 
No. 16/2020 dated 03.09.2021 as Ex. PW 
36/L. 


xli. Copy of the statement of Protected 
witness 'x' as Ex. PW 36/M. 


xiii. Copy of seizure memo as Ex. PW 
36/N. 


xiv. The copy of the statement of Kadar 
Baba as Ex. PW 36/0. 


xv. Copy of the statement of S. M. Umar as 
Ex. PW 36/P. 


37 


Mr. Wanenlo Woch, Addl. 
Superintendent of Police, National 
Investigation Agency, Kolkata, West 
Bengal.(PW37) 


NIA 


i. True Copy of FIR no. 01/2023 dated 
06.01.2023, STF PS, Kolkata Police as Ex. 
PW37/B. 


ii. True copy of the seizure list of the 
articles recovered from the possession of 
the arrested accused Abdul Rakib Qureshi 
as Ex. PW37/C. 


iii. True copy of the FIR no. RC-— 
01/2023/NIA/DLI along with the MHA 
order No. 11011/20/2023/NIA dated 
06.02.2023 as Ex. PW37/D. 


iv. True Copy of the extracted data along 
with the expert opinion in respect of the 
mobile phone seized from the accused 
Abdul Rakib Qureshi (A-3 in the aforesaid 
case) as Ex. PW37/E. 


v. True copy of the chargesheet dated 
04.07.2023 of the above mentioned case 
filed in the Court of the learned NIA 


36 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


Special Judge, Kolkata as Ex. PW37/F. 


38 


Mr. T. ०७. Rajesh, Deputy 
Superintendent of Police, National 
Investigation Agency, Hyderabad. 
(PW38) 


NIA-Hyderabad 


i. True Copy of order dated 
22.04.2024 of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
as Ex. PW38/B. 


ii. True copy of case crime No. RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI dated 13.04.2022 lodged 
in the P.S- NIA, New Delhi as Ex. 
PW38/C. 


iii. True copy of charge sheet No. 
12/2023 dated 18.03.2023 of RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI as Ex. PW38/D. 


iv. True copy of the protected 
document titled “India 2047: Towards Rule 
of Islam in India” as Ex. PW38/E. 


v. True Copy of the Arrest Memos of 
E. M. Abdul Rehman (A-2), E. Abubacker 
(A-6), Prof. P Koya (A-7), Abdul Wahid 
Sait (A-9) and A. S. Ismail (A-10) as Ex. 
PW38/F. 


vi. True Copy of confessional 
statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. of Adv 
Mohd. Yusuf (A-11) as Ex. PW38/G. 


vii. True copy of Forensic analysis 
report of CERT-IN, New Delhi as Ex. 
PW38/H. 


viii. True Copy of the Details of Bank 
receipts pertaining to PFl's Syndicate Bank 
A/c No Xxxxxxxxxx865 and Canara Bank 
A/c No. Xxxxxxxxxx004 as Ex. PW38/I. 


39 


Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gupta, Director 
(CT) in the Government of India, 
Ministry of Home Affairs, New 
Delhi. (PW39) 


Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Government 
of India 


i. Copy of the notification dated 29 
January, 2024 bearing No. S. O. 354(E) 
published in the Gazette as Ex. PW39/B. 


li. Copy of the background note submitted 
before the Unlawful Activities Prevention 
Tribunal along with the reference letter 
dated 26.02.2024 Ex. PW39/C. 


iii. Copies of previous notifications 
publishing the orders of the Tribunals 
confirming the previous bans imposed on 
SIMI as Ex. PW39/D. 


iv. Copy of the Orders dated 06.08.2008, 
25.08.2008 and 11.09.2008 of the Supreme 
Court of India passed in SLP(C) No. 19845 
of 2008 as Ex. PW39/E. 


v. Three sealed covers containing 
concermed files and confidential/privileged 
documents as Ex. PW39/F. 


7.2 


7.3 


It is also relevant to highlight that for the documents filed in sealed 2 covers by the witnesses namely, Mr. 
Pranay S. Nagvanshi, Mr. Harsh Upadhyay, Mr. Kishor Vasudeo Parab, Mr. Vasnat Jadhav, Mr. Vipin 
Kumar and Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gupta in their evidence for the perusal of the Tribunal, the Central 
Government is claiming privilege under Section 123 of Indian Evidence Act read with Rule 3(2) and proviso 
to Rule 5 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968. 


Except the aforesaid, no other witness has appeared before the Tribunal either in support of or against the 


notification dated 29.01.2024. 


[भाग त1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 37 


था. 


IX. 
9.1 


9.2 


9.3. 


9.4 


EVIDENCE ON BEHALF OF THE UNLAWFUL ASSOCIATION OR ANYONE ELSE AGAINST 
THE NOTIFICATION DATED 29.01.2024: 
Despite been given reasonable opportunity, no person has appeared before this Tribunal either to cross- 


examine the witnesses mentioned in the Point no. शा herein above or to lead evidence on behalf of the 
unlawful association. 


ARGUMENTS: 


Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, the learned Additional Solicitor General (ASG) for the Union of India, has advanced 
extensive arguments in support of the Notification dated 29.01.2024 before the Tribunal. 


The learned ASG, has argued that the claim of privilege for producing documents in sealed covers, has got 
statutory and judicial sanction. She has referred to Section 123 of the Indian Evidence Act read with Section 
3(2) of the UAP Rules, which are reproduced as under:- 


Indian Evidence Act, 1872 


“123. Evidence as to affairs of State — No one shall be permitted to give any evidence 
derived from unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the 
permission of the officer at the head of the department concerned, who shall give or 
withhold such permission as he thinks fit.” 


The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 


“3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence.- 


(1) In holding an inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 4 or disposing of any 
application under sub-section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section 8, the Tribunal 
or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), 
follow, as far as practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 (1 of 1872). 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), 
where any books of account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal 
or the Court of the District Judge by the Central Government and such books of account 
or other documents are claimed by that Government to be of a confidential nature then, 
the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall not,- 


(a) Make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the 
proceedings before it; or 


(b) Allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books 
of account or other documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings 
before it.” 


“5, Documents which should accompany a reference to the Tribunal - Every reference 
made to the Tribunal under sub-section (1) of Section 4 shall be accompanied by- 


(i) a copy of the notification made under sub-section (1) of Section 3, and 
(ii) all the facts on which the grounds specified in the said notification are based: 


Provided that nothing in this rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any 
fact to the Tribunal which that Government considers against the public interest to 
disclose.” 


The learned ASG argued that the Union of India has claimed privilege over certain documents, emphasizing 
that their non-disclosure serves public interest. She pointed out that this principle of public interest is relevant 
even in criminal proceedings against the accused. However, in this case, the matter is of even greater 
importance as it concerns the sovereignty and integrity of the country. 


The learned ASG maintained that in issues involving national security, sovereignty, and integrity, the 
Tribunal must interpret and analyze the material with a different perspective. The decisions made by the 
Central Government in such matters rely on highly sensitive information and inputs, and their impact extends 
beyond national boundaries. In the current context of rising terrorist activities and national insurgency, global 
boundaries have become less significant. Therefore, the ASG submitted that maintaining the confidentiality 
of these documents is essential for safeguarding national security and the public interest. 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


9.5 To support her arguments, learned ASG has relied upon the judgment in a case of preventive detention in 
Raj Kumar Singh vs. State of Bihar (1986) 4 SCC 407; where the Supreme Court of India, inter alia, held as 
under:- 


“The executive authority is not the sole judge of what is required for national security or 
public order. But the court cannot substitute its decision if the executive authority or the 
appropriate authority acts on proper materials and reasonably and rationally comes to that 
conclusion even though a conclusion with which the court might not be in agreement. It is not 
for the court to put itself in the position of the detaining authority and to satisfy itself that 
untested facts reveal a path of crime provided these facts are relevant. See in this connection 
the observations of O. Chinnappa Reddy, J. in Vijay Narain Singh case [(1984) 3 SCC 14: 
1984 SCC (Cri) 361: AIR 1984 SC 1334: (1984) 3 SCR 435 ] at p. 440 and 441. (SCC p. 19, 
para 1) 346. Similarly, in the case of Union of India vs. Rajasthan High Court, (2017) 2 SCC 
599: 2016 SCC Online SC 1468.. It was not for the court in the exercise of its power of 
judicial review to suggest a policy which it considered fit. The formulation of suggestions by 
the High Court for framing a National Security Policy travelled far beyond legitimate domain 
of judicial review. Formulation of such a policy is based on information and inputs which are 
not available to the court. The court is not an expert in such matters. Judicial review is 
concerned with the legality of executive action and the court can interfere only where there is 
a breach of law or a violation of the Constitution.” 


9.6 The learned ASG has also placed reliance upon the judgment in Ex-Armymen's Protection Services (P) Ltd. 
v. Union of India, (2014) 5 SCC 409, wherein it has been inter alia held as under: 


“15. It is difficult to define in exact terms as to what is “national security”. However, the 
same would generally include socio-political stability, territorial integrity, economic 
solidarity and strength, ecological balance, cultural cohesiveness, external peace, etc. 


16. What is in the interest of national security is not a question of law. It is a matter of policy. 
It is not for the court to decide whether something is in the interest of the State or not. It 
should be left to the executive.” 


9.7 The learned ASG submitted that the UAPA and the Rules framed thereunder provide for a mechanism to 
claim privilege and withhold certain facts/documents to seek non-disclosure of the same. The learned ASG 
then placed reliance on the judgment in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind v. Union of India (1995) 1 SCC 428, wherein 
the Supreme Court has held as under:- 


"20. ...the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Act itself permits the Central 
Government to withhold the disclosure off acts which it considers to be against the public 
interest to disclose. Similarly, Rule 3(2) and the proviso to Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Rules, 1968 also permit non disclosure of confidential documents and 
information which the Government considers to be against the public interest to disclose" 


22. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine in 
nature and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued 
confidentiality in public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such 
information, and, may be, also full particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public 
interest. The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed 
thereunder provide for maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in public interest. 
However, the non-disclosure of sensitive information and evidence to the association and its 
office-bearers, whenever justified in public interest, does not necessarily imply its 
nondisclosure to the Tribunal as well. In such cases where the Tribunal is satisfied that non- 
disclosure of such information to the association or its office-bearers is in public interest, it 
may permit its non-disclosure to the association or its office-bearers, but in order to perform 
its task of adjudication as required by the Act, the Tribunal can look into the same for the 
purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and satisfying itself that it can safely 
act on the same. In such a situation, the Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure whereby it 
can itself examine and test the credibility of such material before it decides to accept the same 
for determining the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. 
The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a 
procedure would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the 
points in controversy after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, 
without abdicating its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. 
Such a course would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the 
circumstances of each case, while protecting the rights of the association and its members, 
without jeopardising the public interest. This would also ensure that the process of 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 39 


9.8 


9.9. 


9.10. 


adjudication is not denuded of its content and the decision ultimately rendered by the 
Tribunal is reached by it on all points in controversy after adjudication and not by mere 
acceptance of the opinion already formed by the Central Government. 


24. In Paul Ivan Birzon v. E dward S. King [469 F 2d 1241, 1244-45 (1972)] placing reliance 
on Morrissey [408 US 471 : 33 L Ed 2d 484 (1972)] , while dealing with a similar situation, 
when confidential information had to be acted on, it was indicated that the credibility issue 
could be resolved by the Board retaining confidentiality of the information but assessing the 
credibility itself, and a modified procedure was indicated as under: 


“... the board was required to decide whether it would believe the informants or the 
parolee and his witnesses. The infirmity that we see in the hearing and determination 
by the parole board is that it resolved the credibility issue solely on the basis of the 
State report, without itself taking the statements from the informants. Thus the board 
had no way of knowing how reliable the informants were and had no real basis on 
which to resolve the credibility issue against the parolee.... We do not mean to 
intimate that the board should have taken testimony from the informants at the 
hearing and given the parolee the opportunity to cross-examine. What we do mean is 
that the board should have received the information directly from the informants 
(although not necessarily in the presence of the parolee), instead of relying solely on 
the State report. The board could then have reached its own conclusions about the 
relative reliability of the informants’ statements and those of the parolee and his 
witnesses. 


Similarly, the board could then have made its own decision about how realistic were 
the claims of potential danger to the informants or to State parole officers if their 
identity was disclosed, instead of placing exclusive reliance on the State report. 
Thus, we hold that, in relying exclusively on the written synopsis in the State report, 
which was the only evidence of a parole violation, in the face of the parolee's denial 
and his presentation of the testimony of other witnesses, the revocation of Satz's 
parole was fundamentally unfair to him and was a denial of due process of law.”’ 


25. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its 
source, in public interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the 
confidential information for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the 
conflicting evidence of the other side. This modified procedure satisfies the minimum 
requirements of natural justice and also retains the basic element of an adjudicatory process 
which involves objective determination of the factual basis of the action taken." 


It is submitted that a perusal of the aforesaid judgment which has interpreted the provisions of UAPA 
manifest that there is neither any form nor content for claiming privilege. The said judgment instead provides 
for a modified procedure and holds that in cases of privilege the Tribunal has to itself look into the content 
and satisfy itself that that non-disclosure of such information to the association or its office bearers is in 
public interest. The said judgment further mandates that for this purpose the “Tribunal can devise a suitable 
procedure whereby it can itself examine and test the credibility of such material before it decides to accept the 
same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful.” 


The learned ASG, thus, submitted that from the judicial precedents mentioned above, it is clear that an 
enquiry contemplated under the UAPA gives a right to the government to claim privilege of sensitive 
documents in public interest/national interest and in the interest of justice; which right has been duly upheld 
by the Supreme Court; and that in the present case, the documents for which claim of privilege is made, by 
their very nature, are confidential and sensitive in nature and, therefore, cannot be supplied as a public 
document. 


The learned ASG further submitted that the documents in question are part of the evidence collected by 
intelligence agencies concerning the secessionist and unlawful activities of SIMI and its associates. These 
documents are confidential and secret, and their verification is within the purview of the Tribunal only. The 
ASG elaborated that the material submitted in the sealed cover by the Central Government comprises 
intelligence reports, secret information gathered over time by investigative and intelligence agencies, 
communications between these agencies, and information that could lead to further recoveries, discovery of 
facts, and the exposure of conspiracies. Revealing such information would be detrimental to public interest 
and national security. 


Additionally, the learned ASG emphasised that the material includes notes presented to the Cabinet 
Committee on Security, supporting documents, the grounds for the notification issued, intelligence inputs, 
and related correspondence. Thus, the Central Government's claim of privilege over these documents is 


40 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


9.16 


justified by law, and the documents submitted in the sealed cover should remain undisclosed in the public 
interest. 


The learned ASG argued that the claim of confidentiality must be evaluated based on the document's nature. 
If it is objectively determined that disclosing the document would harm public interest, then its contents 
should not be revealed to the opposing party. Therefore, the foundation of immunity from non-disclosure is 
the character of the document, and the Tribunal must balance public interest against the interests of the 
individual, office bearer, or association that has been banned. 


The learned ASG further explained that the statement of objects and reasons for the UAPA 
emphasizes its purpose i.e. to more effectively prevent certain unlawful activities by individuals and 
associations and address related matters. She stated that the statute grants Parliament the authority to impose 
reasonable restrictions, through due process of law, on the right to form associations in the interest of India's 
sovereignty and integrity, and by extension, on the freedoms of speech, expression, and peaceful assembly. 
As a special statute, the UAPA's procedures take precedence over general legal provisions. The learned ASG 
also highlighted that Section 48 of the UAPA asserts that the Act's provisions and the rules made under it will 
override any inconsistent enactments or instruments, thereby clearly establishing its supreme authority. 


The learned ASG also submitted that the decision of the previous Tribunals constituted under Section 4 of the 
UAPA, in which the claim of privilege by the Central Government had been allowed holding that the same 
satisfied the requirement of Section 123 of the Evidence Act, are binding on this Tribunal in view of the 
provisions of Section 5(7) of the UAPA which provide that the proceedings before this Tribunal are judicial 
proceedings. 


In view of the aforesaid position, the learned ASG submitted that the Central Government claims privilege on 
the documents contained in the sealed covers and produced during the inquiry before this Tribunal by various 
witnesses. 


The learned ASG further submitted that the exception to the freedom of speech and expression, and to form 
associations and union, under Article 19(1) of the Constitution of India, was inserted in the form of 
“sovereignty and integrity of India” in Article 19(2) and 19(4), after the National Integration Council 
appointed a Committee on National Integration and Regionalization. The said Committee was formed to look 
into the aspect of putting reasonable restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. 
Learned ASG submitted that pursuant to the acceptance of recommendations of the Committee, the 
Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 was enacted to impose reasonable restrictions in the interests 
of the sovereignty and integrity of India. Further, in order to implement the provisions of the 1963 Act, the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill was introduced in the Parliament. The main objective of the UAPA is 
to make powers available for dealing with activities directed against the integrity and sovereignty of India. 


Learned ASG submitted that after the independence of India, the Parliament has passed many laws to 
regulate national security and in order to protect the sovereignty of India. The UAPA is an Act to provide for 
the more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and associations and for dealing 
with terrorist activities and other matters connected therewith. Learned ASG submitted that the present Act is 
the Central Act and has been amended time and again to tackle the menace of terrorism and terrorist activities 
from India. 


The learned ASG further submitted that to achieve the aforesaid purpose of tackling the menace of activities 
inimical to the sovereignty and integrity of India, the legislature in its wisdom decided to create two species 
of the offence in the UAPA Le. 


1. Unlawful Activity & Unlawful Association [S-2(0) and 2(p) 1/w Chapters II & वा 
(Sections 3-14)]; and 


il. Terrorist Act & Terrorist Organization [S-2(k), (0) (m) t/w Chapter IV-VI 
(Sections 15-40)]. 


The learned ASG further argued that the growing threat of terrorism, which posed an immediate danger to the 
lives of Indian citizens and the security of the State, necessitated the enactment of special deterrent laws over 
time. The ASG noted that the repeal of the Prevention of Terrorist Activities Act, 2002, left a gap in the legal 
framework to address terrorism. Consequently, the UAPA was amended to include a definition of 'terrorism' 
and to grant substantive powers to the Indian State to combat it. These amendments also considered India's 
commitments under the Security Council Resolution of 28th September, 2001, which called for fighting both 
terrorism and terror funding, treating the latter as a form of terrorism. The amendments were part of the 
global effort to combat terrorism. 


In light of the aforementioned points, the learned ASG asserted that the provisions of the UAPA were 
enacted by Parliament, which had the legislative competence to do so. Once it is established that the 
Parliament had the authority to enact the law, there is a presumption of the statute's constitutionality. The 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 41 


9.19 


9.20 


9.21 


9.22 


9.23 


10.1 


10.2 


ASG further argued that statutes are presumed to be constitutionally valid, and it is assumed that the 
Legislature understands the needs of the people. Additionally, the ASG stated that an organization can be 
banned solely based on the Central Government's opinion. Consequently, the challenge to Chapter II of the 
UAPA has already been dismissed by the Supreme Court in paragraphs 84-92 of Arup Bhuyan v. State of 
Assam (2023) 8 SCC 745. In paragraph 90 of this judgment, the Supreme Court held as under: - 


“90. Thus from the aforesaid it can be seen that before any organization is declared 
unlawful a detailed procedure is required to be followed including the wide publicity 
and even the right to a member of such association to represent before the Tribunal. As 
observed hereinabove the notification issued by the Central Government declaring a 
particular association unlawful, the same is subject to inquiry and approval by the 
Tribunal as per Section 4. Once that is done and despite that a person who is a 
member of such unlawful association continues to be a member of such unlawful 
association then he has to face the consequences and is subjected to the penal 
provisions as provided under Section 10 more particularly Section 10(a)(i) of the 
UAPA, 1967.” 


The learned ASG argued that the proceedings before this Tribunal are similar to civil proceedings, with the 
standard of proof as prescribed by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). The decision must be 
based on objectively evaluating which version is more credible and acceptable. The ASG referenced the 
observation in paragraph 30 of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). Additionally, the ASG noted that the 
procedures for Tribunals can be derived from the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. Similarly, the Tribunal 
under the UAPA has specific powers and procedures outlined in Section 5, read with Section 9 of the Act. 


The ASG submitted that, under Section 4 of the UAPA, the Tribunal's jurisdiction is to determine whether 
the Central Government has sufficient cause to ban the organization in question. Any procedural 
irregularities or defects in the material presented before this Tribunal should be evaluated by the relevant trial 
court under the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, and other applicable laws. The Tribunal's role is to decide 
whether these documents can be relied upon to establish 'sufficiency of cause' and whether law enforcement 
agencies could reasonably ignore them when recommending action under the UAPA. 


For assessing the sufficiency of the cause, the Tribunal must consider all materials and incidents holistically. 
If these materials or incidents are related to unlawful activities, secession, or 'cession of a part of the territory 
of India,' based on the preponderance of probabilities, then the ban is justified and should be confirmed. The 
ASG asserted that the Central Government has provided sufficient and compelling evidence to show that 
SIMI and its associates were engaged in unlawful activities. The law does not require that the cases forming 
the basis of the Central Government's opinion be recent or numerous; even one case can suffice. The ASG 
also stated that delays in investigation are irrelevant to these proceedings, as the evidence standard here is 
based on the preponderance of probabilities. 


Despite several FIRs against SIMI, its members, activists, and sympathizers continue to engage in unlawful 
activities defined under the UAPA, posing serious threats to India's sovereignty, integrity, peace, communal 
harmony, internal security, and secular fabric. If SIMI is not banned again, its activists and sympathizers will 
continue to pose significant threats to communal harmony, internal security, and national integrity. 


Lastly, the ASG stated that the Central Government's notification No. S.O. 354(E), dated 29" January, 2024 
declaring SIMI as an unlawful association, is based on information and materials from various states, the 
National Investigation Agency, the Directorate of Enforcement, and other intelligence agencies. Therefore, 
the notification is justified and should be confirmed. 


CLAIM OF PRIVILEGE 


The learned ASG contends that the Government is entitled to claim privilege over certain documents, the 
disclosure of which would affect public interest as provided in the UAPA and its Rules. Rule 3, sub-Rule (2) 
of the UAP Rules specifies that if the Government claims that certain books of accounts or other documents 
are of a confidential nature, the Tribunal or court shall not include these books or documents in the 
proceedings’ records nor allow their inspection. Furthermore, Rule 5 allows the Central Government to 
withhold any information from the Tribunal if it considers the disclosure to be against public interest. 


The ASG argued that the Supreme Court in Jamaat (supra) addressed the issue of claiming 
privilege, stating that the requirements of natural justice in such cases must be adjusted to safeguard public 
interest, which always outweighs lesser interests. Therefore, while the Central Government must disclose all 
information and evidence relied upon to support the declaration to the association, it may withhold any 
information that it deems contrary to the public interest to disclose. 


The issue of claiming privilege by the Central Government on the documents disclosure whereof is injurious 
to public interest is inbuilt in the UAPA and the rules framed thereunder as provided in Rule 3 and 5 of the 


42 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


10.3 


UAP Rules reproduced earlier. Sub-Rule (2) of Rule 3 of the UAP Rules starts with a non-obstante clause 
providing that notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 books of account or 
other documents produced by the Central Government and claimed to be of a confidential nature, the 
Tribunal shall not make such books of account or documents a part of the records of the proceedings before it 
or allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books of account or other 
documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings before it. Rule 5 which provides for the 
copy of notification and all facts on which the grounds specified in the said notification are based, further 
provides that nothing in the Rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact to the Tribunal 
which it considers against public interest to disclose. 


The provisions under UAPA and the rules made thereunder forbidding disclosure were deliberated by the 
Supreme Court in Jamaat (supra) and it was held: 


“20. As earlier mentioned, the requirement of specifying the grounds together with the 
disclosure of the facts on which they are based and an adjudication of the existence of 
sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful in the form of decision after 
considering the cause, if any, shown by the association in response to the show cause notice 
issued to it, are all consistent only with an objective determination of the points in 
controversy in a judicial scrutiny conducted by a Tribunal constituted by a sitting High Court 
Judge, which distinguishes the scheme under this Act with the requirement under the 
preventive detention laws to justify the anticipatory action of preventive detention based on 
suspicion reached by a process of subjective satisfaction. The scheme under this Act requiring 
adjudication of the controversy in this manner makes it implicit that the minimum 
requirement of natural justice must be satisfied, to make the adjudication meaningful. No 
doubt, the requirement of natural justice in a case of this kind must be tailored to safeguard 
public interest which must always outweigh every lesser interest. This is also evident from the 
fact that the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Act itself permits the Central 
Government to withhold the disclosure of facts which it considers to be against the public 
interest to disclose. Similarly, Rule 3(2) and the proviso to Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Rules, 1968 also permit nondisclosure of confidential documents and 
information which the Government considers against the public interest to disclose. Thus, 
subject to the non-disclosure of information which the Central Government considers to be 
against the public interest to disclose, all information and evidence relied on by the Central 
Government to support the declaration made by it of an association to be unlawful, has to be 
disclosed to the association to enable it to show cause against the same. Rule 3 also indicates 
that as far as practicable the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
must be followed. A departure has to be made only when the public interest so requires. Thus, 
subject to the requirement of public interest which must undoubtedly outweigh the interest of 
the association and its members, the ordinary rules of evidence and requirement of natural 
Justice must be followed by the Tribunal in making the adjudication under the Act. 


22. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine 
in nature and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require 
continued confidentiality in public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of 
such information, and, may be, also full particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public 
interest. The scheme of' the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed 
thereunder provide for maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in public interest. 
However, the non-disclosure of sensitive information and evidence to the association and its 
office bearers, whenever justified in public interest, does not necessarily imply its non- 
disclosure to the Tribunal as well. In such cases where the Tribunal is satisfied that non- 
disclosure of such information to the association or its office bearers is in public interest, it 
may permit its non- disclosure to the association or its office bearers, but in order to perform 
its task of adjudication as required by the Act, the Tribunal can look into the same for the 
purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and satisfying itself that it can safely 
act on the same. In such a situation, the Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure whereby it 
can itself examine and test the credibility of such material before it decides to accept the same 
for determining the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful, 
The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a 
procedure would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the 
points in controversy after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, 
without abdicating its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. 
Such a course would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the 
circumstances of each case, while protecting the rights of the association and its members. 
‘without jeopardising the public interest. This would also ensure that the process of 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 43 


10.4 


10.5 


adjudication is not denuded of its content anti the decision ultimately rendered by the 
Tribunal is reached by it on all points in controversy after adjudication and not by mere 
acceptance of the opinion already formed by the Central Government. 


27. It follows that, ordinarily, the material on which the Tribunal can place reliance for 
deciding the existence of sufficient cause to support the declaration, must be of the kind which 
is capable of judicial scrutiny. In this context, the claim of privilege on the ground of public 
interest by the Central Government would be permissible and the Tribunal is empowered to 
devise_a procedure by which it can satisfy itself of the credibility of the material without 
disclosing the same to the association, when public interest so requires. The requirements of 
natural justice can be suitably modified by the Tribunal to examine the material itself in the 
manner it considers appropriate, to assess its credibility without disclosing the same to the 
association. This modified procedure would _satisfy_the_minimum_requirement_of natural 
justice and judicial scrutiny. The decision would then be that of the Tribunal itself.” 


[Emphasis supplied] 


Relevant provision under the Indian Evidence Act permitting the State to claim privilege is Section 123 
which reads as under: 


“123. Evidence as to affairs of State-—No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived 
from unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission 
of the officer at the head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such 
permission as he thinks fit.” 


Referring to Section 123 of the Indian Evidence Act which permits the Government to claim privilege in 
regard to the documents relating to the affairs of the State, disclosure whereof is injurious to public interest, 
the Supreme Court in S. P. Gupta v. Union of India, 1981 Supp SCC 87 held that while granting privilege 
two questions fall for determination of the Court, namely (1) whether the document relates to the affairs of 
the State and (2) whether its disclosure would, in the particular case before the Court, be injurious to public 
interest. The Court in reaching its decision on these two questions has to balance two competing aspects of 
public interest, because the document being one relating to the affairs of the State, its disclosure would cause 
some injury to the interest of the State or the proper functioning of the public service and on the other hand if 
it is not disclosed, the non-disclosure would thwart the administration of justice by keeping back from the 
Court a material document. Thus, the Court has to decide which aspect of the public interest pre-dominates or 
in the other words whether the public interest which requires that the document should not be produced 
outweighs the public interest that a Court of justice in performing its functions should not be denied access to 
relevant evidence. It was held by the Supreme Court as under: 


“73. We have already pointed out that whenever an objection to the disclosure of a document 
under Section 123 is raised, two questions fall for the determination of the court, namely, 
whether the document relates to affairs of State and whether its disclosure would, in the 
particular case before the court, be injurious to public interest. The court in reaching its 
decision on these two questions has to balance two competing aspects of public interest, 
because the document being one relating to affairs of State, its disclosure would cause some 
injury to the interest of the State or the proper functioning of the public service and on the 
other hand if it is not disclosed, the nondisclosure would thwart the administration of justice 
by keeping back from the court a material document. There are two aspects of public interest 
clashing with each other out of which the court has to decide which predominates. The 
approach to this problem is admirably set out in a passage from the judgment of Lord Reid in 
Conway v. Rimmer: 


“Tt is universally recognised that there are two kinds of public interest which may 
clash. There is the public interest that harm shall not be done to the nation or the 
public service by disclosure of certain documents, and there is the public interest 
that the administration of justice shall not be frustrated by the withholding of 
documents which must be produced if justice is to be done. There are many cases 
where the nature of the injury which would or might be done to the nation or the 
public service is of so grave a character that no other interest, public or private, can 
be allowed to prevail over it. With regard to such cases it would be proper to say, as 
Lord Simon did, that to order production of the document in question would put the 
interest of the State in jeopardy. But there are many other cases where the possible 
injury to the public service is much less and there one would think that it would be 
proper to balance the public interests involved.” 


44 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


10.6 


10.7 


10.8 


10.9 


10.10 


11.1 


11.2 


11.3 


Furthermore, the strict requirements for claiming privilege as noted in S.P. Gupta (supra) must be interpreted 
in the context of the UAPA and its Rules, which stipulate that documents whose disclosure may not be in the 
public interest should not be disclosed. As previously mentioned, the Rule begins with a non-obstante clause, 
establishing an inbuilt mechanism within the UAPA and its Rules. The Tribunal is mandated to grant 
privilege and forbid disclosure when the Government claims that such disclosure would be against public 
interest, and upon review, the Tribunal also determines that public interest outweighs the interests of the 
association, its members, or office bearers. 


In other words, the claim of confidentiality must be assessed based on the nature of the document. If it is 
objectively determined that the document's disclosure would harm public interest, then its contents cannot be 
disclosed to the other side. Therefore, the foundation for immunity from non-disclosure is rooted in the 
document's character, and the Tribunal must balance public interest against the interests of the individual, 
office bearer, or banned association. 


Furthermore, the statement of objects and reasons for the UAPA emphasizes that the enactment's purpose is 
to more effectively prevent certain unlawful activities by individuals and associations and address related 
matters. The statute empowers Parliament to impose reasonable restrictions, through due process of law, on 
the right to form associations in the interest of India's sovereignty and integrity, and by extension, restricts 
freedoms of speech, expression, and peaceful assembly. As a special statute, the UAPA's procedures take 
precedence over general legal provisions. Additionally, Section 48 of the UAPA stipulates that its provisions 
and the rules made under it will override any inconsistent enactments or instruments, clearly establishing its 
supreme authority. 


In the present case, as per the procedure, 6 witnesses in their evidence including PW-39 have claimed 
privilege of documents and submitted documents in sealed covers. They have stated that the documents 
submitted to the Tribunal in the sealed cover are privileged and confidential in nature and the same cannot be 
made available to the banned association or to any third party under the provisions of UAPA as the 
Government considers it against the public interest to disclose. 


A total of eight sealed covers were handed over by the above mentioned six witnesses of the Government. 
Before proceeding to deal with the material in the sealed cover, this Tribunal has opened and perused the 
documents and material placed in sealed covers and re-sealed the same with the seal of the Tribunal while 
preparing the report. 


The nature of material placed in the sealed covers by the 6 witnesses is in the form of intelligence reports, 
secret informations collected from time to time by the investigating and intelligence agencies, 
communications between the intelligence agencies, informations revealed on investigation and interrogation 
of the accused which may lead to further recoveries, discoveries of facts as also unearth conspiracies, the 
disclosure whereof would be clearly detrimental to the larger public interest and the security of the State. The 
sealed covers placed on record by Mr Rajesh Kumar Gupta, Director (CT), Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Government of India who appeared as PW-39 contains the note put up to the Cabinet Committee on Security 
along with documents supporting the note and the grounds on which the notification was issued besides 
intelligence inputs and correspondence in relation thereto. Hence, this Tribunal concludes that the claim of 
privilege of the documents by the witnesses is in accordance with law and the documents submitted in sealed 
covers are not required to be disclosed in the public interest. 


DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF EVIDENCE: 


This Tribunal is required to make an objective determination to decide whether or not, there is sufficient 
cause for declaring the association SIMI to be unlawful. The fact that no one has appeared for the concerned 
association, does not relieve the Tribunal of its duty to consider the material furnished before it by the 
Government objectively. The Tribunal is required to consider the credibility of the evidence/material placed 
on record by the Government to decide whether sufficient cause for declaring the SIMI an unlawful 
association has been shown by the Government. 


To consider whether there is sufficient cause to declare SIMI an unlawful association, this Tribunal will 
primarily be considering the evidence furnished concerning the offences registered after the previous ban in 
the year 2019 and the judgments delivered thereafter, even in the cases which were registered before the said 
ban. Wherever necessary, the Tribunal shall also be referring to the offences committed earlier by the 
members/activists of the said association. 


The evidence adduced before the Tribunal by the above-mentioned 39 witnesses would show that even after 
the ban in the year 2019, the individuals associated with the said association SIMI had continued to indulge 
in criminal activities in many states across the country, particularly in the States of Kerala, Tamil Nadu, 
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh in addition to the Union Territory of Delhi. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 45 


11.4 


11.5 


11.5.1 


11.5.2 


11.5.3 


11.5.4 


11.5.5 


11.5.6 


To conclude the instant proceedings and to give its findings in the matter, the Tribunal deems it justified to 
first deal with those cases which are mentioned in the Notification dated 29.01.2024 of the Central 
Government as a background for declaring SIMI as an unlawful association and regarding which evidence 
has been led by the Government. These cases are as follows:- 


Case Crime no. RC-31/2022/NIA/DLI - The notification states that this case has been registered by the NIA 
against Athar Parvez and Mohammed Jalaluddin of Phulwari Sharif, Patna relating to conspiracy of 
disrupting the visit of Hon’ble Prime Minister in July 2022. Both the accused were arrested and charge 
sheeted under various provisions including Sections 17, 18, 18A, 18 B, 38 and 39 of the UAPA. 


For this case, the Central Government has examined Mr Vipin Kumar, Deputy Superintendent of Police, 
National Investigation Agency, New Delhi as the witness PW 33. He is the Chief Investigating Officer of this 
case. He has filed his affidavit by way of evidence exhibit PW 33/A and has also placed reliance on several 
documents about this case. He has deposed that information was received by the Central Government that 
Police Station Phulwari Sharif, Bihar has been informed about a plan to disturb the proposed visit of Hon’ble 
Prime Minister of India, Sh. Narendra Modi by some suspected persons who had assembled in the Phulwari 
Sharif area on 11.07.2022. Police raided Ahmed Place, Naya Tola near the canal, Phulwan Sharif, Patna and 
intercepted two persons namely Athar Parvej and Mohd Jalaluddin near Eshopur Canal, PS Phulwari, District 
Patna. During the search, some incriminating articles/documents were seized. Accordingly, FIR no. 827 
dated 12.07.2022 was registered at PS Phulwari Sharif, District Patna Bihar and both the accused Athar 
Parvej and Mohd. Jalaluddin was arrested u/s 120, 120B, 121, 121A, 153A, 153B and 34 of IPC. 


On 22.07.2022, the Ministry of Home Affairs (hereinafter referred to as "MHA") issued an Order vide F. No. 
11011/63/2022/NIA, considering the nature and gravity of the offence, in exercise of its powers conferred 
under Section 6 (5) read with Section 8 of the NIA Act, 2008, directing the National Investigation Agency to 
register a Regular Case and take up the investigation of the same. Accordingly, on 22.07.2022, NIA 
registered the case being RC-31/2022/NIA/DLI under Sections 120, I20B, 121, 121A, 153A, 153B and 34 of 
the Indian Penal Code. 


Investigation revealed that during the proposed visit of Hon’ble Prime Minister to Bihar, some suspected 
persons had assembled in the Phulwari Sharif area. On 11.07.2022 at about 1930 hrs, on secret information, a 
raid was carried out by the Police Officers of PS Phulwari Sharif, District Patna, Bihar at the rented 
house/premises of Athar Parvej (A-1). They recovered incriminating documents related to the Popular Front 
of India (PFI), which is a banned unlawful association under the UAPA. These included 05 sets of the 
document titled, “India 2047 Towards Rule of Islam in India, Internal Document: Not for circulation”. The 
seized document was related to unlawful activities intended to disrupt the sovereignty of India and to cause 
disaffection against India. On questioning, the owner of the house, Md. Jalaluddin (A-2) revealed that the 
first floor of his house was taken on rent by the accused Athar Parvej (A-1) for a training which was duly 
conducted on 6th and 7th July 2022 in the rented portion of his house. 


On questioning Athar Parvej (A-1) in the presence of Mohammed Jalaluddin (A-2) and other local persons, 
disclosed that he had been an active member of Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI),a banned 
terrorist organization and he used to provide legal help to SIMI members lodged in jail. He also disclosed 
that the recovered and seized articles from his rented accommodation were related to PFI. It was also 
admitted that_on the direction of PFI, he was preparing a secret group of Ex. SIMI members to take revenge 
for the atrocities against Muslims of India and to attack the persons who passed derogatory remarks against 
Islam. It was disclosed by him that recently revenge was taken in Amravati (Maharashtra) and Udaipur 
(Rajasthan) in retaliation for derogatory comments made by Nupur Sharma against Islam. Accused Ather 
Parvej also stated that the accused named in the FIR were his active associates in their mission. (Emphasis 
supplied) 


The above-seized document aims to establish Pan-Islamic rule in India by subverting the Constitution of 
India. It also propagates armed struggle through violent means. It was further disclosed that the Popular Front 
of India (PFI) was planning for mass mobilization of the Muslim community to regain the glory of Islamic 
tule in India and for that they had set up a program for training the Muslim community in handling weapons 
and explosive devices. To meet the challenge, the PFI through the manifesto urged the Muslim community to 
acquire proper arms training and stockpile of arms and explosives which would be under the knowledge of 
selected persons. 


Further investigation in the present case revealed that_most of the accused persons were connected with the 
accused persons of other NIA cases directly or through common contacts including the accused Athar Parvej 
and Anwar Rashid (A-37). Anwar Rashid (A-37), was_a member of the banned terrorist_Organisation 
Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI). After the ban on SIMI, he got associated with Wahdat-e-Islami 
Hind and Crescent/Guidance Publications as a sales representative to continue the ideology of SIMI of 
establishing Islamic rule in India. He was also associated with several members of PFI in Bihar and UP 
including the accused Athar Parvej (A-1) who was instrumental in preparing a secret group of Ex SIMI 


46 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


11.5.7 


11.5.8 


11.5.9 


members to work for the agenda of Popular Front of India. It was also revealed that Anwar Rashid also 
collected funds from various sources which were further sent to several persons convicted in terrorism cases 
and imprisoned in various Jails. He was also acting as an intermediate messenger to further the information 
sent from the accused of terrorism cases to like-minded persons or associates. He was also sending radical 
books/material to various like-minded prisoners. (Emphasis supplied) 


During the custodial interrogation, Anwar Rashid A-37 disclosed that he had joined SIMI in 1996 under the 
endorsement of Jameel Siddique, Zimmedar (Head) of SIMI in UP at that time. Further, in 1998-99, he was 
appointed as Press Secretary of SIMI in Bhadohi (U.P) by Jameel Siddique and was also declared an active 
member of SIMI by the concerned authorities of SIMI. After the ban on SIMI in 2001, he joined Wahdat-e- 
Islami in the year 2004 and was also associated with different groups in Pakistan including Jamaat-e-Islami, 
Pakistan. He further revealed that the ex-members of banned terrorist organisations like SIMI and others 
were instrumental in reviving the ideology of SIMI by joining PFI. He further informed that he was 
associated with the accused Athar Parvej and Manjar Parvej and_during his stay in Patna he used to stay at the 
houses of Ex SIMI membersincluding the house of Athar Parvej. (Emphasis supplied) 


He stated that a total of 05 supplementary charge sheets have been filed in the case and further investigation 
is still going on. He also stated that the accused Anwar Rashid had 09 other criminal cases pending against 
him. (Emphasis supplied) 


It is also relevant to reproduce the relevant extracts of the supplementary chargesheet dated 27.10.2023, 
Ex. PW33/H filed in the instant case by the witness before the court concerned to show that the SIMI 
members were actively involved in planning and committing various offences. The relevant extracts are as 
follows: 


“17.3 On questioning, Athar Parvej (A-1) in the presence of Mohammed Jalaluddin and other 
local persons, disclosed that he has been an active member of Student Islamic Movement of India 
(SIMI), a banned terrorist organization and he used to provide legal help to SIMI members 
lodged in jail. He also disclosed that the recovered and seized articles from his rented 
accommodation are related to PFI. On the direction of PFI, he is preparing a secret group of Ex. 
SIMI members with aim to take revenge on the atrocities against Muslims of India and to attack 
the persons who pass derogatory remarks on Islam. Recently revenge was taken in Amravati 
(Maharashtra) and Udaypur (Rajasthan) in retaliation of derogatory comments made by Nupur 
Sharma against Islam. Accused Athar Parvej (A-1) also named other FIR named accused persons 
and termed them as his active associates in their mission. On his instance, police of PS 
Phulwarisharif, Patna also searched his house and recovered & seized 02 sets of document 
"India 2047 Towards Rule of Islam in India,Internal Document: Not for circulation", 05 cloth 
Flags, original rent agreement on Non- Judicial Stamp by Farhat Bano w/o Md Jalaluddin Khan 
(A-2) with tenant Athar Parvej(A-1) son of Abdul Qayum Ansari, Pamphlets "Popular Front of 
India 20 February, 2021” 05 copies in Hindi and 01 android mobile phone of accused Athar 
Parvej.” 


17.24 Investigation further brought out that Anwar Rashid (A-37) was ex-member of the banned 
terrorist organization Student Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) and he is presently associated 
with the organization 'Wahdat- e-Islami Hind'. He is also associated with several PFI members of 
Bihar and UP including FIR named accused Athar Parvej (A-1) who was instrumental in 
preparing a secret group of Ex. SIMI members to work for the agenda of Popular Front of India. 
The prime agenda, under the banner of PFI, was to establish Islamic Rule in India as envisioned 
in the PFI's ‘India 2047 Document'.” 


17.25 During the investigation, 05 days police custody remand of accused Anwar Rashid (A-37) 
was obtained in the instant case. He was interrogated thoroughly. During custodial examination, 
he stated that he had joined SIMI in 1996 under endorsement of Jameel Siddique, Zimmedar 
(Head) of SMI in UP at that time. Further in 199.8-1999, he was appointed as Press Secretary of 
SIMI in Bhadohi (UP) by Jameel Siddque and also declared as Ansar/ Akhwan (active member) 
of SIMI by the authorities of SIMI. He was arrested by Bhadohi Police for being member of SIMI 
in the year, 2001 and further he was arrested by Gujarat Police in Godhara riot case in 
February, 2002. He also corroborated that he collected funds from different sources and further 
sent the funds to several accused of the terror cases, imprisoned in various jails in India. After 
ban of SIMI in the year 2001, he joined Wahdat-e-Islami in the year, 2004. He had also created a 
Whats App group namely "PAK NEWS GROUP", Further, he was also associated with different 
groups of Pakistan including Jamaat-e-Islami, Palastan. He further revealed that the ex - 
members of banned terror organizations like SIMI and others were instrumental in reviving the 
ideology of SIMI by joining PFI. He was also associated in extending the ideology of PFI For the 
purpose of proliferation of reviving PFIs ideology, he used to visit various places in, India 
including Patna, Bihar to meet with the Ex-SIMI members. During visit of Patna, he met with 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 47 


Athar Parvej (4-0 and other Ex-SIMI members of Patna, Bihar. During his visit at Patna, he 
used to stay at the house of Ex SMI members including accused Athar Parvej (A-1). 


17.30 The seizure of-various letters written to Anwar Rashid (A-37) by convicted/undertrial 
accused lodged in different jail including Safdar Nagori, General Secretary of Students Islamic 
Movement of India (SIMI), a banned terrorist organization by the Government of India 
established his association with members of proscribed terrorist organization and his intentional 
support to the ideology of these terrorists. Safdar Nagori. also requested him to circulate this 
letter among their associates and followers for extending the ideology of SIMI. 


17.35 Investigation further brought out that Anwar Rashid (A-37) was associated with Guidance 
Publication /Crescent publication, Delhi. He was working as sales representative in Guidance 
Publishers and Distributors based in Jamia Nagar, New Delhi-25. His main task was to receive 
order and ensure timely delivery of books and calendar to book depots and individuals all over 
India. Most book depots owner are Ex- SIMI and Wahdat members.” 


11.5.10 In addition to this, the witness PW33 has also relied on the statement of Protected Witness ‘U’, Ex. PW33/I 


11.6 


11.6.1 


11.6.2 


11.6.3 


11.6.4 


in his evidence. The statement produced before the Tribunal during the deposition in sealed envelope has 
been perused. It reveals that the Protected Witness, who admitted to being a member of the SIMI before its 
ban in the year 2001 has stated that even after the ban the members and sympathisers of SIMI were 
instrumental in committing terrorist acts including bomb blasts. They got associated with organisations like 
Wahdat-e-Islami and continued to propagate and spread the radical and anti-national ideology of SIMI. 


Case_Crime No. RC-29/2023/NIA/DLI - As per the Notification dated 29.01.2024, this case has been 
registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) against Saquib Nachan, ex-National General 
Secretary of SIMI. He was the main conspirator and radicalizing Muslims for violent Jihad or Hyarat. He 
was giving ‘Baith’ (Pledge and Allegiance to ISIS) to Muslim youths. Further, he motivated other persons to 
take ‘Baith’ of ISIS. He is alleged to have established ‘Al Sham’ like area in Padga village, wherein sharia 
law is followed. 


The Central Government has examined Mr Vinod Kadam, Deputy Superintendent of Police, National 
Investigation Agency, BO- Mumbai as the witness PW20. In his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. PW20/A 
he has deposed that ever since the arrest of the terrorists in FIR No. 06/2023 PS- ATS, Kalachowky in 
Mumbai registered under Sections 379, 468, 511 & 34 IPC, Sections 3(25) & 4(25) Arms Act, Sections 
37(1)(3) & 135 Maharashtra Police Act and Sections 13, 15, 16(1)(b), 18 & 20 UAPA, in Pune in July, 2023, 
efforts were being made to identify and trace their other absconding associates. Meanwhile, information was 
received that the movements and activities of some unknown persons, suspected to be ISIS 
members/sympathizers have been noticed in Delhi and its bordering districts of Uttar Pradesh. Source inputs 
revealed that these ISIS operatives were operating on instructions of a foreign handler of ISIS who had 
further conspired with Pakistan’s ISI and wanted terrorist Farahatulla Gauri hiding in Pakistan to carry out 
terrorist activities in the areas of Delhi/NCR. Sources revealed that this module is also receiving funds 
through illegal means to accomplish its plan of causing terror acts. 


Information was received that the accused Shahnawaz Alam r/o Hazaribagh, Jharkhand, who was also 
wanted in the above case from Pune, was moving along with one Rizwan r/o Delhi and they have been 
planning to carry out terrorist activities in Delhi and adjoining areas. It was also revealed that they had some 
Delhi-based contacts who were participants in their criminal conspiracy. They were active online on different 
social media platforms and other chat platforms to promote the activities of the Islamic State of Iraq and 
Syria (ISIS) by professing themselves as active members of ISIS. It was also learnt that they had procured 
arms, ammunition and explosives for this purpose and had set up a base in Delhi. The facts indicated the 
commission of an offence under section 120B IPC. Hence, an FIR dated 18.09.2023 was registered by PS- 
Special Cell, New Delhi, vide Crime No. 243 of 2023 under Sections 43 & 120B of IPC. 


The Special Cell, New Delhi had arrested Mohammad Rizwan Ashraf (A-1), Mohammad Arshad Warsi (A- 
2) & Shahnawaj Alam (A-3). Special Cell conducted searches at the instance of arrested accused Shahnawaz 
Alam (A-3) and Mohammad Rizwan Ashraf (0-1) on 02.10.2023 and 16.10.2023 and seized firearms and the 
material used for making IED/Bomb and firearm. 


As per the directions issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt. of India, Counter Terrorism and Counter 
Radicalization Division (C.T.C.R), North Block, New Delhi the Police Station - NIA, New Delhi re- 
registered the said case vide RC-29/2023/NIA/DLI on 06.11.2023. On 22.11.2023, NIA took over the 
investigation from Special Cell, Delhi. It was revealed that the arrested three accused persons A-1 to A-3 are 
in direct contact with Saquib Nachan @ Abu Suleiman @ Antivirus @ Amir-e-Hind of ISIS for India as well 
as foreign ISIS handler Sultan Sikandar, for furtherance of criminal activities of ISIS. Saquib Nachan was All 
India General Secretary of SIMI, a banned terrorist organization. (Emphasis supplied) 


48 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


11.6.5 


11.6.6 


11.6.7 


11.6.8 


11.6.9 


11.6.10 


11.6.11 


On the directions of their handler, the accused persons in the present crime were collecting substances for 
making explosives and IEDs. They were provoking gullible Muslim youths for taking baith (allegiance 
towards) the ISIS for the so-called noble cause of ISIS and joining the ISIS by Hijrat to the land of jihad. On 
09.12.2023 NIA conducted searches at 42 locations in Pune & Padgha-Borivali (including surrounding 
locations), Maharashtra and seized various incriminating materials, lethal arms- swords and knives, huge 
amount in cash (Rs. 68 lacs). Finding their direct involvement in the crime and conspiracy 15 persons was 
arrested. 


Out of the 15 arrested accused persons eight were connected to SIMI. It is established that, the accused 
persons were all members of ISIS, a proscribed terror organisation. They gave "baith" of ISIS through Saquib 
Nachan, self-styled declared "Amir-e-hind" of ISIS. 


It was also revealed that Saquib Nachan and his associates were trying to rejuvenate their SIMI cadre for the 
cause of ISIS and their activities of violent Jihad. For that purpose, they propagated ISIS ideology and 
recruited many Ex-SIMI members and gullible youths by giving "baith" of ISIS. They procured arms and 
ammunitions, explosives, chemicals and materials. They conducted test blast of explosives and IED's, 
established training camps and conducted training of firearms and preparing/fabricating IED's. They also 
raised funds from their associates and supporters for the cause of ISIS through various means. (Emphasis 
supplied) 


It was also revealed that the accused namely Adil Ilyas Khot was an Ex SIMI member and Maharashtra State 
President for SIMI. The accused Hasseb Zubair Mulla, Firoz Dastgir Kuwari, Kashif Sattar Balere, Saif 
Ateeque Nachan, Shagaf Shafique Divekar_and Mukhlis Maqbool Nachan were all either _ex-SIMI 
activist/supporter/sympathiser. Their main objective was to establish Khilafat and formation of State of Islam 
which will rule by Shariya. (Emphasis added) 


It was revealed that the accused persons were furthering their criminal activities on the directions of Saquib 
Nachan @ Abu Suleiman [Telegram ID @ Antivirus]. The said accused Saquib Nachan was receiving 
directions from his foreign based ISIS handler @ Sultan Sikander. Several incriminating articles were 
recovered from the possession of Shahnawaz Alam. The recovered articles include IED, powder like material 
(explosive substances), steel pellets, match stick box, iron pipes, fuse, brown powder, 9V batteries, small 
watch and wires, electric weighing machine. One remote with key A & B and one black color circuit box, 02 
white plastic cans containing some liquid having pungent smell, 4 brown color glass bottles containing some 
liquid having pungent smell, thermometer, 3 surgical gloves, pen drive [PDF files containing procedure for 
making IED, Bombs and ISIS ideology literatures], etc. A firearm and magazine was also recovered from the 
accused Mohammed Rizwan Ashraf. The same is proved by producing the true copy of the seizure memos 
dated 02.10.2023 and 16.10.2023 as Fx. PW20/D. The Expert Opinion Report dated 28.02.2024 and the 
Opinion Report of the Explosive Expert dated 15.03.2024, (as mentioned in the chargesheet dated 
21.03.2024, Ex. PW20/F, filed by the NIA in the concerned Court) establish that the material seized from the 
accused persons included the necessary material/ components required to make bomb/IEDs. Similarly, the 
digital evidence seized in the case contained ISIS recruitment propaganda magazines namely Dabig, 
Rumiyah, Voice of Hind, Voice of Khurasan, Inside, Bay'ah, Harbi Kuffar etc. Electronic copies of the 
propaganda documents connected with ISIS and other terrorist organisations were also recovered.Some 
incriminating images on ISIS viz. Killing, Beheading, Training, Baith etc. were also found in the devices of 
the accused persons. The PDF versions of the manuals to prepare explosives and chemical weapons were 
recovered. Various excerpts of the conversations, related to preparation for committing terror attacks, which 
took place between the accused persons and their handlers/associates were also recovered. 


Furthermore, truncated statements of the Protected Witnesses viz. KW-5, KW-6, KW-7, KW-8 & KW-9, 
relied on by DSP Vinod Kadam in his evidence as Ex. PW20/H, also show that the persons who have been 
chargesheeted in the case had close contacts with the ex-members of SIMI. The statements of Protected 
Witnesses prove Ex SIMI members’ involvement in the instant ISIS module case (RC- 29/2023/NIA/DLI). 


During the investigation, Ajmal Farooqui (father of the accused Haris Farroqui) has told the NIA that his son 
was in close contact with many SIMI ex-members before he went missing. His statement is produced by the 
PW20 as Ex. PW20/I before the Tribunal. 


DSP Vinod Kadam has also relied on the supplementary chargesheet dated 03.06.2024 filed before the Court 
in the RC-29/2023/NIA/DLI. The same is Ex. PW20/J. This document specifically mentions that the accused 
Saquib Abdul Hamid Nachan was a member of SIMI and had been convicted in Terrorist and Disruptive 
Activities case no. 2/93, 7/93 and 2/94 for his involvement in Ahmedabad Arms Haul case. He was also 
convicted for 2002-2003 Mulund bomb blast case. It was also found during the investigation that this accused 
had formed a group of ex-SIMI members for furthering the ideology of the ISIS. In furtherance of the same 
they had met in the month of December, 2021 at Borivali Padgha village and insisted on a witness to join 
ISIS. This accused was heard saying in this meeting “From the time of SIMI, I am fighting against Kafirs for 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 49 


11,7 
11.7.1 


11.7.2 


11.7.3 


11.7.4 


11.7.5 


11.7.6 


11.7.7 


11.7.8 


11.7.9 


the establishment of Khilafat and bringing Islamic State, till my last breath I shall continue this fight for the 
cause of Islamic State.” 


RC-04/2020/NIA/DLI and RC-28/2023/NIA/DLI: 


As per the Notification dated 29.01.2024 the Case Crime No. RC-04/2020/NIA/DLI has been registered by 
the National Investigation Agency (NIA) against Shihabudeen @ Sirajudeen @ Khalid @ Rajesh, ex-SIMI 
member. In May 2019, he met Khaja Mohideen and others in a rented house at Annan Ninaivu Nagar, Puzhal 
and joined the terrorist gang formed by Khaja Mohideen for establishing Khilafat or Islamic Rule in India, as 
part of furthering the objectives of the proscribed terrorist organisation ISIS/Daish in India. He has received 
funds from Khaja Mohideen for procurement of fire arms and ammunition. He was charge-sheeted on 9" 
March, 2021. 


The Notificaiton further states that the Case Crime No. RC-28/2023/NIA/DLI has been registered by the 
National Investigation Agency (NIA) against T. Naseer, ex-SIMI member, who later joined Lashkar-e-Taiba 
(LeT), a proscribed terrorist organisation. He used to select newly lodged Under Trial prisoners and got them 
transferred to his barrack. He further convert, radicalise and recruit them for furthering the activities of LeT 
in Central Prison, Bengaluru from 2017 onwards. In furtherance to their conspiracy and on the instructions of 
T. Naseer, co-accused arranged arms and ammunitions and explosives in collusion with other accused. He 
was involved in raising funds in the Prison for furthering their activities of proscribed terrorist organisation. 
The accused has been charge-sheeted in the case under the provisions of the UAPA. He has been charge- 
sheeted on 12th January, 2024 


With respect to these cases, the Government has examined Ms. Susheela R, Deputy Superintendent of Police 
in the NIA, Bengaluru as the witness PW36. She has filed her two affidavits of evidence (Ex. PW 36/A1 and 
Ex. PW 36/A2) before this Tribunal. 


She stated that the case RC-04/2020/NIA/DLI was registered at NIA Branch, Hyderabad under Sections 
153A, 120B, 121A & 122,123,124A and 125 of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 13, 18 & 20 of the 
UAPA. 


It is deposed in the affidavit Ex. PW36/A2 that on 10.10.2020, Shri Niranjan Kumar C, Inspector, CCB, 
Economic Offences Wing, Bengaluru City submitted a written complaint at Suddaguntepalya Police Station, 
Bengaluru to the effect that, Mehaboob Pasha, resident of Gurappanapalya, Bengaluru, Karnataka in 
association with Khaja Moideen who was accused in several cases registered in Tamil Nadu related to 
terrorism, murder etc. formed a terrorist group with young Muslims in South India. They selected their base 
at Bengaluru. They conducted several criminal conspiracy meetings at the house of accused Mehaboob Pasha 
and Zabiulla (A-16) and at the Al-Hind Office in Bengaluru and other places in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu 
since April, 2019. They propagated the ideology of the proscribed terrorist organization ISIS. They conspired 
to collect arms and explosives for murdering Hindu leaders and police officers thereby creating communal 
riots. They recruited vulnerable Muslim youths with intention to carry out terrorist attacks in South India 
especially in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. 


During investigationit_was revealed that accused Shihabudeen @_ Sirajudeen @ Khalid @ Rajesh was an 
active member of SIMI (Students Islamic Movement of India) organisation before it was banned. He 
provided legal aid to accused Mannady Abdulla and Khaja Moideen to defend them in Crime No. 746/2014 
dtd. 18.06.2014 of T-2 Ambattur Estate PS, Tamil Nadu related to the murder of Ambattur Suresh Kumar. 
(Emphasis supplied) 


Investigation revealed that accused Shihabudeen was in contact with Khaja Moideen and he had visited 
Mumbai for procuring arms and ammunition. He delivered said arms to Ejaz Pasha and Jaffer Ali. On 
another occasion, he visited Mumbai for this purpose. Khaja Mohideen also gave a phone with a fraudulently 
obtained SIM card to him to communicate with arms dealers in Mumbai. Rs. 6 lakhs were also provided by 
Khaja Mohideen to Shihabudeen for the purchase of arms. 


Investigation further revealed that on 18.10.2019, Shihabudeen @ Sirajudeen @ Khalid @ Rajesh collected a 
parcel containing illegal fire arms and ammunitions (04 pistol and 100 rounds) from arms dealers in front of 
Market Road Masjid, Kalyan West, Thane which were then delivered to Ejaz Pasha at Navi Mumbai. During 
this period accused Shihabudeen had used the mobile phone and fake SIM card provided for this purpose by 
accused Khaja Moideen. It was also revealed that Ejaz Pasha was carrying a parcel during his journey back to 
Bengaluru. On reaching Bengaluru on 19.10.2019, Ejaz Pasha handed over this parcel of 04 Pistols and 100 
rounds of ammunition to Mehboob Pasha. 


Investigation further revealed that on 02.12.2019, as per direction of Khaja Mohideen, Shihabudeen @ 
Sirajudeen @ Khalid @ Rajesh met Mehboob Pasha and Jaffar Ali (A-6) near Periyamed Big Masjid, 
Chennai and discussed arrangement and collection of second consignment of arms and ammunitions from 
Mumbai. It was revealed that accused Shihabudeen had travelled from Coimbatore to Chennai on 


50 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


11.7.10 


11.711 


11.7.12 


11.7.13 


11.7.14 


11.7.15 


11.7.16 


11.7.17 


02.12.2019. On analysis of tower location and CDR of fraudulently obtained sim number used by Mehboob 
Pasha it was revealed that he had travelled from Bengaluru to Chennai on 02.12.2019 and was received by 
Jaffar Ali at Pertyamedu Bus Stand. Accused Shihabudeen in his voluntary disclosure had pointed out the 
location near Periyamed Masjid in the investigation of the case RC- 06/2020/NIA/DLI. 


Investigation revealed that as part of the larger conspiracy and on direction of Khaja Moideen, accused 
Shihabudeen again went to Mumbai, via Delhi on 13.12.2019 for collection of second consignment of illegal 
arms and ammunitions and to hand over the same to Ejaz Pasha. During this visit Shihabudeen stayed at the 
office building of Federation of Islamic Youth Organisation (FIYO). Mehboob Pasha travelled from 
Bengaluru to Mumbai on 15.12.2019. The second delivery was not successful as there was disagreement 
between Mahboob Pasha and Shihabudeen on the issue of keeping the illegal firearms and ammunition till 
the arrival of Ejaz Pasha. This is corroborated by the technical data of the cell phones. 


The statement of protected witness X (Ex. PW 36/M) revealed in detail about the meeting between accused 
Shihabudeen and Mehboob Pasha at Market Road Masjid, Kalyan West Thane. The protected witness X 
stated that he heard Mehboob pasha telling Shihabudeen that the first consignment of 4 pistols and 
ammunitions had reached safely and this consignment of pistols and ammunitions is also very important and 
therefore, it can be kept with Shihabudeen for a day till Ejaz pasha arrives. Protected Witness X also stated 
that he can identify the suspected arms dealers who had come on a motorbike and that they had given the 
consignment of arms packed in a box wrapped in glossy gift paper to Shihabudeen but due to the argument 
between Mehboob Pasha and Shihabudeen, the consignment was returned to the arms dealer. 


PW36 has further deposed that the witness Kadar Baba in his statement (Ex. PW 36/O) recorded during the 
investigation has stated that accused Shihabudeen was an active member of SIMI till its ban, and Kadar Baba 
was also associated with SIMI for about 20 years through Shihabudeen. Shihabudeen is running a publication 
house in the name of Thinnai Thozhargal at Mannady, Chennai in which he is publishing various books 
related to Islamic religion. 


It was further revealed in the investigation that the four pistols and 100 rounds of ammunition collected and 
sent by accused Shihabudeen to accused Mehboob Pasha, were recovered in RC- 02/2020/NIA/DLI and in 
RC-06/2020/NIA/DLI. When Shihabudeen got to know about the arrest of Khaja Mohideen on 08.01.2020 in 
RC-05/2020/NIA/DLI, he fled to Malaysia on 17.01.2020 and further to Qatar. On 06.01.2021, based on 
credible information, CIO of RC- 06/2020/NIA/DLI (SSI Wilson Murder Case) arrested Shihabudeen at 
Chennai International Airport after his deportation from Doha. 


After investigation, a supplementary charge-sheet was filed on 03.09.2021 against Shihabudeen. The case is 
in hearing before the charge stage. 


Regarding the case RC-28/2023/NIA/DLI, DSP Susheela R. has deposed by way of her affidavit Ex. 
PW36/A1. She has stated that on 18.07.2023 based on a credible input, the Karnataka State Police conducted 
a raid at the house of one Syed Suhail Khan where a conspiracy was going on . In the raid, 07 pistols, 45 live 
rounds, one magazine, 02 walkie-talkies and other digital gadgets were recovered from the possession of the 
accused persons. Subsequently, FIR no. 149/2023 dated 18.07.2023 under Sections 120B, 121, 121A & 122 
of IPC and Sections 3 & 25 of Arms Act and Sections 13 & 18 of UAPA was registered at Hebbal PS, 
Bengaluru City, Karnataka. Accused Syed Suhail Khan, Mohammed Umar, Zahid Tabrez, Syed Mudassir 
Pasha and Mohammed Faisal Rabbani were arrested. On 27.07.2023 T. Naseer was also arrested in this case. 
Police extracted the data from the mobile phones of accused persons. During scrutiny of data, incriminating 
voice clips were found. Specimen Voice samples of accused persons were taken with the assistance of a 
forensic expert. 


On 20.10.2023 the Ministry of Home Affairs issued an Order F.No.1101/83/2023/NIA, directing the National 
Investigation Agency to register a Regular Case and take up the investigation as credible information was 
received that habitual offenders namely (I) Syed Suhail Khan, (2) Mohammed Umar, (3) Zahid Tabrez, (4) 
Syed Mudassir Pasha, (5) Mohammed Faisal Rabbani @ Sadath and (6) Junaid Ahmed @ Junaid, came in 
contact with the accused T. Naseer (a life convict in terror case) and others, when they were lodged in 
Parappana Agrahara Prison, Bengaluru. They were involved in several conspiracy meetings and procured and 
stored arms, ammunition, explosive substances & other materials, in the house of accused Syed Suhail Khan 
and other places to carry out terror activities in Bengaluru City to disturb the unity, integrity, security and 
sovereignty of the country and to wage a war against India. 


On 25.10.2023, NIA registered a case being RC-28/2023/NIA/DLI under Sections 120B, 121, 121A & 122 of 
the Indian Penal Code and Sections 13 & 18 of the UAPA, Sections, 4, 5 & 6 of the Explosive Substance 
Act, 1908, & Section 9B of the Explosives Act, 1884 on 12.11.2023. After taking over the case records from 
the State Police, remnants of the hand grenades were forwarded to CFSL, Hyderabad for scientific 
examination. NIA also sent the seized mobile phones to CFSL, Hyderabad and CERT-In, New Delhi for 
forensic examination. 


[भाग त1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 51 


11.718 


11.7.19 


11.7.20 


11.7.21 


11.7.22 


11.8 
11.8.1 


11.8.2 


11.8.3 


11.8.4 


Further investigation revealed that initially, T. Naseer was a member of the proscribed terrorist organisation- 
Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) and later, he joined Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), a proscribed terrorist 
organisation and started furthering the activities of LeT. He was involved in many terror cases such as the 
Kozhikode Twin Blasts in 2006, Bengaluru Serial Blasts 2008 and LeT Recruitment (RC-02/2010/NIA/DL]I) 
etc. In the year 2010, he was arrested in Bengaluru Serial Blast cases and was detained in the Central Prison, 
Bengaluru. He was lodged in Kerala Prisons for his involvement in terror cases in Kerala. In the year 2013, 
T. Naseer was convicted of life imprisonment in the LeT recruitment case and was shifted to Central Prison, 
Bengaluru for trial of Bengaluru Serial Blast cases and since then, he has been lodged there. (Emphasis 
supplied) 


On 18.07.2023, in pursuance of the conspiracy hatched by T. Naseer, the accused persons namely Junaid 
Ahmed and Salman Khan, accused Syed Suhail Khan , Mohammed Umar (A-4), Zahid Tabrez, Syed 
Mudassir Pasha and Mohammed Faisal Rabbani assembled in the house of Syed Suhail Khan. Zahid Tabrez 
brought arms and ammunition to the conspiracy meeting, which was delivered by Junaid Ahmed in February, 
2023. Syed Suhail Khan had walkie-talkies in the meeting, which were delivered by Vikram Kumar @ 
Chhota Usman. The meeting was organised by T. Naseer and Junaid Ahmed to get T. Naseer released from 
police custody en route to court and to further the terrorist activities of LeT, a proscribed terrorist 
organisation. CDR and IPDR analysis of mobile numbers used by the accused persons showed that they were 
connected to each other. 


Chargesheet No. 01/2024 dated 12/01/2024 was filed under Section 173 (2) Cr.P.C., against T. Naseer, 
Junaid Ahmed, Syed Suhail Khan @Suhail, Mohammed Umar @ Umar, Zahid Tabrez @ Zahid, Syed 
Mudassir Pasha @ Mudassir @ Sait Sab @ Muddu Sait, Mohammed Faisal Rabbani @ Sadath and Salman 
Khan @ Salman. Further investigation against Vikram Kumar @ Chhota Usman was left pending. 


It is further stated that the accused T. Naseer, who was a member of SIMI and subsequently of the LeT, is a 
life convict in RC-02/2010/NIA/DLI (LeT Recruitment Case) and an under-trial prisoner in Bengaluru Serial 
Blasts cases. He was lodged in Central Prison, Bengaluru. He was a member of a proscribed terrorist 
organisation and later on became a member of Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), another proscribed terrorist 
organisation. He used to select gullible among the newly lodged under trial prisoners and got them 
transferred to his barrack. Further, he used to radicalize, convert (if they belonged to other communities) and 
recruit them for furthering the activities of LeT. During the process, T. Naseer radicalised and recruited the 
above said 8 accused persons, while they were lodged in Central Prison, Bengaluru, in a murder case. He also 
converted Vikram Kumar @ Chhota Usman (A-9), and other Hindu individuals to Islam for further 
radicalization and recruitment to LeT. This witness has relied on the seizure memos prepared during the 
investigation of the case recording the recovery of the arms and ammunition and explosives. 


Chargesheet in the case was filed on 12.01.2024 before the NIA Special Court at Bengaluru. The trial of the 
case is yet to commence. 


Case Crime no. RC-16/2019/NIA/DLI and RC-06/2020/NIA/DLI- 


The Notification dated 29.01.2024 states that the Case Crime No. RC-16/2019/NIA/DLI has been registered 
by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) against Mohammed Ibrahim @Ibrahim Jamali, who is an ex- 
State Secretary of the proscribed organisation SIMI, was the main leader of the pro-jihadi jamaat formed in 
UAE with the intention of propagating violent extremist ideology of proscribed terrorist organisations 
including Al-Qaeda and ISIS. He has also subscribed and disseminated pro-ISIS/ Daish material advocating 
violent jihad and establishment of Islamic Khilafat, while delivering lectures on such topics during the 
meetings and classes organised by the unlawful jamaat in the United Arab Emirates. The accused has been 
charge-sheeted in the instant case on 15 January, 2020 before the NIA Special Court, Chennai. 


The notification further states that the Case Crime No. RC-06/2020/NIA/DLI has been registered by the 
National Investigation Agency (NIA) which pertains to the murder of Shri SSI Wilson on 8th January, 2020. 
During investigation serious involvement of S. Shahabudeen @Shihabudeen @Sirajudeen @Khalid was 
revealed which resulted in his arrest on 6th January, 2021. It was also revealed that this accused has been 
continuing with covert anti national activities as a former SIMI member having association with hard core 
ISIS cadres. He was also involved in publication of provocative and highly objectionable material inciting 
others to commit terror acts. 


Regarding these two cases, the Central Government has examined Mr. R.Ranjith Singh who serves as Deputy 
Superintendent of Police, National Investigation Agency, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, as the witness PW19. He has 
filed his respective evidence of these two cases by way of the affidavits Ex. PW19/A and Ex. PW19/A1. 


He has stated that on 08.07.2019, the Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt. of India issued an Order vide F No. 
11011/34/2019/NIA, in exercise of its powers under Section 6(5) read with Section 8 of the NIA Act, 2008, 
directing the National Investigation Agency to register a Regular Case and to take up the investigation as 
credible information was received by the Central Government that a group of pro-ISIS and Al-Qaida 


52 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


11.8.5 


11.8.6 


11.8.7 


11.8.8 


11.8.9 


11.8.10 


organisations variously called as "Wahadat-E-Islami", "Jamaat Wahadat-ul-Islam-al-Jihadiya", "Jihadist 
Islamic Unit" and "Ansarullah" have been formed to establish Islamic rule in India by resorting to violent 
jihad and that an individual named A. Hasan Ali Yunus Maricar @ Abu Dujana of Tamil Nadu, who is 
closely associated with ISIS, is actively recruiting individuals to strike terror in India. The information also 
indicated that Syed Bukhari who heads Wahadat -e-Islam Organisation in Tamil Nadu was also the President 
of the Student Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) before it was proscribed as an unlawful association in 
2001, and Hasan Ali @ Abu Dujana had entered into a conspiracy to destabilise the democratic polity of 
India and establish Islamic rule in India by adopting to violent jihad against the established Government of 
India. (Emphasis supplied) 


On 08.07.2019, NIA registered a case being RC-16/2019/NIA/DLI under Sections 120B, 121A & 122 of the 
Indian Penal Code and Sections 17, 18, 18B, 38, 39 and 40 of the UAPA. The investigation revealed that 
Syed Bukhari (A-1) was associated with Mohammed Ibrahim (A-4) in SIMI, prior to its ban for the first time 
in 2001 and had succeeded A-4 as President of SIMI in Tamil Nadu. 0-1 worked in UAE till 2008 and he 
used to organise religious classes in UAE where other accused like A-4 and others conspired and formed pro- 
jihadi jamaat in UAE with the unlawful objective of causing disaffection against the established Government 
of India. The accused Mohamed Ibrahim @ Ibrahim Jamali who was the State Secretary of the SIMI in the 
year 1986 was the main leader of the pro-jihadi jamaat formed in the UAE, by the accused persons, intending 
to propagate violent extremist ideology for establishing Islamic rule in India through violent jihad and also by 
engaging in unlawful activities. Mohamed Ibrahim had also subscribed and disseminated pro-ISIS/ Daesh 
material advocating violent jihadist and the establishment of Islamic Khilafat while delivering lectures on 
such topics during the meetings and classes organized by the unlawful jamaat in the UAE. The data extracted 
from his email and social media accounts, revealed details of members of the jamaat, its objectives and 
classes conducted. An Arabic book, seized from his possession, during his arrest in the UAE and carried to 
India, on deportation, supports violent jihadi ideology. Data extracted from his Facebook account revealed 
that he followed the Sri Lankan ISIS/ Daesh leader Zahran Hashim and attempted to converse with him. 


Mohamed Ibrahim had also shared the material supporting violent jihad, with ISIS/ Daesh member Mohamed 
Azarudheen, charge-sheeted under provisions of the UAPA in NIA case RC-02/2019/KOC (ISIS Kerala 
Tamil Nadu Case) and with another ISIS/ Daesh member Sheik Shafiulla, charge-sheeted under provisions of 
UAPA by Coimbatore Police in Crime No. 499/2019. Mohamed Ibrahim has used social media to propagate 
his violent extremist intentions of forming a pro-jihadi jamaat, in the UAE. His Facebook account revealed 
that he had shared and subscribed to a lot of jihadi material, including "The Book of Jihad". His mobile phone 
data analysis also revealed the subscription and dissemination of material in support of violent jihad. 
Mohamed Ibrahim@ Jamali was arrested by the UAE authorities in January 2019, for spearheading activities 
of the unlawful jamaat and was detained till his deportation to India in July, 2019. 


Pursuant to the investigation carried out by the NIA, main Charge Sheet dated 08.01.2020 was filed before 
the NIA Special Court, Chennai against 11 accused persons, including Mohamed Ibrahim @ Jamali. The 
charges have yet not been framed as the High Court of Madras vide interim order dated 28.04.2023 in 
Criminal Appeal No.496 of 2023 had stayed the trial until further orders. 


With respect to the case RC-06/2020/NIA/DLI, DSP R.Ranjith Singh has deposed by way of the affidavit Ex. 
PW19/A1. This case was registered regarding the on-duty killing of Special Sub-Inspector of Police Mr. 
Wilson on 08.01.2020. 


It is stated that on 08.01.2020 at about 21:20 hrs, while Wilson, Special Sub-Inspector of Police, 
Kaliyakkavillai Police Station was on duty, the assailants (A-1) Abdul Shameem and (A-2) Thowfeek killed 
him with a gun and thereby caused terror in the mind of the general public. Initially, the case was registered 
in the Kaliyakkavillai Police Station, Kanyakumari District, Tamil Nadu as FIR in Cr. No 09/2020 dated 
09.01.2020 and under Sections 302, 506 (ii) of IPC read with Sections 7, 25(1A), 25(1) (b) of Arms Act. 
Considering the gravity of the offences committed, the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Government of India, 
issued an Order vide F.No.11011/15/2020/NIA dated 31.01.2020, in exercise of its powers conferred under 
Section 6 (5) read with Section 8 of the NIA Act, 2008, directing the National Investigation Agency to 
register a Regular Case and take up the investigation of the same. Accordingly, the case RC- 
06/2020/NIA/DLI was registered by the NIA. 


Investigation disclosed that the prime accused (A-3) Khaja Mohideen @ Jalal @ Hamza @ Kasim Khan @ 
Kaja Modeen formed a terror gang with an ulterior motive to commit terror act and thereby entered into the 
criminal conspiracy with Abdul Shameem (A-1), Thowfeek (A-2), Mahaboob Pasha (A-4), Ejaz Pasha (A-5), 
Jaffer Ali (A-6) and Shihabudeen (A-7 and member of SIMI) in various places in Tamilnadu, Karnataka, 
Maharashtra and Kerala during the period between 2019 to 2020 with the malafide intention of committing 
violent terror acts. In furtherance of criminal conspiracy, accused 0-1 and A-2 have been supplied with the 
prohibited firearms and ammunitions, through A-5 and others in order to commit acts of terror. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 53 


44.6. 1/ 


11.8.12 


11.8.13 


11.9 


11.9.1 


11.9.2 


11.9.3 


11.9.4 


It is deposed by the PW19 that the investigation revealed that the accused S. Shihabudeen @ Shihabudeen @ 
Sirajudeen @ Khalid was an active member of SIMI. He was also a member of the terrorist gang formed by 
Khaja Mohideen with the objective of establishing Khilafat or Islamic Rule in India as part of realizing the 
objectives of the proscribed terrorist organization ISIS/Daesh in India for threatening the unity, integrity, and 
sovereignty of India and also to strike terror in the minds of people. He became a member of the ISIS/Daesh. 
He attended various conspiracy meetings with Khaja Moideen, Mahboob Pasha, Ejaz Pasha and Jaffar Ali 
and other suspects in this case at various parts in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala and Maharashtra during the 
year 2019 and 2020 with intention to commit terror acts. It is towards realizing these goals that the accused 
Abdul Shameem and Thowfeek had murdered SSI Wilson. It is stated that at that time the assailants had 
shouted 'Allahu Akbar", a slogan raised by the terror outfit while executing the so called kafirs. They had also 
written on a piece of paper in Tamil language: "We are the fighters of Islam, we will fight for Islam in India, 
ISI Islamic State in India"on one side and “leader Khaja Bhai” on other side for leaving it at the place of the 
incident before fleeing, but mistakenly, could not leave it there. (Emphasis supplied) 


The witness PW19 has also relied upon the statement of the witness Kader Baba recorded during the 
investigation. It is pertinent to refer to the relevant portion of this statement to show that the prime accused 
were connected to SIMI. The corresponding portion is reproduced as follows: 


“I acquainted with Shihabuddin through SIMI about 20 years ago. He was an active member 
of SIMI till its ban” 


Other two witnesses namely Subhaida and Sirajuddeen had also told the Investigating Officer that the 
accused Shihabuddin was an active worker of SIMI. These statements were produced as Ex. PW19/AE. 


Case Crime No. RC-02/2019/NIA/KOC-As per the notification dated 29.01.2024 this case has been registered 
by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) against ex-SIMI cadre Sheik Hidayathullah Y @ Firoze Khan @ 
Firozy. Sheik Hidayathulla was a part of conspiracy in propagating the ideology of proscribed terrorist 
organisation ISIS/Daesh, and also recruiting vulnerable youths with a view to carry out terrorist attacks in 
Southern part of India especially in the cities of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. During the search conducted in his 
premise, various documents relating to SIMI were seized. He has been charge-sheeted in the instant case 
under Section 38 and 39 of the UAPA. 


With respect to this case, the Government has examined Mr. Abhilash MJ, Inspector at the NIA, Kochi as the 
witness PW3. He is the current Chief Investigating Officer of the case. He tendered his evidence vide the 
affidavit Ex. PW3/A. It is stated by him that this case shows the involvement of former SIMI cadre, namely 
Shiek Hidayatullah @ Firoz Khan @ Firozy in the conspiracy of propagating, violent extremist ideology of 
proscribed terrorist organisation ISIS/Daesh and also for recruiting vulnerable youth into this organisation. 


The witness PW3 has deposed that on 28.05.2019, the Ministry of Home Affairs issued an order directing the 
NIA to register a regular case and investigate the information received by the Government to the effect that 
one Mohammad Azharuddin and his associates were propagating the ideology of ISIS/Daesh. They were 
recruiting youth with the objective of carrying out terrorist attacks in Southern part of India, especially in the 
States of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. Accordingly, the case RC—02/2019/NIA/KOC was registered on 30.05.2019 
against 6 accused persons. Investigation revealed the connection of Mohammed Azharuddin with Wahadat-e- 
Islami which is the frontal organisation of Jamat-e-Islami Hind. He used to deliver speeches propagating the 
religious ideology of the said organisations. The Salafi organisation, India National Towheed Jamaat, invited 
himto deliver speeches in Coimbatore. It was found that Mohammed Azharuddin and Shaikh Hidayattulah 
became radicalised after accessing online speeches of international radical speakers and downloading such 
material onto their devices, which they further disseminated amongst their associates. Mohammed 
Azharuddin was in touch with many Sri Lankan radicals and speeches and other material attributed to the Sri 
Lankan ISIS leader Zahran Hashim were forensically recovered from the digital devices and social media 
accounts of the aforesaid two persons. 


It was also revealed that these accused persons have extensively used social media to propagate the ideology 
of ISIS, and also to recruit youth into this organisation. Sheikh Hidayatullah had confessed that he was earlier 
associated with the banned outfit, SIMI. Incriminating material related to the SIMI was recovered from his 
possession. A charge sheet was filed in the said case for the offences punishable under Section 120B IPC and 
Sections 38 and 39 of the UAPA. The trial of the case is pending in the Special Court for Trial of NIA cases, 
Ermakulum. 


This witness has supported his evidence with the relevant documents including the copy of the chargesheet 
dated 07.12.2019 of the above-mentioned case, taken on record by the Special Court for Trial of NIA cases, 
Ernakulam, report along with the list of additional evidence collected during further investigation filed in the 
Special Court on 26.10.2022 as Ex. PW3/H and the copies of the statements of the protected witnesses viz. 
Protected Witness-A, Protected Witness—B and Protected Witness—C as Ex. PW3/I, PW3/J and Ex. PW3/K, 
respectively. He has also produced the copy of the English translation of a SIMI magazine bearing the name 


54 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


11.9.5 


11.10 


11.10.1 


11.10.2 


11.10.3 


"Khilafa SIMI Monthly Magazine" dated September 2001 as Ex. PW3/D. This was recovered from the house 
of the accused Sheikh Hidayatullah. The magazine has contents which disparage and demean the religions 
other than Islam. The same are prima facie sufficient to cause enmity between different groups and religions. 


The evidence presented in the affidavit by Inspector Abhilash M.J.demonstrates a clear link between SIMI 
members and ISIS/Daesh. The seized materials, digital evidence, and witness testimonies establish that ex- 
SIMI cadres were actively involved in promoting extremist ideologies, recruiting youths, and planning 
terrorist activities in Southern part of India. 


Case_Crime No. RC-02/2022/NIA/KOC- As per the Notification dated 29.01.2024, this case has been 
registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) against ex-SIMI leader Mohammed Ali @Kunhappu 
Haji @Kunjappu Sahib @Kunjappukka. The accused is an ex-SIMI member and former state vice-president 
of Popular Front of India (PFI), Kerala. He used to arrange and supervise arms training conducted at Periyar 
Valley campus, Aluva on various occasions. He propagated violent jihad to the cadres of Popular Front of 
India and also justified the terrorist activities in Popular Front of India meetings. He has been charge-sheeted 
under various provisions including Section 16, 18A, 18B, 38 and 39 of the UAPA. 


The Central Government has examined the witness, namely Mr Umesh Rai K, Inspector of Police, NIA, 
Kochi as PW2 who tendered his evidence by way of the affidavit Ex. PW2/A. He deposed that the NIA has 
registered this case on the orders of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. The orders were 
made based on information to the effect that the office bearers, members and cadres of the Popular Front of 
India (PFD, and its affiliates in Kerala have conspired to instigate communal violence and radicalise its 
cadres to commit terrorist acts in the State of Kerala and various other parts of the country. Information was 
further received that PFI members and office bearers based in Kerala having earlier association with 
proscribed terrorist organisation SIMI, maintain operational nexus with other proscribed international 
terrorist organisations like Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) Daesh and AI- 
Qaida. Some of the members of PFI cadres are also members of these proscribed terrorist organisations. PFI 
has created an organisational web which is stretched to recruit vulnerable Muslim youths into proscribed 
international terrorist organisations to commit terrorist acts. Information was also received that PFI and its 
members are indulging in activities prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony by creating feelings of enmity 
between people of different religions and groups through violent speeches, publications, articles, social media 
posts etc. with an intention to disrupt public tranquillity and have been seen to have organized movement 
intending that the participants be trained to use criminal force against people of other religions and groups in 
order to cause fear and alarm besides feeling of insecurity among members of other religion and groups. The 
Ministry also had the information that the PFI, its members and office bearers are also indulging in many 
violent incidents and murders in Kerala that have created terror in the minds of the general public. 


During the investigation of the said case it was found that the case bearing Crime no. 318/2022 of the PS- 
Palakkad Town South (Srinivasan murder case) was a connected offence as per Section 8 of NIA Act and as 
per report submitted by NIA, the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs directed NIA to investigate 
the FIR No. 318/2022 as a connected offence. It was found during the investigation that the PFI leaders and 
members conspired together to create terror and communal divide in the society, conducted an intense recce 
of several Hindu Leaders of that locality whom they had short listed using their "Reporter Wing" and 
subsequently selected and brutally killed one Srinivasan. There were 53 accused in the connected case Crime 
No. 318/2022 of Palakkad Town South PS, out of which two accused, namely Yahiya Koya Thangal (A-11) 
and C. A. Rauf (A- 12) were the common accused of the two cases. Hence, 51 accused in the connected case 
were arraigned as accused Nos. A-18 to A-68 in RC-02/2022/NIA/KOC. Investigation revealed that, the 
accused Popular Front of India (PFI), a registered society, its office bearers, leaders and members besides 
their affiliates, hatched a larger conspiracy in the last few years in Kerala and outside Kerala, with their 
agenda to overthrow the democracy and Constitution in India and to implement Islamic Rule in India by 
2047. For this purpose, the PFI prepared structured stages of progression. Investigation revealed that the PFI 
used their 'Reporters' and 'Service Teams' to eliminate many targeted personalities in Kerala. The PFI, its 
office bearers and cadres had conspired to commit terrorist acts by killing any targeted person of another 
religion/section of the Society to create terror in the minds of other communities and the public at large. In 
furtherance to that, PFI leaders and cadres maintained intensive watch and reported on members of other 
religions, particularly the Hindu community and compiled the same for targeting through their 'Service 
Wing/Hit teams’. 


This witness has stated that during the investigation it was revealed that some members of PFI were formerly 
associated with the proscribed organisation, Student Islamic Movement of India (SIMI), and had instilled 
SIMI ideology in its cadres to fight against non-Muslims to convert India into Islamic State through violent 
jihad and in the process, some of the cadres and leaders of PFI joined the proscribed terrorist organisation 
ISIS to further its activities in India and abroad. The investigation further revealed that 116 accused 
Mohammed Ali @ Kunhappu Haji @ Kunjappu Sahib @ Kunjappukka (A-13) being a member of Popular 


Front of India (PFI) and an ex-SIMI leader, a proscribed terrorist organisation, knowingly and intentionally 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 55 


became a part of the larger conspiracy hatched by PFI. Being a part of a terrorist gang, he arranged and 
supervised the arms training for the cadres of PFI at Periyar Valley Trust and other places on various 
occasions in the last few years, as a part of the preparation for committing terrorist acts. (Emphasis supplied) 


11.10.4 In his evidence, this witness has placed reliance on the redacted statements of protected witnesses as Ex. 
PW2/F. The relevant extracts of the said statements are reproduced as follows: 


a. Protected Witness 1 - “ Popular Front is formed from NDF which was founded at 
Nadapuram. Former SIMI members found NDF while SIMI was banned and that the same 
members transformed it as Popular front while NDF was put under surveillance. Former SIMI 
cadres like Prof. P Koya, E Aboobacker and Muhammed Ali @ Kunjappu and others like C P 
Muhammed Basheer, Nasrudeen Elamaram, Yahiya Thangal, P K Abdul Latheef; Karamana 
Ashra f Moulavi, C A Raoof, OMA Salam are now state leaders of Popular Front. Their aim is 
not for a Muslim organization. They do not agree with the ideologies of other Muslims 
organizations. They are introducing a special kind of Islam which I have never heard/learned.”’ 


b Protected Witness 2 - “Aboobacker Sahib, Professor Koya Sahib, E. M. Abdul 
Rahiman Sahib, Mohammedali @ Kunjappo Sahib who are all ex-SIMI leaders and the leaders 
of PFL I heard and attended various meetings conducted by them during 2010 to 2017, They 
still have SIMI ideology and incites the cadres to act against non-Muslims, They used to say 
that what we couldn't achieve through SIMI, will be achieved through PFI, our ultimate goal is 
Islamic Rule in India.”’(Emphasis added) 


11.10.5 The witness PW2 in his evidence has also placed reliance on the statements of some other individuals 
recorded during the investigation of the case as Ex. PW2/G. The relevant extracts of such statements are 
reproduced as follows: 


a. Statement of Shri Hussain Koya TK - “The PFI leaders like Prof: Koya, Abubacker, 
E. M. Abdul Rahiman, Mohammedali_@_Kunjappo were SIMI leaders and were also the 
leaders of NDF.” 


b. Statement of Shri Mujeeb Rahman P V - “After formation of SIMI (Student Islamic 
Movement of India), I joined as a member of SIMI while I was doing BA at Islahiya College 
Chennnamangallur, Mukkam. In the year 1984, I was the District secretary of SIMI Kannur 
and continued for one year. Thereafter I was the manager of "Vivekam" a fortnight 
publication of SIMI. In 1985-86, I pursued B.Ed (Social Science and moral education) in 
Ramakrsihna Mission college Mysore. In the year 1987, I was the District Secretary of SIMI 
Malappuram. In the year 1989-90, I was the Kerala State General Secretary of SIMI. In the 
year 1991, I retired from SIMI. Thereafter, I was the Secretary of ARDRA (Action for Rural 
Development and Research). That organization was discontinued after 5 years. In the year 
1995, I was the Director of an NGO, Allama-Igbal-Foundation Trust. I resigned that post in 
the year 2010. In the year 1995, I was an accused in Crime No. 194/95, Vengara PS related 
to pipe bomb case. The trial of the case was conducted and I have been acquitted from the 
charges. In December 2010, I joined PFI as a member of Pulickal unit and continued till its 
ban.” 


c. Statement of Mujeeb Yacoob - “J know Karamana Ashraf Maulavi. He is the Vice 
President of All India Imam Council and also the in-charge of PFI Education Wing. He was 
the State President of PFI Kerala earlier. Abdul Sathar of Kollam is the General Secretary of 
PFL Sadiq of Pathanamthitta is the Secretary of PFI Pathanamthitta District. Shihas of 
Kottayam is the Zonal Secretary of PFI Ernakulam Zone! Usman of Thrissur is the State 
General Secretary of SDPI and also the member of PFL Yahya Koya Thangal is SEC member 
of PFI Kerala. He attended the "Jana Maha Sammelan" held at Alappuzha in 2022 in which 
PFI cadres raised hate sloganeering and he is an accused in that case. Kunjappo @ 
Mohammed Ali is from Malappuram and Ex-Leader and active member of PFL He was also 
ex-leader of SIMI.” 


d. Statement of Noufal V K- “J used to call Muhammad Ali @ Kunjappo of 
Malappuram District while I was holding the charge of State Committee Member and District 
President. C T Sulaiman is a relative of my wife. I know OMA Salam and have communicated 
over the phone about a Second-hand Car that he is looking for. As a PFI cadre I have the 
usual phone calls with Nasarudeen and C P Basheer. I have phone contact with C A Raul I 
have Phone contact with P K Abdul Latheef: I_knew_that_certain leaders including 
Muhammad Ali were former SIMI members.’’(Emphasis added) 


56 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


e. Statement of Shameer P - “J know Karamana Ashraf Maulavi was the State 
President of PFI. He was also SEC member and NEC member. He is the office bearer of All 
India Imam Counsel and also the National In-charge of national Education wing. Abdul 
Sathar was the State Secretary of PFI and presently he was General Secretary of PFI Kerala. 
Usman of Thrissur is active PFI cadre and State General Secretary of SDPI. Yahya Koya 
Thangal of Thrissur is the SEC member of PFI. CA Rauf of Pattambi is the Secretary of PFI. 
Mohammedali @ Kunjappo was former SIMI leader and National in-charge of PFI 
Expansion Wing. CT Sulaiman is a teacher and District President of Kasaragod.” 


11.10.6 The testimony of Mr. Umesh Rai K. (PW2) has been successful in showing that the erstwhile members of 


11.11 
11111 


11.11.2 


11.11.3 


11.11.4 


1111.5 


the association SIMI, after its ban, had shifted to other organisations, particularly the PFI and have been 
continuously functioning under the garb of these organisations and in furtherance of the goals of the 
association SIMI. It has been shown that despite the ban, the office bearers/members of SIMI are still active 
in committing acts which are inimical to the religious harmony and peace and tranquility of the country. 


Case Crime No. RC-14/2022/NIA/DLI and Case Crime No. ECIR/STF/17/2022— 


The Notification dated 29.01.2024 mentions that the case Crime No. RC-14/2022/NIA/DLI has been 
registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) against E.M. Abdul Rehman, ex-National Secretary, 
SIMI, E. Abubacker, ex-State President SIMI and founding chairman of Popular Front of India, P. Koya, ex- 
SIMI member and founding member of PFI, A. S. Ismail, ex-SIMI member and State President of PFI, Tamil 
Nadu. Accused were conducting meetings for expansion of PFI (banned organisation) through radicalising 
and recruiting Muslims, providing weapons training classes across the country under the garb of ‘Beginners 
Course’ and other seemingly innocuous programs, collecting funds and facilitating funds to persons for 
commission of unlawful activities and were involved in a conspiracy to commit violent, unlawful and 
terrorist acts. All the aforesaid accused were charge-sheeted on 18th March, 2023. 


The Notification further states that Case Crime No. ECIR/STF/17/2022 has been registered by the 
Directorate of Enforcement against the office bearers, ex-SIMI members and cadres of PFI (now banned), 
along with others, for conspiring and raising or collecting funds within India and abroad through banking 
channels, Hawala, donations, etc. for committing or getting committed, terrorist acts across India. These 
cadres and members are also involved in activities supporting and furthering the proscribed terrorist 
organisations like SIMI and ISIS. 


For the case Crime No. RC-14/2022/NIA/DLI, the Government has examined Mr T. V. Rajesh, Deputy 
Superintendent of Police, National Investigation Agency, Hyderabad as the witness PW38 who has filed his 
affidavit of evidence Ex. PW38/A. 


He has stated that the Case Crime No. RC-14/2022/NIA/DLI was registered under Sections 120B and 153A 
IPC, and Sections 17, 18, 18B, 20, 22B, 38 and 39 of the UAPA against E.M. Abdul Rehman (A-2), ex- 
National Secretary, SIMI, E. Abubacker (A-6), ex-State President SIMI and founding chairman of Popular 
Front of India (PFI), P. Koya (A-7), ex-SIMI member and founding member of PFI, A.S. Ismail (A-10) ex- 
SIMI member and state president of PFI, Tamil Nadu and others for conspiring and raising or collecting 
funds from within India and abroad for committing or getting committed, terrorist acts in various parts of 
India including states of Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, and Delhi. In pursuance of the 
aforementioned conspiracy, they were also involved in radicalising and recruiting Muslim youth to join 
proscribed organizations like ISIS and sacrifice their lives for religion and for provoking them to commit 
violent and unlawful activities. The case was registered on 13.04.2022 at NIA, New Delhi with the 
allegations that the office bearers, members and cadres of Popular Front of India (PFI), having an office at 27 
Floor, Kalindi Kunj, Noida Road, New Delhi and having offices all over India, along with others, are 
conspiring and conducting meetings for expansion of PFI (banned as an Unlawful Association by the MHA 
on 27.09.2022) through radicalizing and recruiting Muslim persons, providing weapons training classes 
across the country under the garb of 'Beginners Course' and other seemingly innocuous programs, collection 
of funds and facilitating funds to persons through banking channels, Hawala, donation etc. for commission of 
unlawful activities and was involved in conspiracy to commit violent, unlawful and terrorist acts in various 
parts of India. 


After investigation, Chargesheet No. 12/2023 was filed against 20 accused persons, including the 
organization PFI on 18.03.2023 before the NIA Special Court in New Delhi. Subsequently, a supplementary 
chargesheet was filed on 19.04.2023, against the accused Ibrahim Puthanathani. The Investigation has 
revealed that the accused persons were also involved in promoting enmity among different groups, thereby 
causing communal disharmony in the society through social media and other platforms. As per Para 16.6.5 of 
the Chargesheet, PFI has had the most visible presence in Kerala, where it has been repeatedly accused of 
murder, rioting, intimidation, and having links with terrorist organisations. In 2012, the Kerala government 
had informed the High Court of Kerala that PFI was "a Muslim fundamentalist Organization and nothing but 
a_resurrection of the banned outfit Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) in another form". The 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 57 


11.11.6 


1111.7 


11.11.8 


government Affidavit stated that PFI activists had been found involved in 27 cases of murder, mostly of CPM 
and RSS cadres, and that their motives were violent and communal. As per the Charge sheet, investigation 
has revealed that the unlawful and terrorist activities were being carried out by developing a mass 
organization that was purportedly a socio-political movement, whereas at the same time, a very motivated 
and secretive elite force was being created within the larger organisation that was intended to create an army 
and generate resources to wage war against Indian Government and to disintegrate Indian polity, democracy 
and the Government to establish an Islamic Caliphate in its place. The Investigation also further revealed the 
organizational structure of the PFI. (Emphasis supplied) 


The objectives and vision of the PFI and the means to achieve the same are enshrined in the document titled 
‘India 2047: Towards Rule of Islam in India’ which was seized during the investigation of the case. The 
salient points recorded in the document are as follows: 


i. Establishment of Rule of Islam in India. 
ii. Political power to Muslims & establishment of Islamic Government in India in 2047. 


iii. Strengthening at least 10% of the Muslim population and associating them with the PFI to 
subjugate the majority community and bring back the glory of Islam. Four stages of 
progressiontowards Islamic rule — 


a. Unite Muslims & provide weapons training to PFI cadres, 

b. Selective use of violence to demonstrate strength and terrorize opponents, 
c. Alliances with SCs/STs/OBCs to divide Hindus for political gains &. 

d. Infiltrate Police, Army and Judiciary. 


iv. After completion of all 4 stages, unveil a new Constitution based on Islamic Shariah law with the 
help of external forces. 


v. To organize Physical Efficiency (PE) training under the guise of Yoga Classes & ‘Healthy People 
Healthy Nation' and such like campaigns. 


vi. Training of PFI cadres in handling of weapons, arms and explosives. 


vil. To acquire plots of land in Muslim-dominated localities or remote locations for training and 
stock-piling of weapons and explosives. 


viii. Identification, reconnaissance and elimination of all those who do not believe in the 
establishment of Islamic rule in India. 


Investigation showed that the National Executive Council of PFI had devised a well-planned strategy to wage 
a large-scale war against the Government of India by recruiting/ collecting and training radicalized Muslim 
men to use arms and weapons who pledged their allegiance to PFI by administration of the oath of secrecy 
and loyalty (baith). These men were trained to use deadly weapons in various training camps/arms training 
camps to raise a well-trained army of radicalized and fundamentalist Muslim Army/ Militia of Mujahideen. It 
was intended by PFI that its Army/ Militia shall wage a war to disintegrate and dismember the Indian 
Republic constituted by the Constitution of India, both geographically and politically and to establish an 
Islamic Caliphate in its place ruled by an Amir (President) based on Shariat/Islamic Law. 


Investigation revealed that PFI cadres have been involved in a series of murders, including those of leaders 
of organisations who are at variance with PFI on religious ideas, and the motives were communal. A few of 
such incidents are as below: 


1. Professor Hand chopping case: On 04.07.2010, eight PFI activists chopped off the right 
palm of a College Professor T.J. Joseph near Muvattapuzha in Kerala for his alleged 
derogatory references to Prophet Mohammed in an Examination Question paper. 


il. Sashi Kumar Murder Case: On 22.09.2016, Hindu Munani activist Sh. Sasi Kumar was 
brutally murdered by PFI members in Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu. 


iil. Rudresh Murder Case: On 16.10.2016, four PFI members committed the brutal murder 
of RSS leader Sh. Rudresh in Bangalore, when he was returning home after attending the 
RSS route march. 


Iv. Ramalingam murder Case: On 05.02.2019, PFI activists murdered Sh. Ramalingam in 
Thirupuvanam in Thanjavur District in Tamil Nadu for "interfering in religious propagation 
activity." 


58 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


V. Sanjith murder case: RSS worker Sh. Sanjith was brutally murdered on 15.11.2021 by 
four PFI activists in Palakkad District, Kerala, when the victim was travelling with his wife. 


Vi. Srinivasan murder case: On 16.04.2022, Sh. Srinivasan, an RSS office bearer was 
brutally murdered in his shop with swords and knives by a six member gang of PFI at 
Palakkad District of Kerala State. 


Vii. Praveen Nettaru murder case: On 26.07.2022, Sh. Praveen Nettaru, an RSS member, 
was brutally murdered by the PFI cadres in Dakshina Kannada District of Kamataka in front 
of his business premises. Investigation reveals that PFI had been using several Social Media 
platforms including Facebook, Instagram, Twitter etc. to propagate its ideology. 


11.11.9 The interrogation of the accused persons in the said case and the analysis of the technological devices 


recovered from their possession revealed that the accused persons/PFI cadres were maintaining a database of 
detailed information about the leaders of certain organisations who oppose the ideology of PFI. This 
information was being collected by the PFI cadres in local areas after conducting reconnaissance of aforesaid 
leaders/persons. This database includes minute details of the identified persons, such as names, parentage, 
addresses, photographs, occupation, post/designation in the organization, physical attributes of the person, 
vehicles used by them, timings of leaving/entering the house, mounting of surveillance on targets then 
identifying their regular travel routes etc. There were provocative photos, videos, and pamphlets about 
sensitive issues like the Babri Masjid demolition, and the Gyanvapi Mosque matter. In these 
videos/photos/pamphlets, the accused persons/PFI cadres used the term 'Shaheed' (Martyr) for Babri Masjid 
and were advocating the use of violence against the people not conforming to the PFI's ideology. Many 
incriminating videos & documents like Voice of Khurasan, Sawat Al Hind published by ISIS and similar 
foreign Jihadi groups, documents published by Al-Sahab media on Kashmir, Martyrdom operations and some 
training/motivating videos released by ISIS & Al-Qaeda were also found. There were videos of senior PFI 
leaders/NEC members openly making highly provocative speeches, inter alia, calling the Indian Government 
to be Anti-minorities. In these videos, the accused persons/PF1 cadres were instigating the crowd to protest 
against the Government. Detailed examination of the Protected Witnesses during the investigation revealed 
that the organisation, Popular Front of India (PFI) had devised strategies to implement their long-term goal of 
establishing an Islamic Caliphate by overthrowing the democratically elected Government of India through 
armed rebellion. 


11.11.10 It_is stated by this witness that the PFI emerged in the aftermath of the ban on the Students Islamic 


11.1111 


Movement of India (SIMI). Most former leaders of SIMI were either identified with PFI or were holding 
various portfolios in the organization. As per para 16.6 of the Charge-sheet, the PFI is an extremist Islamic 
organization that was formed in the year 2006 with the merging of 3 Muslim organizations with extremist 
ideologies namely the National Democratic Front, Manitha Neethi Pasaarai and Karnataka Forum for 
Dignity. Manitha Neethi Pasarai (MNP) and Karnataka Forum for Dignity (KFD) were formed in the year 
2001 after the declaration of the Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) as an 'Unlawful Association' 
under UAPA. Incidentally, a few members of the core leadership of erstwhile SIMI, came together to form 
the top leadership of the PFI. Most former leaders of SIMI were found either involved with the PFI in various 
capacities or were holding various portfolios in the organization. Para 16.6.5 of the Chargesheet reveals that 
in 2012, the Kerala government had informed the High Court of Kerala that PFI was "a Muslim 
fundamentalist Organization and nothing but a resurrection of the banned outfit Students Islamic Movement 
of India (SIMI) in another form". The government Affidavit said that PFI activists had been found to be 
involved in 27 cases of murder, mostly of CPM and RSS cadres, and that their motives were violent and 
communal. E. Abubacker (A-6), who is a senior member of the National Executive Council (NEC), the apex 
decision-making body of PFI, was SIMI's former State President for Kerala. E. M. Abdul Rehman (A-2), 
PFI's National Chairman in 2010, was the former National Secretary of SIMI. Accused P. Koya (A-7), 
accused Mohammed Ali Jinnah (A-9) and accused A. S. Ismail (A-10) were active members of the Students 
Islamic Movement of India (SIMI), before its banning. The NIA has filed the chargesheet mentioning 243 
witnesses in support of its case. It has also filed 184 documents with the chargesheet. (Emphasis supplied) 


At this juncture, it is relevant to mention that the investigation of the Case Crime No. RC- 
14/2020/NIA/DLI revealed a widespread large-scale collection and routing of funds for subversive activities. 
Accordingly, the Directorate of Enforcement initiated an investigation against the office bearers, members 
and cadres of Popular Front of India (PFI) under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 
vide ECIR/STF/17/2022 dated 21.09.2022 based on FIR No.RC-14/2022/NIA/DLI. 


11.11.12 The Government examined Mr Ankur Sharma, Assistant Director, Enforcement Directorate, STF- 


HQ, New Delhi regarding the case bearing No. ECIR/STF/17/2022. He has deposed as the witness PW34 
vide his affidavit of evidence Ex. PW34/A. He has stated that the Directorate is investigating Popular Front 
of India (PFI) & its related individuals/entities under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 
2002 vide ECIR/02/HIU/2018 dated 02.05.2018 based on various cases registered by the National 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 59 


11.11.13 


11,12 


1112.1 


11,12.2 


11,12.3 


Investigation Agency (NIA) and other Law Enforcement Agencies invoking Scheduled offences under 
Sections 120-B, 121, 121A of IPC, Sections 3, 4 & 5 of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908, Sections 25 & 
27 of the Arms Act and Sections 13, 16, 17, 18 & 18(A) of the UAPA. He also stated that certain persons 
who have been cited as accused in the Scheduled offence and also the subject of investigation of the PMLA 
case, have been also found to have links with the Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) in the past as 
per information available in open source and from the Chargesheet filed in the predicate offence (i.e. FIR 
No.RC-14/2022/NIA/DLI) by NIA, New Delhi. The details of such individuals are as under: 


a. E.M. Abdul Rahiman 
- Former general secretary of SIMI (1982-1993). 


- Vice-Chairman of PFI at the time of its declaration as an unlawful organization on 
27.09.2022. 


- Held various positions in PFI's National Executive Committee and authorized signatory 
in several PFI bank accounts which had a total cash credit of Rs. 3,24,09,529.50/-. 


b. Professor P. Koya 
- Founding member of SIMI. 


- Member of PFI's National Executive Committee served as Treasurer (2018-2020), and 
Editor in Chief of PFI's publications. 


- Involved in the decision-making and financial activities of PFI. 
6 E. Abubacker 
- Headed SIMI's Kerala unit (1982-1984). 


- Chairman of PFI (2018-2020) and involved in the decision-making at the National 
Executive Committee level. 


- Founding chairman of PFI, SDPI (political party), and Rehab India Foundation (NGO and 
charity wing of PFI). 


- He was an authorized signatory in some of the bank accounts of PFI having cash credit of 
Rs. 4,10,72,736/-. 


Witness PW34 has deposed that the investigation by the ED has found clear links between PFI and 
SIMI through the involvement_of former SIMI members in PFI's organizational structure and activities. 
These individuals played significant roles in PFI, furthering its agenda which was in line with SIMI's 
extremist ideology. (Emphasis supplied) 


Case_Crime No. RC-01/2023/NIA/DLI - The Notification dated 29.01.2024 states that the Case 
Crime No. RC-01/2023/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) against ex- 
SIMI cadre A. R. Qureshi. He along with his associates hatched the conspiracy to join ISIS for the cause of 
Islamic Jihad and targeted killing in India. He has been chargesheeted in the instant case under the UAPA. 


For this case, the Government has examined Mr Wanenlo Woch, the Additional Superintendent of Police, 
NIA, Kolkata as the witness PW37 who filed his affidavit of evidence Ex.PW37/A. He has stated that on 
06.01.2023, a team of STF, Kolkata Police, apprehended Md. Saddam Hussain and Sayeed Ahmed after 
intercepting their motorcycle. Two mobile phones, incriminating Jihadi documents, several debit/credit cards, 
etc. were recovered from them. During the interrogation of Md. Saddam Hussain and Sayeed Ahmed, it was 
revealed that they had conspired to wage war against the Government of India by means of terrorist attacks 
on government establishments and common people. A case FIR number 01/2023 dated 06.01.2023 was 
registered at PS — STF, Kolkata Police under Sections 120B, 121, 121A, 122 and 123 of IPC. During the 
investigation, A3-Abdul Rakib Qureshi @ Kureshi was arrested from Khandwa on 09.01.2023. He is a 
member of SIMI and from his possession, several incriminating articles were recovered. 


It transpired during the investigation that the accused persons were members of ISIS and SIMI and they used 
social media platforms to conspire with their associates. They shared Jihadi articles and videos for 
radicalising the vulnerable Muslim youths for jihad and for sending them to Khorasan, Afghanistan. They 
were also in touch with one Amina Bint Munnavvar, who was house arrested in Singapore concerning 
criminal activities. Considering the significance of the discoveries made, the case was re-registered by the 
NIA as RC—01/2023/NIA/DLI as per the order dated 06.02.2023 of the MHA.(Emphasis supplied) 


It was found that Abdul Rakib Qureshi @ Kureshi came in contact with SIMI members, Akhil Khilji, Amjad 
and Zakir while he was in college. Analysis of the chats between Md. Saddam Hussain and Abdul Rakib 
Qureshi @ Kureshi corroborated the fact that they were conspiring to target killing of the owner of the 


60 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART I—SEC. 3(11)] 


11.12.4 


11.13 


11.131 


11,13.2 


Sudarshan TV channel, Suresh Chavhanke and the renowned Hindu priest, Yati Narasimhanand Saraswati. 
They were also found to be engaged in the recruitment of Muslim youth for ISIS and for further sending 
them to Khorasan for terrorist activities. It was revealed that Abdul Rakib Qureshi @ Kureshi had shared 
information regarding the arrest of ISIS and SIMI members by the Indian security agencies. 


It was also revealed that Abdul Rakib Qureshi @ Kureshi was convicted and sentenced to 10 years 
imprisonment for harbouring the offenders of the case FIR no. 14/2009, PS Kotwali which was registered 
regarding the attempt to kill the BJYM City president, Pramod Tiwari and Raju Dubey. Subsequently, 
another case No. 424/14 was registered at MP Nagar police station against the said Abdul Rakib Qureshi @ 
Kureshi and his associates when they had shouted slogans against the Prime Minister and in support of the 
Taliban. They had also threatened to eliminate the Prime Minister of India. In this case, they were sentenced 
to 3 years imprisonment. In the year 2019, Abdul Rakib Qureshi @ Kureshi was released on bail by the 
Madhya Pradesh High Court with legal help provided by Jamiyat ul Ulema Hind. In the year 2020, he came 
in touch with Amina Bint Munnavwvar and with his help he contacted Saddam Hussain for propagating the 
activities of ISIS and the recruitment of Muslim youth into its fold. He was also trying to procure weapons 
for target killings and ISIS activities. Saddam Hussain and Abdul Rakib Qureshi @ Kureshi were building 
separatist and militant movements in India. On completion of the investigation of NIA Case No. RC- 
01/2023/NIA/DLI, charge-sheet was filed under Sections 120B of IPC, 18, 20, 38 & 39 of UAPA. The 
chargesheet mentions that a detailed analysis of the seized digital devices of Md. Saddam (A-1) established 
that A-1 stored different online magazines of ISIS in his mobile phones like "Dabig, Voice of Hind” and its 
Bengali version, namely "Hind-er-Awaz", in SD Cards etc. and used them for radicalization, recruitment of 
more Muslim youths, spread hatred and to target prominent persons of India. A total of 148 incriminating 
videos on ISIS/Jehadi activities like brutal killing of security force personnel, speech on radicalization, 
attacks on common people, hanging of non-believers of Islam, links for preparation of making of explosives, 
etc. were retrieved. Retrieved Telegram chats of A-1 with one Farhan Javed contain one proforma of the 
"Baith' (allegiance to ISIS), which is used as an oath for the recruitment of new members in ISIS. Similar 
digital material was also recovered from the devices of A-3, Abdul Rakib Qureshi @ Kureshi. The trial of the 
case RC-01/2023/NIA/DLI is still pending in the court concerned. 


Case Crime No. 203/2022, PS- Padgha, Thane (R)-To declare SIMI an unlawful association vide the 
Notification dated 29.01.2024, the Government has further relied on Case Crime No. 203/2022 which has 
been registered at Padgha Police Station, Thane (R) under Sections 153(a), 153(1)(a)(b) and 153(2) of the 
Indian Penal Code for writing of provocative text on Jamma (Moti) Mosque Padgha, Borivali, Thane to 
create a communal rift between two religions or communities and lead violence and increase enmity between 
the two groups and disrupt social harmony. The case is pending trial in court. 


For this case, the government has examined the witness Mr. Rahul Ramchandra Zalte, Deputy 
Superintendent of Police, Ganeshpuri Division, Dist. Thane (Rural), Maharashtra as the witness PW23 who 
has tendered his evidence as the affidavit Ex. PW23/A. He has stated that Crime No. 203/2022 was registered 
at Padgha Police Station under Sections 295A, 153A(1)(a), (1)(b) and (2) of the Indian Penal Code. It was 
initially investigated by Sr. Police Inspector Dinesh Manohar Katake during his tenure at Padgha Police 
Station from 01.01.2020 to 29.11.2022. 


On 17.06.2022 the accused Kasib Sattar Balere wrote provocative messages in Urdu and displayed them at 
two Masjids, Jama Masjid (Big) and Small Masjid, in Borivali village, Tal. Bhiwandi, Dist. Thane. The 
messages were intended to promote religious disharmony and disturb public tranquility by causing enmity 
between communities. He used his influence to provoke community members, leading to potential conflicts. 
He was arrested on 21.07. 2022, and is currently in judicial custody. Photocopies of the provocative messages 
written in Urdu were seized and a seizure panchanama was conducted on 27.06.2022. Photographs of the 
messages were taken and the contents were translated from Urdu to Hindi by an expert. The translation of the 
said message, as filed with the affidavit is as follows: 


“Islam Jindabad 16 saali Mudassir apne maa baap ka akela beta gustakhane - rasool ke 
julus (mohammad paigambar ka apman karnewale ke khilaf andolan/rally) me Jharkhand- 
Ranchi me naare baaji karke apna gussa nikal raha tha. Usne sirf islam jindabad kaha aur ek 
police officer ki riffle se goli chali vo goli uske mathepar lagi aur vo allah ko pyara ho gaya 
usne apne is kaam se sabko ye bata diya ke gustakhane - rasool me police ki goliya shikar 
hua allah unki kurbaniyo ko kabool kare aur bhagwa dahshatwadiyo ko unki kiye ki saja de 
(amin). Spain jahan musalmanone 750 saal tak raaj kiya jab wahan islam ko Idbatm kame ki 
koshish shuru hui to sabse pehle hozoor (mohammad paigmnar) ka apman karna shuru kiya. 
Aur dhire dhire islam khatm ho gaya. Bhagwa dahshatwadi bhi bharat me usi tarah karna 
cbahte hai. Magar unhe ye malum nahi ki Mudassir aur Sahil ki tarah unke yuva bharat me 
hai jo islam ke liye ladhne aur use jinda rakhne ko tayyar hai. Samay aa gaya hai ki bar 
musalman ko vishesh yuvao ko tay kar le ki, unhe beijjat hokar mama pasand hai ya yodha ki 
tarah ladhte huye veer maran chahiye. In sab me ye baat dhyan rakhe ki dhame - andolan lok 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 61 


11,13.3 


11,13.4 


11,13.5 


11.14 


11.141 


11.14.2 


11,14.3 


11.14.4 


11.14.5 


11.14.6 


11.14.7 


tantra ki den hai aur islam jihad air kattal (maramari) ka rasta dikhata hai. Hojoor 
(mohammad paigambar) ka apman karne wale aur wali ka sirf ek hi ilaj hai sar dhad se alag. 
Aaj ki halat me apne aap ko ekjoot karo aur islam ke dushmano ka ilaj jihad se kame ki 
jaroorat hai. Ese halato me bhi hamari dini jamate chup hai unhe saap sung gaya hai. Ese 
me yuvao ko eksath mil kar ek taakat bankar gustakhane rasool (mohammad paigambar ka 
apman kame walo ka) sar dhad se alag kare. Sahil aur Mudassir ka uthaya hua kadam aur 
shahapur ke Aslam aur Salman ne jo kiya wo hamare pyare nabi ki mohabbat par chalne ki 
dawat de raha hai. Isi me hamari duniya me ijjat aur akherat me (marne ke baad) kamyabi 
hai. Allah ham sab ko din ke maarae aur khud ko mar mitane ki taakat de, aur usko bahot nek 
silah dono jahan me de (amin, summa amin).”’ 


It is stated by the witness that Kasib Sattar Balere is a member of SIMI and is engaged in activities that cause 
communal disharmony and threaten national security. (Emphasis supplied) 


The witness stated that SIMI aims to disturb communal harmony and promote terrorism. The seized materials 
and statements reveal plans to incite violence and promote SIMI's agenda. SIMI's activities pose a significant 
threat to national integrity and sovereignty. He further stated that lifting the ban on SIMI would enable its 
activists to engage in terror acts, undermining the law and order situation in the country. 


Charge Sheet was filed on 17.09.2022, in the court of the JMFC, Bhiwandi, and registered as RCC No. 
1117/2022. The FIR and charge sheet detail the unlawful activities and materials seized from the accused. The 
trial is ongoing, with charges yet to be framed as of 21.04.2024. 


Case_Crime No. 15/2023, PS- Padgha, Thane (R) - Case Crime No. 15/2023 has been registered at 
Padgha Police Station, Thane (R) under Sections 37(1)(3), 135 of the Maharashtra Police Act, 1951, read with 
Section 194(d), 129, 177 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, for raising slogans and holding rally for getting the 
bail to Atik Nachan in Ahemdabad NIA Court and violation of prohibition order of Collector and District 
Magistrate, Thane. The case is pending for trial in court. 


For this case, the Central Government has examined Mr. Amol Nandkumar Salunkhe, Assistant Police 
Inspector, Padgha Police Station, Thane Rural, Maharashtra as the witness PW21. He filed his evidence by 
way of the affidavit Ex. PW21/A. He deposed regarding the evidence and ongoing investigations related to 
Crime No. 15/2023, which involves members of SIMI, justifying the continued ban on the organization. 
Crime No. 15/2023 was registered at Police Station Padgha under Sections 37(1)(3) r/w 135 Maharashtra 
Police Act, 1951 and Sections 129 and 177 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The investigation was handed 
over to Mr. Salunkhe during his tenure at Padgha Police Station. 


The witness has stated in his affidavit of evidence that on 11.01.2023 Police Constable Rupesh Jadhav 
registered FIR No. 15/2023 against the accused persons, namely Rehan Ashpak Suse, Musab Hasib Mulla, 
Abdul Kadir Suse, Kasif Sattar Balere and Atif Atik Nachan for violating prohibitory orders issued by 
Collector and District Magistrate, Thane and conducting an unlawful assembly. The accused, along with 25 
to 30 others, gathered and held a procession despite prohibitory orders issued by the Collector and District 
Magistrate, Thane. They raised slogans and drove motorcycles and four-wheelers without permission. 


Accused Kasif Sattar Balere was a prominent figure in organizing the procession. He actively led the group 
and ensured the participation of others. He was identified as an active member of SIMI, involved in 
promoting its activities. Atif Atik Nachan is another main accused in the case. He has previously been 
arrested by Ahmedabad NIA under the Explosive Substances Act. (Emphasis supplied) 


Motorcycles and four-wheelers used in the unlawful assembly and procession were identified and noted. 
Video clips of the procession and activities of the accused were recovered from the complainant's mobile 
phone and transferred to a pen drive as evidence. Statements from the complainant and other witnesses were 
recorded, confirming the involvement of the accused. 


The accused Kasif Sattar Balere was identified as an active member of SIMI, with confidential records from 
Padgha Police Station confirming his association with the banned organization. It is relevant to mention that 
this Confidential Record has been produced before this Tribunal by the witness Kishor Vasudeo Parab, 
Assistant Commissioner of Police, Anti Terrorism Squad, Mumbai, Maharashtra while deposing as PW25. 
The same has been perused by the Tribunal and it was found to be containing records about the relation of the 
said accused with SIMI. 


It is further deposed by the witness that the charge sheet was filed in the Court of Judicial Magistrate First 
Class (JMFC), Bhiwandi, and charges were framed on 14.03.2023. The trial is ongoing, with charges framed 
against the accused. 


The witness has stated in his affidavit that SIMI's objectives include establishing Islamic rule in India, 
propagating Islam, and conducting Jihad for the cause of Islam. The accused, particularly Kasif Sattar Balere, 
have been identified as members of SIMI, engaging in activities that promote communal disharmony and 


62 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


11.15 


1115.1 


1115.2 


11,15.3 


11.15.4 


11.16 


11.16.1 


threaten national security. It is further stated that SIMI's activities aim to disturb communal harmony and 
promote a Pan-Islamic fundamentalist agenda. It is stated that SIMI's activities pose a significant threat to 
national integrity and sovereignty. 


Case_Crime No. 95/2008 Police Station- Kotwali, Bhopal: The Gazette Notification dated 
29.01.2024 further mentions that three SIMI activists have been sentenced three years simple imprisonment 
and fine of rupees ten thousand each under Section 419 of the Indian Penal Code, two years simple 
imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand each under Section 10A of the UAPA, seven years simple 
imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand each under Section 13(1)(a), 13(1)(b) of the UAPA and five 
years simple imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand each under Section 13(2) of the UAPA by the 
Court of Additional Chief Judge, Bhopal in Case Crime No. 95/2008 registered at Kotwali Police Station, 
Bhopal under section 419 of Indian Penal Code and Section 10, 13 of the UAPA. 


Mrs. Anita Prabha Sharma, A.C.P., Kotwali Sub Division, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh has been examined as 
the witness PW16 with respect to this case. In her evidence, she tendered her affidavit Ex. PW16/A. She has 
stated that on 19.04.2008, Mr. Virendra Mishra, SDOP, Narsinghgarh District Rajgarh, informed Inspector 
PS- Kotwali that the accused Kamruddin and Safdar Nagauri, earlier arrested in Case Cr. No. 142/08, Police 
Station Narsinghgarh, had taken a house on rent Near Imami Gate in Bhopal and were carrying out the 
activities of the banned organization SIMI from there for the last two years. In inquiry, the landlord, Azizur 
Rahman @ Aziz Mian, and the neighbours said that in the month of March, 2006, a person giving his name 
as Irfan, and stating himself to be a resident of Narsinghgarh, rented a ground floor at Rs. 1600/- per month. 
He told the landlord that an elder Maulana and a younger Maulana will also stay with him. When he was 
shown the photos of the said individuals published in the newspaper, the landlord and neighbors identified 
the three persons. It came to be known that the man who had given his name as Irfan was in fact, 
Qamaruddin and his other companions, the elder and the younger Maulana were respectively, Safdar Nagori 
and Hafiz Hussain. 


The house was raided after breaking the locks. Urdu literature related to SIMI and other objectionable 
documents were seized. The said documents have also been produced before the Tribunal in the form of copy 
of the case diary of the case. It is stated by this witness that the investigation also revealed that all the above 
accused were secretly carrying out the activities of SIMI organization by changing their names and were also 
in contact with other persons of Hyderabad for targeted killings. 


The Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Bhopal after considering the evidence adduced in the 
case and hearing the prosecution and the defence had convicted and sentenced all the three accused persons 
vide the judgment dated 22.06.2019 in R.T. No. 14638/2019 in Cr. No. 95/08. The copy of Judgment dated 
22.06.2019 and its English translation were relied on by the witness as Ex. PW16/E. In order to show the 
connection of the convicts of the case to SIML, it is justified that the relevant extract of the translation of the 
judgment is reproduced. The same reads as follows: 


“In this case, there is no direct evidence of the crime the accused have been accused of, but it 
is a serious crime committed in pursuance of deceit. On behalf of the accused, it has been 
argued that there is no evidence that the accused are members of SIMI organization. From 
the documents available in the case, it is a clear fact that the accused worked as members of 
SIMI organization. It is not possible to give certificate to any accused for any crime and the 
crime is detected from the presumption of illegal act and circumstances and other evidence. In 
the case, no evidence has been presented that the books seized by the accused were bought by 
every person and found at every place.’ (Emphasis added) 


The judgment examines the evidence in great detail and then concludes with the conviction of the accused 
persons for the offences punishable under section 419 of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 10A, 13(1)(a), 
13(1)(b), 13(2) of the UAPA. 


Case Crime No. 456/2009, Police Station - BNP, Devas:The Notification dated 29.01.2024 further 
mentions that two SIMI activists have been sentenced to life imprisonment and fine of one thousand each and 
in default of payment of fine to extra six months imprisonment under Section 395 and 397 of Indian Penal 
Code by the court of Special Judge, NIA, Bhopal in Case Crime No. 456/2009 registered at BNP Police 
Station, Devas under Section 395, 397 of Indian Penal Code and Section 10, 13, 16, 17, 20, 21 of the UAPA 
and section 25, 27 of the Arms Act, 1959. 


Regarding this case, the Government has examined Mr. Sanjay Sharma, Deputy Superintendent of Police, 
(LR/HQ), Dewas, Madhya Pradesh as the witness PW14. He has tendered his evidence in the form of the 
affidavit Ex. PW14/A. He deposed in his affidavit that the said FIR was registered on the basis of the 
information received from Mr Amit Kumar Mittal, an official of Bank of India, Vijay Ganj Mandi branch. He 
has stated that on 24.08.2009, at about 4:45 PM, four unknown miscreants, armed with pistol and other 
weapons, entered the bank and threatened the cashier and the peon. They locked them in the stationery room 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 63 


11.16.2 


11.16.3 


11,17 


1117.1 


11.17.2 


11.17.3 


12. 


and thereafter robbed a sum of Rs. 9,62,000/-. The FIR was registered for the offences under Section 395 and 
397 IPC and Sections 3, 10, 13, 16, 17, 20 & 21 of the UAPA and the investigation was started. 


The ATS received information that the suspected offenders Abu Faizal, Mohd. Iqrar and Aijazuddin were 
coming to Bhopal by Janshatabdi Express, on 05.06.2011 at around 01:00 AM. The team of ATS, Bhopal 
reached Habibganj Railway station. There, the said accused persons were apprehended with firearms and 
ammunition. Incriminating books and other material were also seized from their possession. In relation to the 
recovery of the said articles, another case bearing Crime Case No. 4/11 under Section 25/27 of the Arms Act 
and Sections 3, 10 & 13 of the UAPA was registered. In their confession these accused persons admitted 
themselves to_be the members of the Indian Mujahideen and SIMI. They admitted committing the bank 
robbery in order to activate the association SIMI and they had used the money to strengthen the said 


organization. 


In the aforementioned offence relating to the Crime Case no. 456/09 PS-BNP, the Special Judge-NIA, 
Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh vide the judgment dated 11.12.2020 convicted the accused Abu Faizal and Mohd. 
Igrar for the offence punishable under Section 395 read with Section 397 IPC. The accused Aijazuddin was 
killed in a police encounter on 04.04.2015. The witness has also relied on the copy, Ex. PWI4/E, of the 
judgment dated 11.12.2020 in his evidence. 


Crime No. 35/2011, Police Station - GRP Ratlam, Indore (Rail): The Notification dated 29.01.2024 
also refers to this case and states that one SIMI activist has been sentenced to life imprisonment and fine 
under Section 302, 307 of Indian Penal Code and Section 16(1)(a) of the UAPA by the court of Special 
Judge, NIA, Bhopal in Case Crime No. 35/2011 registered at GRP Ratlam Police Station, Indore (Rail). 


Regarding this case, the witness Mr. R. K. Singh serving as DSP Railway, Indore, Madhya Pradesh has been 
examined as the witness PW15. He has tendered his evidence by way of the affidavit Ex. PW15/A. He stated 
that on 03.06.2011, Complainant SI Manish Dubey, In Charge ATS reported to the Police Station that at 
04.30 PM, he received information to the effect that Zakir Hussain who was the prime accused in the murder 
of ATS Const. Sitaram, committed in Khandwa district in the year 2009 and who was wanted by the police 
for a long time, is in Ratlam with another miscreant. It was informed that the said accused was about to leave 
the locality of Mochipura, Ratlam in a Tempo vehicle. 


SI Manish Dubey along with Const. Shiv Pratap and Const. Jitendra Kumar reached Mochi Pura, Ratlam. 
However, by that time, the two suspects had already boarded a Tempo. When the Tempo reached near 
Sharma Restaurant, they both got down. They were followed by the above said police officials on two 
separate motorcycles. Const. Jitendra Kumar and Const. Shiv Pratap tried to apprehend the accused Zakir 
Hussain, but he fired at them with an intention to cause their death. Constable Jitendra sustained a gunshot 
wound in his left elbow while Constable Shiv Pratap sustained gunshot wound on his right shoulder. SI 
Manish Dubey fired three rounds from his service weapon in defense. By that time, the other suspect had also 
opened fire from his weapon. One bullet hit the right thigh of SI Manish Dubey. As he was engaged in 
assisting the injured Constables, the accused persons managed to escape. During treatment Const. Shiv 
Pratap succumbed to his injuries. Consequently, case crime number 35/11 was registered at PS — GRP, 
Ratlam. After some time, the accused Zakir Hussain was apprehended in an injured condition while the 
accused Farhat was apprehended subsequently. The case was investigated in detail. During the investigation, 
it was revealed that the offenders were assisted by their associate Nizamuddin, who had given his SIM card 
to be used by the accused Zakir, which the said accused had used to conduct the activities of the proscribed 
association SIMI. Thereafter, the said accused Nizamuddin was also arrested. 


While placing reliance on the certified copy of judgment dated 15.03.2019 in S.T. Reg. No. 9600298/2014 
and its English translation as Ex. PW15/E, the witness stated that vide this judgment, the Special Court for 
Trial of NIA Cases, Bhopal, convicted the accused Mohammed Farhat for the offence punishable under 
Section 302, 307 IPC, and Section 16 (1)(a) UAPA and sentenced him to life imprisonment. The accused 
Zakir Hussain was killed in a police encounter in the jurisdiction of Gunga Police Station, District Bhopal on 
31.10.2016. The accused Nizamuddin was acquitted of all charges. The State has preferred an appeal against 
this acquittal before the Madhya Pradesh High Court. This witness has stated that despite the ban on the 
association SIMI its members/sympathisers are still indulged in unlawful activities. That the investigation of 
the case has shown the involvement of the sympathisers of this organisation in the offence as mentioned 
above. 


In addition to the above mentioned witnesses which have been examined by the Union of India with 
respect to the cases pertaining to SIMI stated in the Notification dated 29.01.2024 and the Background Note, 
the following witnesses have also been examined before the Tribunal to show that the individuals connected 
with the SIMI are continuing with unlawful activities. 


64 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


12.1 


12.1.1 


291 Mr Putta Vimaladitya, IPS is the DIG, ATS, Kerala. In his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. 
PWI1/A, he has deposed with respect to 6 cases relating to the members of SIMI and pertaining to the State of 
Kerala. 


Mr. Vimaladitya has deposed that the Crime number 257/2008, PS Mundakayam of Idukki District, Kerala 
was registered under Sections 122, 124A, 153A, 120B IPC and 10 and 13 of the UAPA and Section 25, 27 of 
Arms Act. It is alleged in this case that the members of SIMI had assembled at an isolated place and 
conducted physical training and arms training there. They marked some signs on the rocks and promoted 
enmity between different groups. They committed the activities prejudicial to the integrity of the nation. This 
case was transferred to NIA and re-registered as RC—04/2010/NIA/DLI on 21.01.2010. The Special Court for 
Trial of NIA Case, Ernakulam, convicted 18 persons vide the judgment dated 14.05.2018, Ex. PW1/B. 


12.1.1.a For consideration of this Tribunal, the following extract of the judgment dated 14.05.2018, is 
pertinent to be reproduced: 


“(121) To sum up, the oral evidence of PWs 2 to 4, 6, 9 to 11 and 24 convincingly proves 
the presence of the accused No.1 to 7, 11, 14, 15, 24, 26, 29, 30, 33, 34, 36 and 38 at 
Vagamon on 10th, 11th and 12th of December 2007. Their evidence further proves that 
three tents were erected in the property of PW4 and a camp was conducted there in from 
10.12.2007 to 12.12.2007. Their evidence further proves the presence of cars and bikes 
including MOI and MO2 near and around the tents. Their evidence also proves that 
motorcycle racing and swimming practice were conducted as part of the training camp. The 
identification of the accused Nos. 2, 4, 7, 33, 34, 36 and 38 in the court by PWs 3, 4, 9 and 
24 was corroborated by their identification in the test identification parade. The recovery of 
MO3 glass pieces and MOI5 Thermocol under section 27 of the Evidence Act and the 
seizure of MOS pellets from the scene of occurrence have also been well proved by the 
prosecution. The prosecution has also proved the seizure of MOI car and MO9 to MO14 
mats from it. The scientific evidence establishes that M03 series and MOs 9 to 14 contain 
the mixture of Potassium Chloride, Aluminum powder and Sulfur which are explosive 
substance and MOS is a fired projectile from a firearm. The prosecution has also succeeded 
in establishing the conduct of the accused as admissible piece of evidence under section 8 of 
the Evidence Act in pointing out various places in Wagamon where the tents were pitched, 
the camp was conducted and various training practices in connection with the camp were 
taken place, lodges where the accused stayed during and immediately after the camp and 
the shop from where the air gun was purchased. The confession given by the accused No. 34 
under section 164 Cr.P.C. implicating himself as well as the accused No.1, 3, 4, 7, 15 and 
36 also stands proved. The prosecution has also proved that SIMI is an unlawful/terrorist 
organization as defined under the UAPA, 1967 and the accused No.1 to 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 
19, 22, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 and 34 are members of SIMI.” 


12.1.1.b The appeal against the said judgment is stated to be pending before the Kerala High Court. 


12.1.2 


12.1.3 


The witness PW1 has further deposed regarding the Case Crime number 159/2006, PS Binanipuram of 
Ernakulam Rural Police District was registered for the offences punishable under Sections 120B & 124 IPC 
and Sections 10 & 13 (1) (b) of UAPA. It is alleged that a secret meeting of SIMI members took place and 
pamphlets and books containing principles and views of the banned SIMI were distributed amongst the 
participants. The case was transferred to the NIA and re-registered as RC—03/2010/NIA/DLI on 21.01.2020. 
5 out of 17 accused persons were convicted by the Special Court on 25.11.2015. The Kerala High Court set 
aside the conviction by way of the order dated 12.04.2019. The Supreme Court of India upheld the decision 
of the High Court on 21.09.2023. 


Crime number 356/2008, PS- Edakkad, Kannur district- It is stated that this case was registered for the 
offences punishable under Section 3, read with Sections 13(2), 16, 18, 38 and 39 of UAPA and Sections 
120B, 121, 121A, 124A of IPC. The genesis of the case is from the surveillance of one Abdul Jaleel (A1) 
and the FIR registered suo motu by Sub Inspector, Edakkad Police Station, Kannur as Crime No. 356/2008. 
Al, arrested on the same date was kept under surveillance for his involvement with the banned organisation 
SIMI. Al was found using two mobile numbers 9744382047 and 960579262 alternatively. The call details of 
the first mobile number on examination revealed that number to have been deactivated after 05.10.2008 and 
ten calls having been received by Al on the Ist and 2nd of October, 2008 from Jammu & Kashmir (J&K) . 
Inquiries with the intelligence agencies revealed that the calls could be related to terrorists shot dead in 
Kashmir. 


12.1.3.a It is alleged that the 24 accused persons between the years 2006-2008 had hatched a criminal 
conspiracy in Kannur and other places in India and abroad with intent to facilitate and promote terrorism and 
thereby, waged war against the Government of India. They conspired with the proscribed terrorist 
organisation, LeT. The accused persons under the leadership of the accused T. Naseer conducted Jihadi 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 65 


12.1.4 


12.1.5 


12.1.6 


12.1.7 


12.2 


12.2.1 


12.2.2 


classes and selected other four accused persons for training in LeT Camp in Jammu and Kashmir. These 
accused persons trained in weapons in Jammu and Kashmir to wage war against the Government of India and 
while undergoing training, three of them were killed in exchange of fire with Indian Security Forces while 
the fourth managed to escape. The case was re-registered by the NIA as 02/2010/NIS/DLI. The Special Court 
for Trial of NIA cases convicted 13 out of 24 accused persons. The Kerala High Court vide the order dated 
09.05.2022 (Ex. PW1/D) upheld the conviction of 10 accused persons while acquitting the remaining three. 
(Emphasis added) 


Crime number 448/2010, PS — Kozhikode City- The 7५७1 has stated that this case was registered under 
Sections 124A, 153A read with Section 34 IPC in relation to a raid conducted at a bookshop and certain 
material, including a hard disk containing statements on questioning the secular values of India and other 
factors capable of inciting disaffection towards other religions and capable of creating communal 
disharmony, were found and seized. The following persons are arrayed as accused in the case: P.K. 
Abdurahiman, S. Shanavas, Mahin C.A, Abdul Raasik and Haneef. K. T. 


Crime number 533/2013, PS — Nadakkavu was registered under Sections 153A and 153B IPC with respect to 
publication and exhibition of a Malayalam Book "Dahvathum Jihadum” which was a translation of the book 
“Jahiliath ke Khilaf Jung”. The book contained sentences and ideas to promote enmity and hatred between 
different religions and questioned the secular values of India. Usman P., P K Abdulrahiman and Mujeeb 
Rahman were chargesheeted in the case as accused. 


Crime number 697/2013, PS — Nadakkavu under Section 153A and 153B IPC pertained to the seizure of a 
book, which was translation of English book “MileStone” written by Shaheed Sayyid Khutub. The book 
contained imputation and assertions promoting disharmony and feelings of enmity and hatred between 
different communities and different religions, and questioning the secular values of India. Muhammed 
Hashim @ Hafsa, P.K Abdurahiman, and Siddiq T.P. were arrayed as accused in the said case. It is stated by 
this witness that the cases bearing no. 448/2010, 533/2013 and 697/2013 are investigated against the SIMI 
activists, chargesheets were filed and the same are being tried by the respective trial courts. 


It is further stated by the witness PW1 that these cases as well as facts revealed during their investigation 
show that former members of SIMI are continuing to be actively engaged with the criminal justice system. 


The Government has examined ACP Ved Prakash as the witness PW4. This witness has deposed 
regarding FIR No. 532/2001 registered under Sections 3, 10 and 13 of the UAPA, read with Sections 153A, 
153B and 120B IPC on 28.09.2001 at PS - New Friends Colony, Delhi, (investigated by Special Cell). This 
case was registered in furtherance of information received by SI Ajay Kumar Singh of PS - New Friends 
Colony regarding the holding of a press conference by the operatives of the banned organisation SIMI at 
Zakir Nagar, New Delhi. A raid was conducted by the police and the office bearers and the members of SIMI 
were found raising slogans against the Indian government for banning the said organisation. Four of the 
members, namely Shahid Badar, Irfan Ahmed, Md. Khalid and Saif Nachan were arrested from the spot but 
the other escaped. Incriminating material in the form of video and audio cassettes containing provocative, 
anti-national and anti-religion content, posters of SIMI, computer, floppy disks, photographs of SIMI 
activists while being trained and copies of 'Islamic Movement' magazines were recovered. 


The witness has stated that the charge sheet, of the case mentioned above, was filed by the Special Cell, 
Delhi Police against the accused persons namely Shahid Badar (erstwhile President of SIMI), Irfan Ahmed 
(Asstt. Office Secretary), Mohammed Khalid (Asstt. Manager SIMI), Saif Nachan (Office Manager cum 
Circulation Manager of SIMI), Javed Iqbal (Sympathiser) and Mohd. Naiyar for the offences under Sections 
3, 10 and 13 of the UAPA, read with Sections 124A, 153A and 120B of IPC. In the said case, the following 
accused persons were got pronounced as proclaimed offenders: Abdul Subhan @ Abdullah (English Editor 
and writer), Safdar Hussain Nagori (Secretary General of SIMI and Chief Editor Hindi Press Secretary of 
SIMD), Shahbaz Hussain @ Shahbaz Ahmad (Hindi editor and Press Secretary of SIMI), Abdullah Danish 
(SIMI activist & writer), Hanif Sheikh (SIMI activist) and Noman Badar @ Falahi. All these absconding 
accused persons had subsequently been arrested, except for the accused Hanif Sheikh@ Hanif Hudai @ 
Mohd. Haneef. The arrested accused persons had disclosed the name of Hanif Sheikh. The police witnesses, 
namely HC Rajbir Singh, Ct. Abad Khan and Ct. Wahid who were part of the raiding team had also disclosed 
the name of this accused. During the examination of the witnesses in the trial of the case, the name of the 
accused Hanif Sheikh was again disclosed. Finally, the said accused Hanif Sheikh was arrested on 
22.02.2024. A supplementary charge sheet concerning this accused was filed on 24.04.2024 in the competent 
court. 


It has been deposed by this witness PW4 that the accused Hanif Sheikh is an active member of SIMI and was 
on the editorial board of the “Islamic Movement” magazine published by the said organisation in Hindi, 
English and Urdu. By publishing this magazine, this accused and other cadres of SIMI were sharing their 
radical ideology with Muslim youth and instigating them for jihad by indulging in anti-national activities. 
During investigation, the accused Hanif Sheikh had identified SIMI's headquarters in Delhi. He disclosed that 


66 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


12.2.3 


12.2.4 


12.2.5 


12.3 


12.3.1 


12.3.2 


12.3.3 


the articles in the magazine were published after his proofreading and that he had worked in the magazine 
under the name Haneef Hudai. It was also found during the investigation that the said accused was involved 
in the following cases: FIR No. 158/1998 dated 01.12.1998 registered under Sections 153B, 295 and 34 IPC; 
FIR No. 104/1999 registered under Sections 153A IPC; FIR No. 3038/1999 registered under Sections 144 Cr. 
P.C and 188 IPC and FIR No. 3035/2001 dated 17.12.2001, registered under Sections 3, 10 and 11 of the 
UAPA. All these FIRs were registered at PS-Bazarpeth, Bhusawal, Maharashtra. This witness has mentioned 
the difficulties faced by the Delhi Police in nabbing the said absconding accused Hanif Sheikh. The relevant 
extract of his affidavit is reproduced as follows: 


“It was a herculean task for the team of Special Cell to identify, locate and apprehend 
accused Hanif Sheikh. Assistance was also taken from the local police staff of PS New Friends 
Colony, posted at the time of incident resulting in the present FIR. After diligent efforts and 
deploying of secret informers, his activity was zero down in the area of Bhusawal, Distt. 
Jalgaon, Maharashtra, from where he used to visit other parts of the country to propagate his 
idea of Islamic movement.”’ 


Furthermore, while placing reliance on the documents filed along with his affidavit of evidence, Ex. PW4/A, 
ACP Ved Prakash has also stated that the SIMI activities are still continuing and he had mentioned the fact 
that the Sleeper Cells of the said association are still active. The relevant extract of his deposition dated 
10.05.2024 in this regard is as follows: 


“The fresh recoveries in the nature mobile connectivity chart, fresh evidence, WhatsApp 
images, multiple voter ID cards, and another mobile frequency of call data of the accused 
Uanif Sheikh(marked as 'Ex.PW4/C1, Ex.PW4/C2, Ex.PW4/C3, Ex.PW4/C4 and Ex.PW4/C5 
at internal page nos.21 to 26, 27 to 29, 63 to 65, 71 to 73 and 79 to 82,respectively of the 
charge-sheet) demonstrates continued activity in pursuance to the objective of banned 
organization SIMI and presence of their Sleeper Cell Operatives.” 


He has further stated that the accused persons named in the case had clear motives and intentions to 
indoctrinate members of his community for promoting unlawful activities within India. They have conspired 
to overthrow the established Indian government aiming to replace democracy. Towards this objective, they 
had Joined SIMI and regularly attended SIMI Conference to establish Islamic rule in India. 


The testimony of the witness PW4 is successful in showing that despite the ban on SIMI, its activities are 
continuing. The erstwhile members of the association are still on run and some of them could only be 
apprehended by the investigating agencies with extreme efforts. It is also remarkable to note that the accused 
Hanif Sheikh had managed to evade his arrest in the above-mentioned case for more than 22 years. He could 
not have done this by himself alone. In light of this fact, the existence of an underground network of the 
members of the unlawful association even after several bans on it by the Government cannot be ruled out. 


Crime No. 324 of 2001, P.S.- Colonelganj, District- Prayagraj (Allahabad); Case Crime No. 384 of 
2001, P.S. Colonelganj, District- Prayagraj and Case Crime No. 246 of 2008, P.S-Ghoorpur, District- 
Prayagraj: The Government has examined Mr. Vivek Yadav, A.C.P., Prayagraj regarding these three cases 
pending trial/appeal as on date in district Prayagraj against the members of the banned association SIMI. 


The witness in his affidavit Ex. PW 5/A has deposed that the Crime No. 324 of 2001 was registered under 
Section 153A, 225, 295, 120B of I.P.C at PS- Colonelganjon the information that on 29.08.2001 Shamsher 
Alam was caught by two public witnesses namely Pawan Tripathi and Raj Kumar Verma at Shradha Cassette, 
Katra while recording anti-national contents in audio cassettes. While Shamsher Alam was being taken to the 
police station, two persons namely Mohd. Arif and Uber tried to get him freed from the public witnesses. The 
contents of the cassettes were listened to by 8.1. Ram Das Prasad and it was found that the contents were 
related to Osama Bin Laden and were also against America. It also had the statements that the Muslims of 
Kashmir are in danger and the Muslims of the whole world should be united. Hate speeches were also there in 
the cassette regarding Hindus and Muslims. He stated that the investigation revealed that the accused persons 
involved in the case were related to the SIMI. 


PWS has further stated that the Case Crime No. 384 of 2001 was registered under Sections 153A, 124A & 
295A LP.C. & Sections 3(3), 10 & 13 of UAPA at P.S. Colonelganj with the allegations that on 26.09.2001 a 
source information was received on which the police officials reached the spot and found that the member of 
SIMI namely Jalaluddin, Dr. Arshadullah, Alimullah, Mahibullah and 4-5 other persons were raising 
outrageous anti-national slogans and abusive words against Bharat Mata. They were shouting "Are 
Musalmano Jago Hindustan Ke Teen Tukde Karke Hinduo Ke Seene Par Baithkar Unka Raj Cheenkar 
Muslmano Ka Raj Sthapit Karna hai’’. The case was registered and the charge sheet was submitted before the 
court concerned where the trial is in progress. 


It is stated further in the evidence by this witness that_Case Crime No. 246 of 2008 was registered under 
Section 489A, 489B, 489C & 489D at P.S-Ghoorpur ason receiving a source information on 14.08.2008, the 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 67 


12.3.4 


12.4 


12.4.1 


12.4.2 


12.4.3 


12.4.4 


police officials of the police station Ghoorpur, had reached the Railway Crossing Iradatganj, and arrested the 
accused namely Amir Mahfooj. He had in his possession forged and counterfeit currency notes of Rs.500 and 
Rs.200/- total amounting to Rs. 6500/-. On questioning he disclosed that he was a member of SIMI. His name 
was on record as a SIMI member in the police station. The said accused was also involved in four other 
criminal cases viz. Case Crime No. 15 of 2003 registered under Sections 153A & 1538 I.P.C. and Sections 
3(1) & 13 of UAPA at P.S.- Ghoorpur, District- Prayagraj; Case Crime No. 246 of 2008 registered under 
Sections 489-A,B,C and D of I.P.C at P.S- Ghoorpur, District-Prayagraj; Case Crime No. 264 of 2008 
registered under Section 3 N.S.A. at P.S.- Ghoorpur, District- Prayagraj and Case Crime No. 442 of 2001 
registered under Sections 3, 13 & 15 of UAPA at Surat, Gujarat. 


It is stated that the Trial Court vide the judgment dated 12.01.2012 ( EX. PWS/E) had convicted the accused 
for the offences under Sections 489B and 489C IPC. He was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for a period 
of 8 years and fine of Rs. 50,000/- for the offence under Section 489B IPC. He was sentenced rigorous 
imprisonment for a period of 5 years and fine of Rs. 25,000/- for the offence under Section 489C IPC. The 
accused filed the Criminal Appeal bearing no 543 of 2012 before the Allahabad High Court against the said 
conviction. The High Court granted the bail to the accused on 21.05.2012 and the appeal is still pending for 
final hearing. 


The Government has examined PW6 Mr. Gaurav Sharma, Circle Officer, Distt.- Azamgarh, Uttar 
Pradesh regarding five cases pending against the members of banned organization SIMI which are under trial 
in district Azamgarh. He has filed his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. PW6/A. 


He deposed in the affidavit that the Case Crime No. 129 of 2001 was registered under Sections 153A, 153B, 
505C & 505(2) of LP.C. and 10 & 13 of UAPA at P.S.-Saraimeer, District- Azamgarh. The FIR was 
registered with the allegations that on 27.09.2001 S.H.O. Ravendra Prakash received information that Mohd. 
Saleem who was an active member of SIMI was pasting posters at Saraimeer Roadways and other public 
places regarding Osama Bin Laden. He raised the slogan "Osama Bin laden Jindabad". He also gave 
speeches aimed at creating hatred between Hindus and Muslims. He was trying to connect the Muslim youth 
to the banned organisation SIMI. After investigation, the Investigating Officer submitted the charge sheet on 
12.02.2002. At present the trial is pending before the Trial Court and it is at the stage of evidence. 


PW6 further deposed that the Case Crime No. 186 of 2001 was registered under Sections 153A, 153B & 505 
of I.P.C. and Sections 3(1), 10 & 13 of UAPA at P.S.- Nijamabad, District- Azamgarh. The allegations in the 
FIR are that on 27.09.2001 complainant Smt. Narendar Kaur Bhatia, Sub-Inspector, P.S.- Nijyamabad, 
District- Azamgarh during patrolling found six persons namely Javed Ahmad, Makbool Ahmad, Sahjad 
Ahmad, Farook Ahmad, Abdul Rahman and Mohd. Faiz raising anti-national slogans such as “Jslam 
Zindabad, Laden Zindabad” “Bharat Ko Hum Mitayenge” near Idgah Village- Fariah. The slogans made 
were against the national interest, unity and integrity of the country and had the potential to disrupt the 
communal harmony and peace. Hearing the slogans, several Hindu youths started assembling at the National 
Highway due to which a possibility of outbreak of communal riots arose. The above said six persons were 
claiming that they were the members of SIMI. They were arrested at the spot. The Investigating Officer 
submitted the charge sheet on 20.06.2002 before the concerned Court and the trial is in progress. 


It is deposed by the witness that the Case Crime No. 09 of 2019 was registered under Sections 420, 467, 468 
& 471 of LP.C. and Section 8 of Notary Act at P.S-Nijamabad, District- Azamgarh. This First Information 
Report was registered on receiving the information that one accused, namely Mohd. Faiz who was a SIMI 
activist and under trial accused in First Information Report No. 186 of 2001, had obtained a passport on 
forged and fabricated documents. He also travelled on the said passport to countries like Libya, Malaysia and 
the UAE. Information was also received that the said person was about to flee the country. A look out card 
notice (LOC) was immediately opened against the accused Mohd. Faiz. He was arrested on 27.01.2019 at the 
immigration counter of Varanasi Airport, when he was trying to flee from the country. After investigation and 
collecting the evidences, the Investigating Officer submitted the charge sheet on 30.01.2019 and the trial is 
pending before the concerned court. 


Regarding the Case Crime No. 1058 of 2000 registered under Sections 153A, 505, 295 & 1208 of I.P.C. at 
P.S- Kotwali, District- Azamgarh, the PW6 has deposed that the FIR was registered with the allegations that 
on 08.09.2000, Inspector in Charge B.B.L Jaiswal received information that the President of the banned 
organization SIMI Dr. Sahid Badra along with Faizan Ahmad and Abdul Noor had assembled in Harioudh 
Kala Bhavan and they all gave speeches capable of causing hatred between the Hindus and Muslims. They 
also justified the Aligarh Muslim University and Agra Bomb blasts. They also said that there was no pressure 
of Government and that every action would be retaliated. They stated that recruitment in SIMI will be 
continued in future. They also stated that Kashmir is only for the Muslims and it cannot be a part of India. 
After investigation, the Investigating Officer submitted the charge sheet before the Trial Court on 16.10.2001 
under Section 153-A, 505, 295, 120-B of I.P.C. and the trial is in progress. 


68 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


12.4.5 


12.4.6 


12.5 


12.5.1 


12.5.2 


12.5.3 


12.6 


12.6.1 


With respect to the Case Crime No. 979 of 2001 under Sections 153, 153A, 1538 & 505 of I.P.C and 3(1), 
10 & 12 of UAPA P.S Kotwali Sadar, District- Azamgarh, Mr Gaurav Sharma has deposed that the case was 
registered as on 27.09.2001, a source information was received at Police Station- Kotwali Sadar that some 
persons have gathered in front of the house of Minister Sohail Ahmad at Awas Vikas Colony, Gulami Ka 
Pura and were giving anti-national speeches for inciting public to create outrage in the society. They were 
also asking the Muslim youth to join SIMI. The speech was given in order to create rift between Hindu and 
Muslim communities and to spread communal hatred. On such information, the police officials reached the 
crime scene, and arrested nine persons namely- Amir Rashadi, Suhail Ahmad, Nadeem Ahmad, Barkatullah, 
Rizwan Ahmad, Imtiyaaz, Ahmad, Abdul Noor, Habib Ahmad and Abdul Rashid. The police also recovered 
incriminating materials such as pamphlets and registration forms meant for joining SIMI. The trial of the case 
is in progress before the concerned Court. 


It is categorically deposed by the witness that the ban on SIMI should be continued in the interest of the 
nation otherwise the activists will again start their unlawful activities. 


The Government has examined Ms. Shweta Kumari, posted as Assistant Commissioner of Police 
(ACP) Sisamau, Kanpur Nagar as the witness PW7. In her affidavit of evidence Ex. PW7/A, she deposed 
regarding two cases pending in District- Kanpur Nagar against the members of banned organization SIMI in 
which trial is pending. 


She deposed that the Case Crime No.39 of 2001 was registered under Section - 188, 153A, 153B, of LP.C. & 
Section 10 of Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1932 at P.S.- Chamanganj, District- Kanpur. On 27.09.2001 
S.H.O. Shri Anil Kumar Sharma, Police Station- Chamanganj, Kanpur received information that members of 
SIMI were giving anti-national speeches. When the S.H.O. reached Humayun Bag, he saw five members of 
the banned SIMI, namely Mohd Suleman, Mohd Anwair, Mohd Saileem, Mohd Riyaz Ahamad and Mohd 
Amir giving anti-national speeches. They were stating that they did not believe in the Indian Constitution and 
the National Flag. They were speaking loudly that they will establish Pakistan in Kanpur andthey will neither 
sing nor would allow anyone to sing Vande Mataram. They further said that they will demolish the temples 
and will establish terror amongst Hindus. The S.H.O. registered case crime no. 39/2001 against these persons 
for making such statements. It is further submitted that the trial is at the stage of summoning of the accused 
persons. 


Regarding the Case Crime No. 84 of 2001 was registered under Section 115, 120B, 121, 121A, 122, 123 and 
124 of I.P.C. at P.S.- Bajariya, District- Kanpur Nagarthe PW7 deposed that on 03.08.2001 accused persons, 
namely Wasif and Mohammad Jubair were arrested and explosives were recovered from their possession. 
During interrogation it was found that the accused person and their associate Mumtaz are involved in terrorist 
and anti-national activities. They were related to terrorist organizations such as Hizbul Mujahiddin, Jaish-e- 
Mohammad and Lashkar-e-Taiba and were involved in several terrorist and anti-national activities in the 
country. They were making plans to take revenge from persons/parties like the BJP/RSS etc. who as per them 
were involved in the demolition of Babri Masjid. They also were planning to conduct blasts at several places 
in the country. It was also found that the SIMI was planning to train them at the Pakistan - Kashmir border 
and the said accused persons were planning to wage a war against India. During investigation it was revealed 
that four years prior to the incident mentioned above, Mohd. Amir, Mohd. Salman and other members related 
to SIMI namely Dr. Abrar, brother of Dr. Abrar, Suleman Maulana, Mohd. Hussain, Hasmati Hafiz Ishtiyak 
Ejaj and Adil Irshad were participating in the weekly meetings of SIMI. In the trial, the statement of Insp. 
Brajveer Singh has established that explosives, RDX, Rocket Launcher, Detonator, Remote Control Pistol, 
Air Gun were recovered from the possession of the accused persons. It is deposed that the trial has been 
transferred from Kanpur Nagar to Special Judge/NIA Lucknow and the case is at the stage of evidence. 


Ms. Shweta Kumari has deposed on oath that in view of the facts which have emerged during the 
investigation and trial of the above mentioned cases, it is clear that the ban on SIMI should be continued in 
the national interest of the nation otherwise its activists will again start their unlawful activities. 


PW8 Mr. Dharmendra Singh Raghuvanshi is posted as Assistant Commissioner of Police, Bazar 
Khala, District- Lucknow. He has been examined by the Government regarding Case crime no. 25 of 2003 
registered under Sections 153A, 153B, 297 and 420 IPC and Section 7 Criminal Law (Amendment) Act at 
P.S.- Sahadatganj, District- Lucknow. He has tendered his evidence by way of the affidavit Ex. PW 8/A. 


PWS8 has stated that the officials of P.S.- Sahadatganj, District- Lucknow were on patrolling on 25.01.2003. 
One police informer gave information that some SIMI members who were earlier arrested were still 
recruiting new members into the organization. The police officials reached the spot and arrested two persons, 
namely Ubaidurrahman and Mohd. Arif Mahfoos. Incriminating articles like leaflets of SIMI, Compact Disk, 
Books in Urdu language, ten audio Cassettes, three Floppy Discs, one Album, Pocket Diary and Telephone 
Diary were recovered from the possession of above-mentioned persons. On questioning the accused persons 
they disclosed that they worked for SIMI and said that "S/MI Ke Liye Hame Allah Tala Ne Banaya Hai". 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 69 


12.6.2 
12.6.3 


12.7 


12.7.1 


12.7.2 


12.7.3 


12.7.4 


12.7.5 


After investigation of the case, the charge sheet was submitted. The trial of the case is in progress. 


The witness deposed that from the knowledge acquired by him during the course of his service and record of 
the case, it was manifest that the members of SIMI have been promoting anti-national and separatist 
sentiments prejudicial to the integrity and security of the country. They have been spearheading / conspiring / 
masterminding / facilitating / escalating / anti-national movements and unlawful activities inside the country. 
They were also tacitly supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the country. 


The Government has further examined PW9 Mr. Kuldeep Tiwari, Deputy Superintendent of Police, 
Anti-Terror Squad Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow. In his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. PW9/A, he deposed 
regarding six cases pending trial in the State of Uttar Pradesh against the banned organization SIMI and its 
members. 


PW9 deposed that the Case Crime No. 449 of 2002 was registered under Section 153A, 1538, 420 of I.P.C. 
and Section 13 of UAPA at Police Station- G.R.P. Charbagh, Lucknow. Complainant in the case is Shri. 
Ashok Kumar Singh, Police Inspector, Police Station-G.R.P. Charbagh, Lucknow. The case is related to the 
distribution of published literature and objectionable pamphlets in Urdu, at the Lucknow City Railway 
Station on 05.05.2002 by one Nauman Badra. The said publications were carrying material having potential 
to disrupt and inflate communal hatred between Hindus and Muslims. The accused persons, namely Nauman 
Badra, claiming himself to be the Secretary of Uttar Pradesh Branch of SIMI was also encouraging the public 
to be part of SIMI organization. The accused was arrested on the spot. After investigation, the Investigating 
Officer submitted a charge sheet and the trial is in progress. 


Regarding the Case Crime No. 609 of 2001 registered under Section 153A, 153B, 124A, 298, 505 & 120B 
IPC at Police Station-Kotwali Sadar, District- Gorakhpur, the PW9 has deposed that on 21.09.2001 Inspector 
in Charge, Ram Nagina Rai received information that the National President of SIMI namely Shahid Badra 
Falahi and Zonal President of SIMI Hamam Ahmad had given speech against the State and Central 
governments in the meeting held at Madarsa Anjuman Islamiya Khunipur. Their speech had contents which 
could cause hatred between Hindus and Muslims. They claimed that they only worked for Islam and did not 
care for the welfare of the State. They encouraged the Muslim youth to work for Islam and to get involved in 
Jihad. It is further submitted that the trial of the case is in progress. 


With respect to the Case Crime No. 510 of 2001 registered under Section 153A I.P.C. at Police Station- 
Mohammadabad, District-Mau, the PW9 has stated that on 26.09.2001 during a routine checking, Inspector 
Vijay Shankar Tiwari, Police Station Mohammadabad, District-Mau received an information that in the area 
of Mohammadabad some persons were giving anti-national speeches. The police reached the spot and found 
three persons making anti-national speeches saying that America was showing its hooliganism and this kind 
of work of America was against Islam and it was dangerous to the Islam. They were saying that the Hindus of 
Hindustan and the Central Government were totally against the Islam and were helping America. They 
claimed that they were active members of SIMI. They stated that their organization SIMI will not allow 
America, Hindus and the BJP government of Hindustan to succeed in their aim. They were asking the people 
in the audience to get ready for Jihad and to unite against the Kafirs of Hindustan so that they could succeed 
in their aim. They said “/nki Eent se Eent Baja Deni Hai”. They asked the audience to fill up a form and 
become a member of SIMI and be a part of Jihad. They stated that the Hindus were always their enemy. For 
making the said speech, three persons namely Mohd Alim, Mohd Talib and Kalam were arrested. SIMI 
membership forms dated 05, 06 and 07 October 2001 and posters related to conference of SIMI at Karbala 
Maidan, Azamgarh were seized from their possession. The case is under trial before the concerned court. It 
was further submitted that from perusal of the above mentioned facts, it is necessary in the interest of 
National Integrity that the ban on SIMI be continued. 


Mr. Tiwari has further deposed that the Case Crime No. 396 of 2001 was registered under Sections 153A, 
153B, 295B of I.P.C. and Section 10 and 13 of UAPA at Police Station — Bhadohi, District- Sant Ravidas 
Nagar. The complainant is Laxman Rai, Police Inspector, Police Station- Bhadohi, District- Sant Ravidas 
Nagar. On 27.09.2001 the police received a source information that anti-national speech was being given by a 
person namely Sohail Ahmad at Ajmullah Chauraha. It was also informed that unlawful activities are being 
carried out by SIMI activists. The police reached the said location and witnessed the speech in which 
statements like "muslim bhaiyon Islam ke liye Jihad chhedo", "Osama Bin Laden ki madad ke liye ek ho Jao”’ 
and "Hindu se badla lena hai” were being made. The police arrested the following five accused persons: 
Suheb Alam, Meraj Khalid, Anwar Raseed, Abid Imran and Ehtesham Ali. Incriminating materials connected 
with SIMI such as anti-national posters, pamphlets, books, scripts and video cassettes were also recovered 
from the place. 


It is further deposed by the PW9 that the Case Crime No. 733 of 2001 was registered under Sections 153A 
and 153B of I.P.C. and Section 7 of Criminal Law (Amendment) Act and Section 10 and 13 of UAPA at 
Police Station-Kotwali Mathura, District-Mathura. The complainant in this case is Shri. B.B. Singh, 
Inspector, Police Station-Kotwali Mathura, District- Mathura. On 27.09.2001, the police arrested four persons 


70 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


12.7.6 


12.7.7 


12.8 


12.8.1 


12.8.2 


namely Julfikar, Rashiduddin, Farman and Shahid, while they were pasting incriminating posters on the walls 
of the city. The contents of the said posters were found capable of inciting communal hatred and disrupting 
the communal harmony and peace. Thereafter, three persons namely Ashfaq, Rahees Ahmad and Nauman 
were alsoarrested in connection with the case. The case is still pending trial before the Court. 


DSP Kuldeep Tiwari, PW9 has further deposed that there were five cases registered vide a common FIR No. 
590/2014 at Police Station- Kotwali City, District- Bijnor viz. Crime No. 964/2014 under Sections 121, 122 
of IPC; Crime no. 965/2014 under Sections 13, 18, 23 of UAPA; Crime No. 966/2014 under Section 25 Arms 
Act; Crime No.967/2014 under Section 25 Arms Act and Crime No. 968/2014 under Sections 4 and 5 of 
Explosives Substances Act. He further stated that there were three crime case numbers registered vide a 
common FIR No. 597/2014 viz. Case Crime No. 974/2014 under Sections 121A, 122, 120B IPC; Case Crime 
No. 975/2014 under Sections 4 and 5 of Explosive Substances Act and Case Crime No. 976 of 2014 under 
Sections 13, 18, 23 of UAPA. The PW9 has deposed that there were three crime case numbers registered vide 
a common FIR No. 598/2014 viz. Case Crime no. 977/2014 under Sections 121A, 122, 216, 120B IPC; Case 
Crime No. 978 of 2014 under Sections 4 and 5 Explosive Substances Act and Case Crime No.979/2014 under 
Sections 13, 18, 23 of UAPA. 


Facts of the case are to the effect that on 12.09.2014 one bomb blast took place in the house of Leela Devi at 
Jatan Mohalla, Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh. During investigation, it was revealed that six tenants were residing in 
the house of Leela Devi on the day of the incident. After analysis of CCTV footage and other material, six 
persons namely Mohd Amjad, Zakir, Sheikh Mehboob, Mohd Salim, Aslam and Mohd Ejajuddin @ Ayaz 
were indentified. All the accused persons had absconded after the incident took place. During investigation it 
was found that these _six persons were associated with the banned organization SIMI and had escaped from 
Khandwa Jail, Madhya Pradesh on 10.10.2013. The other arrested accused persons in this case were Husna, 
Nadeem, Furkan, Raees and Abdulla who had provided logistic support and had facilitated the escape of the 
above mentioned accused persons. On the basis of the above, 3 FIRs having total 11 case crimes were 
registered. After registration, these FIRs were firstly transferred to ATS UP Police, Lucknow and 
subsequently to the NIA which resulted in registration of FIR no. RC-0I/2015/NIA/DLI, RC- 
10/2015/NIA/DLI & RC-11/2015/NIA/DLI. After investigation by the NIA, the charge sheet was filed. The 
accused persons namely Husna @ Husana, Abdullah, Raees Ahmed, Nadeem and Fukran were convicted by 
the trial court vide the judgment dated 30.06.2022, Ex. PW9/G. 


Mr. Peetam Pal Singh posted as Deputy Superintendent of Police/ CO, Dhaurahara, District- 
Lakhimpur Khiri has been examined by the Government as the witness PW10. In his affidavit of evidence 
Ex. PW10/A he has deposed regarding two cases pending in District- Lakhimpur Khiri against the member of 
banned organization SIMI in which trial is pending in the respective Courts of law. 


He deposed that the Case Crime No. 1035 of 2001 was registered under Section 10 & 13 of UAPA at P.S. 
Kotwali Nagar, District- Lakhimpur Khiri. On 29.09.2001, during the normal course of checking, the officials 
of police station - Kotwali Sadar found three persons raising slogans in favour of Osama Bin Laden and 
Afghanistan. They were distributing pamphlets regarding the ideology of SIMI. When the police personnel 
requested them not to engage in such unlawful activities, they retaliated vigorously and again started raising 
slogans. As there was imminent apprehension of flaring up of communal tension and hatred, the police 
arrested all the 3 accused persons namely Shakeel Ahamad, Ejaj Aslam and Mahboob Alam. The FIR was 
registered as mentioned above. The witness further stated that the statements of the witnesses recorded by the 
investigating officer under Section 161 Cr.P.C. have revealed that the accused persons were the members of 
the banned organization SIMI. The trial of the case is stated to be at the stage of evidence. 


PW 10 has further deposed in his affidavit that the Case Crime No. 658 of 2000 was registered under Sections 
153A, 153B, 295A & 505 (2) IPC, P.S.- Kotwali District- Lakhimpur. It is stated that on 29.09.2001, Mohd. 
Amir, the State President of SIMI held a press conference in Bilabi Hall. He stated that Lord Sri Ram is a 
fictitious character. He also insulted the Hindu religion. He said that the Muslim will themselves construct the 
Babri Masjid and that they have no belief in the Constitution of India. That Koran and Hadith are the highest 
Constitution. He stated that Kashmir was not a part of India. He further said that the Masjids of the country 
are calling Mohd. Ghaznavi. In the said press conference, Mohd Amir, Mohd Shakil, Mohd Kayyum, Ejaj 
Aslam, Gayasuddin, Sagir Ahamad and Mahboob Alam were also present. Pamphlets in Urdu containing hate 
speeches were distributed in the said meeting. The participants were asked not to obey the rule and 
Constitution of India. It is stated that all the witnesses have stated that there is involvement of SIMI members 
in the present case. Statements of witnesses namely Inspector Suraj Nath Yadav, Smt. Sudha Sharma, Smt. 
Raj Kumari Shukla, Umesh Kumar Mishra, Mistri Lal, Suraj Kumar and Kaushal Kishore recorded under 
section 161 Cr.P.C were relied on by the PW10 as Ex. PWIO/E. The case is stated to be at the stage of 
evidence. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 71 


12.9 


12.9.1 


12.9.2 


12.9.3 


12.9.4 


12.10 


12.10.1 


12.10.2 


The witness PW11 namely Mr. Amrinder Singh is posted as Circle Officer, Police Line, District- 
Moradabad. In his affidavit of evidence PW11/A, he has deposed regarding four cases pending in District- 
Moradabad, Uttar Pradesh against the members of the banned organization SIMI in which trial is pending. 


PW11 deposed that the Case Crime No. 1197 of 2001 registered under Sections 147, 153A & 1538 of I.P.C. 
and Sections 13(1) & 13(2) of UAPA at P.S.- Civil Line Sadar, District- Moradabad. A source information 
was received on 12.10.2001 by the S.H.O. Shri Suresh Veer that some persons were raising anti-national 
slogans and were distributing incriminating pamphlets. The S.H.O. concerned reached the spot and witnessed 
5 persons shouting slogans like "Taliban Zindabad, Hindustan Murdabad, America Murdabad, Meri Jaan 
Taliban, Osama Bin Zindabad". They were claiming that Hindustan is an anti-Islamic Country. They were 
protesting against the ban on SIMI organization ordered by the Central Government. The Police also 
recovered incriminating pamphlets which were dangerous to national security. The Police arrested the said 5 
accused persons namely- Mohd. Haneef, Mohd. Furkan, Mohd. Qadeer, Khurseed Ahmad and Jamal 
Mohammad. The Investigating officer investigated the matter properly and filed a charge sheet against the 
above -mentioned 5 accused persons. He deposed that from the investigation, it is clear that the above- 
mentioned accused were related to the banned organization "SIMI". 


Regarding the Case Crime No. 266 of 2001 registered under Sections 147, 148, 504, 506, 153A & 153B 
I.P.C. and Sections 3(1), 13(1) & 13(2) of UAPA at P.S.- Mugalpura, District- Moradabad, the PW11 
deposed that on 29.09.2001 pursuant to the notification issued by the Government of India regarding ban on 
SIMI, S.H.O. Mugalpura, Moradabad reached the office of SIMI which was in the house of Farjand Ali and 
started sealing the office. During the sealing, several young persons gathered at the spot and started shouting 
slogans like “SIMI Zindabad, Taliban Zindabad, Osama Bin Laden Zindabad, Bharat Sarkar Murdabad". 
They further tried to restrain the Police Officer from sealing the office. They further threatened to kill the 
Police Officials. The Police arrested the accused persons namely- Farjand Ali, Mohd. Imraan, Kadir, Mohd. 
Jamaal, Furkan, Mohd. Haneef, Vaseem, Simrej and Khursid. It is stated that the accused persons are on bail 
at present and they are not cooperating for a speedy trial. 


For the case Case Crime No. 270 of 2001 registered under Sections 147, 153A &153B IP.C. and Sections 
3(1), 13(1) & 13(2) of UAPA at P.S - Mugalpura, District- Moradabad, the witness deposed that the F.I.R 
was lodged on 07.10.2001 by the SHO, P.S- Mugalpura alleging that when he and his team were crossing the 
house of accused Furkaan, they found him and his associates Rizwan, Jamaal, Khurseed and Kadir Shouting 
slogans like "Taliban Zindabad, Afghanistan Zindabad, Hindustan me Taliban ki hukumat ho kar rahegi, 
Hindustan Murdabad". They were also inciting people for communal hatred. The S.H.O. along with his team 
arrested Rizwan however other accused persons fled away from the spot. They were arrested later on. The 
trial of the case is in progress. 


It is further submitted by the PW11 that the Case Crime No. 572 of 2001 registered under Sections 153A & 
153B LP.C. and Sections 3(1), 13(1) & 13(2) of UAPA at P.S- Nagfani, District- Moradabad. It is stated that 
while patrolling in the local jurisdiction on 11.11.2001, the officials of police station — Nagfani found that 6 
persons namely Mohsin, Sirmej, Tahir, Sahbaj Haider, Nigris and Dr. Irshad were assembled at a place and 
were making anti-national speeches. They were shouting "Muslim Bhaiyo Islam Khatre Me Hal""Islam Ka 
Sabse Bada Dusman America Hai""Jiska Saath BJP De Rahi Hai"" Jo Kasmir me Musalmano Ka Katal Kra 
Rahi Hai""Nigeria Ki Tarah Hame Bhi Badla Lena Hoga""Osama Bin Laden Ki Hame Madad Karni 
Chaiye""Sarkar Ka Takta Palatna Hai""Ham Giraftari Se Darte Nahi Hai" “ Hum SIMI Ke Kattar Sipahi 
Hai”. The Police arrested three accused persons Mohsin, Simrej and Tahir on the spot while the remaining 
three managed to escape. They surrendered later on. Presently the accused are on bail but they are not 
cooperating in the trial. 


The witness PW12 Mr. Pranay S. Nagvanshi is serving as S.P. (A.T.S.), P-H.Q., Bhopal, Madhya 
Pradesh. He was appointed as a Nodal Officer vide the order dated 04.07.2023 to represent the State of 
Madhya Pradesh before this Tribunal in cases relating to the banned organization SIMI. In his affidavit of 
evidence, Ex. PW12/A, he has deposed with respect to 02 cases where the Court has convicted the accused 
persons related to the banned association SIMI for various offences. 


Crime no. 434/13 was initially registered at P.S. Sendhwa, Distt. Badwani on 24.12.2013 for the commission 
of offences published under Sections 307, 34 IPC. Subsequently, it led to the registration of the Crime no. 
22/13 on 26.12.2013 in Police Station A.T.S./S.T.F. Bhopal under Sections 307, 34, 467, 468, 471, 120B and 
201 of IPC, Sections 25 and 27 of the Arms Act, Sections 3,4,5 and 6 Explosive Substance Act & 3, 10, 13 
and 13(1)(2) of the UAPA. Complainant in this case was Mr. Ajay Kaithwas, DSP-ATS, Bhopal. The case is 
related to the arrest of the prisoners related to the association SIMI and who had escaped after breaking from 
Khandwa jail and who were also wanted in the murder of the ATS Const. Sitaram & Const. Shiv Pratap. 


On 24.12.2013 at 02.40 AM, Mr. Ajay Kaithwas, DSP-ATS got a report lodged in Police Station Sendhwa, 
Distt. Badwani, that acting on an intelligence input regarding the possibility of SIMI terrorists coming to the 
border districts of Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh, to meet their associate Khalid in Solapur, Maharashtra, 


72 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


12.10.3 


12.10.4 


12.10.5 


12.11 


12.111 


12.11.2 


12.11.3 


the ATS and CTG team reached Kharkiya Guest House, near Sendhwa Village of Distt Badwani. At around 
09:30 PM on 23.12.2023, DSP Ajay Kaithwas present was at Sendhwa to take some medicines when he saw 
three suspicious persons. One of them resembled Khalid Ahmed, a wanted criminal. They all were given a 
chase. The identity of the remaining two individuals was subsequently confirmed as Abu Faizal and Irfan 
Nagori. Meanwhile, DSP Ajay Kaithawas also informed the ATS team which was assembled at Kharkiya 
Guest House. When an attempt was made to surround and arrest the said accused, they fired at the police 
force at the plateau near Nawalpur Warehouse. The police also retaliated and finally succeeded in capturing 
all three with weapons. Three country-made pistols, live cartridges and other items were seized from them. 
Two other companions of these accused persons namely Sadik and Umer were also arrested from Solapur, 
Maharashtra and from their possession explosive substances and bombs were recovered. 


After the investigation charge sheet was filed in the Court of the 24th Additional Sessions Judge and Special 
Judge, NIA, Bhopal. Vide the judgment dated 16.09.2022, Ex. PW12/E, the Court convicted the following 
accused persons in the said case: Irfan Nagori, Abu Faisal, Mohd. Sadik and Umer Dandoti and sentenced 
them to various terms of prison ranging from ten years rigorous imprisonment to life imprisonment. The 
absconded prisoners from Central Jail, Bhopal namely Amzad, Mehboob, Zakir, Saleek and Khalid were 
killed in a police encounter in Gunga Police Station, Distt Bhopal on 31.10.2016. The accused persons 
namely Aslam and Aijazuddin were killed in a police encounter in district Nalkunda, Telangana on 
04.04.2015. Accused Ismael, Irfan Muchhale, Aman and Gulrez were acquitted of all charges by the Court. 
This acquittal has been challenged in the Madhya Pradesh High Court. 


Crime no 01/2014 was registered at Police Station ATS/STF Bhopal on 01.01.2014 for the offences published 
under Section 25 Arms Act, Sections 307, 34, 120B, 107 and 115 IPC & Sections 3, 10(a) & 10(b), 13(1)(2), 
16, 17, 18, 20, 38 and 39 of the UAPA & Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the Explosive Substances Act. The 
complainant in this case also is Shri Ajay Kaithwas, DSP-ATS, Bhopal. The case was related to the seizure of 
explosive substances and detonators from the SIMI members. On 24.12.2013, SIMI members Abu Faisal, 
Khalid Ahmed, Irfan Nagori, Sadik and Umer were arrested at Sendhwa, Madhya Pradesh and Solapur, 
Maharashtra in connection with Crime no. 434/13 at P.S. Sendhwa which further led to the registration of the 
above mentioned case Crime no. 22/13 at Police Station A.T.S./S.T.F. Bhopal (MP). The persons arrested in 
the said case disclosed that the recovered explosive substance and weapons were provided to them by Javed 
Nagori, Mohd Adil, Aziz, Abdul Wahid and Guddu @ Sajid. The arrested individuals disclosed that they had 
concealed a huge quantity of explosives and detonators to blast bombs at various places in the country. They 
further disclosed that they had kept two big drums of explosives, under the staircase of a dilapidated house in 
Mahidpur Ujjain. These were later seized by the police on the intervening night of 31.12.2013 and 
01.01.2014. 


After the investigation, the charge sheet in the case was filed in the Court of the 16th Additional Sessions 
Judge and Special Judge, NIA, Bhopal. Vide the judgment dated 28.02.2019, Ex. PW12/H, the Court had 
convicted the accused persons namely Javed Nagauri, Abdul Aziz, Abdul Wahid, Jubair Hussein and Mohd. 
Adil and sentenced all of them to life imprisonment. Accused Majid Nagori and Khalid Ahmad were killed in 
a police encounter in the jurisdiction of Gunga Poilce Station, Distt. Bhopal on 31.10.2016. The accused 
persons namely Abu Faizal, Irfan Nagori, Umer, Sadik and Sazid were acquitted of all charges by the court. 
This acquittal has been challenged before the Madhya Pradesh High Court. 


PW13 Mr. Arvind Singh Tomar is posted as C.S.P. Khandwa, District Khandwa (M.P.). He was 
appointed as a Nodal Officer vide order of S.P., Khandwa dated 20/04/2024 for the State of M. P. to represent 
the State before this Tribulal. In his affidavit Ex. PW13/A he has deposed regarding Cr. No. 541/13 
Registered at Police Station Kotwali, Khandwa against the members of banned organization SIMI. 


On 01.10.2013, at around 03.15 AM, Const. Lokesh Hirwe, Const. Narendra Soni and Cheeta Mobile Const. 
Kundan Mandloi, Sainik Suresh Tiwari were on night patrolling at Siddhipuram Colony, Bhandariya Road 
Khandwa. They saw 6-7 persons running towards them. When they were stopped for questioning, all of them 
immediately started quarrelling and beating the police officials. When the officials caught one of them 
namely Abu Faizal, another accused Aijajuddin tried to free him and raised a sharp object, probably a knife, 
with an intention to kill Lokesh Hirve. Lokesh Hirve sustained injuries at his shoulder and head. Meanwhile, 
Suresh Tiwari tried to save Lokesh Hirve but another offender Aslam injured him in his hand with an 
intention to kill him with a knife. At the same time, Abu Faizal and his associates managed to run away after 
snatching rifles and motorcycles of the police team. 


Crime No. 541/2013 dated 01/10/2013 was registered Under Sections 395, 307, 353, 332,120B, 212, 216 & 
75 IPC and Sections 3, 10, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 & 21 UAPA at P.S. Kotwali Khandwa against the accused 
(1) Abu Faizal (2) Aiyjazuddin (3) Guddu @ Mehboob (4) Aslam (5) Zakir, (6) Amjad (7) Abid Mirza and (8) 
Saleek. 


During investigation, it was revealed that all the above accused had escaped from Khandwa Jail. On the basis 
of this information, a separate Crime no. 542/2013 dated 01/10/2013 was registered against them in P.S. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 73 


12.11.4 


12.11.5 


12,12 


12.12.1 


12.12.2 


12.12.3 


12.12.4 


Khandwa. Vide the order dated 20.01.2015 passed in M.C.R.C No. 3656/2014 the Madhya Pradesh High 
Court, Jabalpur had transferred all the cases pertaining to the SIMI matters to the District Court, Bhopal. The 
present case was also transferred from District Court, Khandwa to the District Court Bhopal. 


Meanwhile, information was received to the effect that the other escaped accused persons, namely Aslam and 
Aiazuddinwere killed in police encounter in police station of district Nalkunda, Telanganaon 04.04.2015. It 
was also informed that the other escaped accused persons, namely Amzad, Mehboob, Zakir and Saleekwere 
also killed in police encounter in Gunga Police Station, District Bhopal on 31.10.2016. 


The Special Court of NIA Bhopal vide the judgment dated 07.12.2023 in Cr. No. 541/13 (S.T. Reg. 
No.154/2015 ), Ex. PW13/E had convicted the accused Abu Faizal in the said case and sentenced him to life 
imprisonment. The other accused Abid Mirza was acquitted of all charges by the court. This acquittal has 
been challenged in the Madhya Pradesh High court. 


PW17 Mr. Harsh Upadhyay, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Anti-Terrorist Squad, Gujarat State, 
Ahmedabad in his affidavit of evidence, Ex. PW17/A has deposed regarding the Sessions Case No. 38 of 
2009 titled ‘State of Gujarat v. Jahid @ Javed Kutubuddin Shaikh and Ors.’. This case pertained to the 22 
bomb blasts which took place at different places in Ahmedabad city on 26.07.2008 as well as to the 
subsequent recovery of unexploded bombs. 


The PW17 has placed reliance on the judgment of the said case pronounced by the learned Additional 
Sessions Judge (Special Designated Judge for Speedy Trial of Serial Bomb Blast Cases), Court No. 4, 
Ahmedabad, Gujarat on 18.02.2022. The certified copy of the judgment and its synopsis is produced as Ex. 
PW-17/B and Ex. PW17/C respectively. 


It is stated that there were 80 accused persons in Sessions Case No.38 of 2009 against whom the trial was 
conducted. However, 15 accused are still absconding and therefore, no trial was conducted against the 
absconding accused. The investigation against those 15 absconding accused is still in progress. The Anti- 
Terrorist Squad is making all possible efforts to find out the whereabouts of the absconding accused and 
efforts for their arrest are also being taken.He further stated that out of the 80 accused against whom trial was 
conducted, accused no. 79 and 80 expired during the course of trial. Out of the remaining 78 accused, as per 
the judgment of conviction and sentence, 38 have been awarded capital punishment, 11 have been awarded 
life imprisonment and 29 were acquitted. On the basis of the material available and the information gathered, 
he further stated that approximately against 72 of the alive 78 accused persons of the said Sessions Case No. 
38 of 2009 various criminal cases relating to unlawful activities are pending or concluded by the respective 
agencies of the Center and different State Governments. He also stated that some of the accused persons who 
were tried in Sessions Case No. 38 of 2009 were also found involved in an attempt to break Sabarmati Jail 
and accordingly, a separate case bearing Crime no. 24 of 2013 was registered against them at PS Ranip. 


The witness stated that it has been observed in the judgment dated 18.02.2022 that even though the Student 
Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) had been declared an 'Unlawful Association’ by the Central Government, 
the apprehended, deceased and absconding accused had directly and indirectly assisted such association by 
being and continued to be members of SIMI by participating in the meetings of SIMI and raising funds and 
contributions for the purpose of SIMI and possessing unlicensed firearms and explosives in furtherance of the 
purpose of such association. He stated that it has also been observed by the Court that the apprehended, 
deceased and absconding accused had formed a criminal conspiracy to spread terror in the state of Gujarat 
and throughout India, to establish an Islamic regime in India and to overthrow the Gujarat government, and to 
take revenge against the Gujarat government and remove the government and to take revenge for the loss of 
life and property of the Muslim community during the communal riots that broke out in the whole of Gujarat 
when Hindu karsevaks and innocent passengers were burnt to death in the Sabarmati Express train at Godhra 
on 27-2-2002. As part of the conspiracy, the apprehended, deceased and absconding accused as members of 
the banned terrorist organization "SIMI", adopted a new identity of "Indian Mujahedeen", despite knowing 
that SIMI was banned after the year 2002. Its members held meetings at different places in Ahmedabad and 
Surat and other cities of Gujarat, attended these meetings, made jihadi speeches and carried out terrorist 
activities. The apprehended, deceased and absconding accused prepared, provoked and trained each other to 
make bombs as part of terrorist activities by showing bomb making CDs and demonstrating bomb making to 
give training for making bomb, also hatched a criminal conspiracy to blast bombs in Hindu populated areas at 
different places in Ahmedabad and Surat and held a terrorist training camp in December 2007 in the forests 
of Wagamon in Kerala state and in January 2008 in the forests of Pavagadh, Halol of Gujarat state. 


The PW17 stated before the Tribunal that the evidence produced by him coupled with the intelligence 
briefing/inputs which are being consistently received from reliable sources, the Anti-Terrorist Squad, Gujarat 
is of the considered view that the members and sympathizers of the banned association, SIMI are still actively 
involved in organizing unlawful activities in order to revive its activities in a more destructive manner. The 
inputs also indicate that the members of the association in a clandestine manner are still trying to carry out 
their unlawful activities in the names of different organisations. 


74 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


12.13 


12.13.1 


12.13.2 


12.14 


12.14.1 


12.15 


12.15.1 


12.15.2 


PW 18 Mr. Ara.Arularasu serves as Superintendent of Police, Special Division, Special Branch 
Criminal Investigation Department, Chennai, Tamil Nadu. In his affidavit of evidence Ex. PW18/A he has 
deposed regarding the Case Crime No.722/1999 dated 25.6.1999 registered at P.S.- B-3, Kattoor, Coimbatore 
City. He has stated that the Case Crime No.722/1999 was registered on the information that on 25.6.1999 at 
about 1615 hrs in the Coimbatore City, some persons were seen distributing May and June 1999 issues of the 
SIMI magazine titled 'Seithi Madal', containing sedition articles. They knew that the said articles could bring 
hatred and excite disaffection towards the government established by law and that the articles were 
prejudicial to communal harmony between Muslims and other religions. 


The Ld. Additional District and Sessions Court, Coimbatore, Fast Track Court No. 2 vide a detailed 
judgement dated 29.02.2012 (Ex. PW18/B) convicted five accused persons namely Samimul Islam, Syed 
Abdur Rahman, Syed Mohammed, Khadar Bhaba and Shah Jahan (who were the members of SIMI) for the 
offences u/s 124A and 153B IPC. They were held guilty of portraying the Indian Army and Indian 
government as their enemy and thereby promoting hatred and ill-will, besides inciting communal passion 
against the Indian Government in their publications. The convicts filed Criminal Appeals viz. Crl. A. No. 
306/2012 and (711. A. No. 309/2012 before the Madras High Court. 


Vide the judgment dated 19.12.2019 (Ex. PW18/C) the Madras High Court set aside the conviction of all the 
convicts for the offence under Section 124A IPC. The convicts namely Syed Mohammed, Khadar Bhaba and 
Shah Jahan were acquitted for the offence under Section 153B IPC. However, the conviction and sentence 
imposed by the trial Court on Samimul Islam and Syed Abdur Rahman for the charge under Section 153B 
IPC was confirmed. He has also filed the incriminating publications seized from the accused from accused 
No.5, Shajahan as Ex. PW18/D. 


PW-22 Mr. Prakash Shivdas Chavan, Head Constable/2616, presently posted at Kulgaon Police 
Station, Thane Rural (Maharashtra) has filed his affidavit of evidence Ex. PW 22/A. It details the evidence 
and ongoing investigations related to Crime No. 100/2021, PS-Padgha which involves members of SIMI, 
justifying the continued ban on the organization SIMI. Crime No. 100/2021 was registered at Padgha Police 
Station on March 6, 2021, under Sections 188, 269 IPC read with Section 51(B) of the Disaster Management 
Act. Thecase was initially investigated by Mr. Chavan during his tenure at Padgha Police Station from 
August 2016 to November 2022.It is stated that 06.03.2021, at about 9:30 AM, in Navi Vasti, Borivali 
village, Padgha, Tal-Bhiwandi, Dist-Thane the accused, Adil Elias Khot, organized a religious program 
"Sharte-A-Nabi" without safety measures during the COVID-19 pandemic, violating prohibitory orders. He 
thereby breached the prohibition order issued by the District Magistrate issued Under No. Gruha/Ka/-1/T- 
1/ManaiAadesh/V shi/23-21, dated 25.02.2021. Statements from witnesses and the accused confirmed the 
involvement of Adil Elias Khot in organizing the unlawful gathering. Charge Sheet was filed on 11.12.2021in 
the court of the Ld. JMFC, Bhiwandi, and registered as RCC No. 4180/2021. The trial concluded vide the 
judgment dated 11.12.2021 (Ex. PW22/C) with the accused found guilty of the offence punishable under 
section 269 IPC and Section 51(B) of Disaster Management Act. 


Adil Elias Khot was identified as an active member of SIMI, engaging in activities that promote communal 
disharmony and threaten national security. The witness stated that SIMI aims to disturb communal harmony 
and promote terrorism. The accused's activities indicate ongoing unlawful activities linked to SIMI. He stated 
that SIMI's activities pose a significant threat to national integrity and sovereignty and lifting the ban on SIMI 
would enable its activists to engage in terror acts, undermining the law and order situation in the country. The 
affidavit supports the continuation of the ban on SIMI as justified and necessary for the integrity and 
sovereignty of India. 


PW 24 is Mr. Nilesh Nanabhau Sonawane, Assistant Commissioner of Police, Detection-1, Crime 
Branch, Thane City, Maharashtra. His affidavit, Ex. PW14/A, details the evidence and ongoing 
investigations related to Crime No. 131/2012 registered at Nizampura Police Station, Bhiwandi which 
involves members of SIMI, justifying the continued ban on the organization. 


Crime No. 131/2012 was registered at Nizampura Police Station, Bhiwandi under Sections 307, 120B of the 
IPC, Section 25 and 27 of the Arms Act.It was initially investigated by ACP B.G. Yashod ACP Crime 
Branch, Detection-2, Kalyan. 


On 03.08.2012, the complainant Manoj Raicha was attacked by three bullets while traveling in his car with 
his police bodyguard, Const. Acharekar. The attack took place in Bhiwandi, Thane District. The complainant 
and his bodyguard reported the incident, leading to the lodging of an FIR. The complainant suspected the role 
of the accused Saquib Abdul Hameed Nachan in the attack. The attack was suspected to be motivated by 
intent to create communal riots between Hindus and Muslims, affecting the sovereignty of the nation. The 
main accused, Saquib Nachan, was identified as having a history with the banned organization Students 
Islamic Movement of India (SIMI). 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 75 


12.15.3 


12.15.4 


12.15.5 


12.15.6 


12.15.7 


12.16 


12.16.1 


12.16.2 


12.16.3 


During the investigation it was found that the accused Saquib Abdul Hameed Nachan was the mastermind 
behind the attack. He was the longstanding member of SIMI since 1982 and was also the Secretary of All 
India SIMI Association in 1987. He was arrested on 04.08.2012 in this case. Saquib Nachan still 
clandestinely continues to work for SIMI and still a strong sympathizer of the Organization. The accused 
Guddu Khan was found to be involved in the planning and execution of the attack. He was arrested on 
24.08.2012. The accused Shamil Nachan was found to have participated in the conspiracy and planning of the 
attack. He was arrested on 29.08.2012. The accused Akif Nachan was found involved in planning and 
execution of the attack. He was arrested on 29.08.2012. The accused Tanveer Jamindar had provided 
logistical support for the attack. He was arrested on 30.08.2012. Abubakar @ Saif Shaikh was found to be the 
main shooter in the attack. He was arrested on 03.06.2017. 


The witness stated in his affidavit that Tanveer’s house search on 31.08.2012 led to the recovery of a book 
titled "The Muslim Charge-sheet against Government, the Real Face of Indian Judiciary" by Saquib Nachan. 
Assembled CPU and similar book along with 3 CDs containing videos and material regarding alleged 
harassment of Muslims in Palestine and relating to Jihad were also recovered. 


From the possession of Guddu Khan (Mohammand Hafiz Hamza Khan) a mobile phone was seized. A 
country-made pistol and 6 live cartridges were recovered from the house of the absconding accused Abu 
Bakar based on Guddu Khan's statement. A red Pulsar motorcycle (MH-04-DH-5485) was recovered near a 
public toilet close to a mosque based on Guddu Khan's statement. A mobile phone was seized from a witness 
who claimed it was used by Abu Bakar. Additionally, Guddu Khan's brother produced another mobile phone 
per Guddu Khan's instructions. 


Statements from witnesses and the accused confirmed the involvement in SIMI activities. Charge Sheet was 
filed on 20.11.2012 in the Special MCOCA Court, Thane U/s. 30), (ii), 3(2) & 3(4) of the MCOCA U/s 307, 
120 (b), 153A of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 3, 25 & 27 of the Arms Act. Supplementary charge 
sheets were filed on 14.03.2013 and 13.07.2017 U/s. 16 (1)(b), 18 of UAPA and Sections 353, 153A and 
120B of the Indian Penal Code. The trial is ongoing, with 26 witnesses examined so far. 


The witness stated that the accused were identified as active members of SIMI, engaging in activities that 
promote communal disharmony and threaten national security and that SIMI aims to disturb communal 
harmony and promote terrorism. The accused's activities indicate ongoing unlawful activities linked to SIMI. 
He stated that SIMI's activities pose a significant threat to national integrity and sovereignty and lifting the 
ban on SIMI would enable its activists to engage in terror acts, undermining the law and order situation in the 
country. 


PW-25 is Mr. Kishor Vasudeo Parab, Assistant Commissioner of Police, Anti Terrorism Squad 
(ATS), Mumbai, Maharashtra. His affidavit details the evidence and ongoing investigations related to several 
cases involving members of SIMI, justifying the continued ban on the organization. 


CR No. 06/2010, PS- ATS, Mumbai - German Bakery Blast- On 13.02.2010 at around 6.50 p.m. in the 
evening a powerful bomb blast took place at German Bakery, Koregaon Park, Pune in which 17 people died 
and 56 persons were injured. C.R. No. 83 of 2010 was registered in respect of the said incident at Bund 
Garden Police Station, Pune under Sections 302, 307, 326, 324, 427, 120-B r/w. Sections 3, 4, 5 of the 
Explosive Act and Sections 16, 18, 21 of the UAPA. Considering the gravity and intensity of the crime 
perpetrated, the said offence was transferred for further investigation to the Anti-Terrorism Squad, 
Maharashtra. The crime was re-registered as C.R. No. 06 of 2010 with the ATS Police Station, Kalachowki1, 
Mumbai. 


The investigation revealed the involvement of Mirza Himayat Inayat Beg @ Ahmed Beg Inayat Mirza @ 
Yusuf and his associates, all linked to SIMI. Mirza Himayat Inayat Beg perpetrated the bombing with help 
from associates, Mohsin Ismail Choudhary, Ahmed Siddhibappa Zafar (Yasin Bhatkal), Riyaz Ismail 
Shabadari (Riyaz Bhatkal), Iqbal Ismail Shabadari, Fayyaz Kagzi (Zulfikar Fiyaj Ahmed), Sayyad Jabiudeen 
Sayyad Zakiuddin (Zabi Ansari). All these accused are in judicial custody. At the instance of the accused 
Mirza Himayat Inayat Beg 1200 gm ofRDX explosive, soldering equipment, mobile phones, forged 
documents, hard disks, pen drive, registers etc. were recovered. 


On 18.04.2013 Mirza Himayat Inayat Beg was convicted by the Special Court for the offences under Sections 
120B, 153A, 302, 307, 435 and 474 of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 10(a),10(b), 13(1)(b), 13(2), 
16(1)(a), 18 and 20 of UAPA and Sections 3(b), 4(a),(b) of Explosive Substances Act, 1908. He was awarded 
death penalty and life imprisonment as well as fine for the above offences. The accused was convicted u/s 10 
of UAPA as a member of unlawful association i.e. SIMI. The Bombay HighCourt delivered the Judgment in 
Confirmation Case No. 4 of 2013, on 17.03.2016 (Ex. PW25/B) by which the conviction and sentence of the 
appellant/accused Mirza Himayat Baig @ Ahmed Baig Inayat Mirza @ Hasan of life imprisonment for the 
offence punishable under Section 5 (b) of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 was confirmed. On being 


76 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


12.16.4 


12.16.5 


12.16.7 


12.16.8 


12.16.9 


aggrieved by this Judgment, the State of Maharashtra filed a Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 5289- 
5290/2016 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. 


LAC No. 03/2006 - MCOCA Special Case No. 16/2006, 18/2006, 20/2007, 08/2009, 20/2012 Police Station - 
ATS Mumbai. On the 09.05.2006, a Tata Sumo Jeep with the registration number MH14-X-4380 was 
intercepted by the Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) police party on the Verul Aurangabad Road. During the 
search of the vehicle, the police discovered a significant cache of arms and explosives concealed within ten 
computer cabinets. The items recovered included ten AK-47 rifles, 2000 live cartridges, 40 magazines, and 
30 kilograms of a black-colored sticky explosive substance. 


Initially the accused Mohammad Amir Shakil Ahmed Shaikh were arrested. Two other occupants of the 
vehicle, including the driver, managed to escape during the interception. The seized arms and explosives were 
confiscated, and a complaint was filed by ACP Mr. Kisan Narayan Shengal, leading to the registration of FIR 
bearing LAC No. 03 of 2006 at ATS Police Station Kalachowky, Mumbai, Maharashtra. 


It was revealed that Mohammad Amir Shakil Ahmed and Zabiuddin Ansari were in contact with terrorist 
outfits based in Pakistan. They were involved in promoting jihad and procuring sophisticated arms, 
ammunition, and explosives for insurgency activities in India. Based on their organized crime activities, 
provisions of the Maharashtra Control of Organized Crime Act (MCOC Act), 1999, were invoked. Samples 
of the seized explosive substances and parts of a dismantled hand grenade were sent for analysis to the 
Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL), Mumbai, which confirmed their nature as explosives. 


It is deposed that the confessions from Mohammad Amir Shakil Ahmed and other individuals, including 
Doctor Mohammad Sharif Shabir Ahmed, Faisal Ata-Ur Rehman Shaikh, and Sayyed Aakif Sayyed 
Jafaruddin, revealed their active membership in SIMI (Student Islamic Movement of India), which had been 
declared an unlawful association. Further investigation led to the seizure of a total of 16 AK-47 rifles, 62 
magazines, 3200 live cartridges, approximately 43 kg of RDX, and 50 live hand grenades. 


On 04.09.2006, an initial charge sheet was filed against 16 arrested accused persons and wanted accused 
under Sections 120B IPC r/w Sections 5, 6, 9B of The Explosive Act 1884, Sections 4 and 5 of the Explosive 
Substance Act 1908, Sections 3 & 25 Indian Arms Act, Sections 10, 13, 16, 18 & 23 of UAPA, and Sections 
3(1) (ii), 3(2), 3(4) MCOC Act. Further charge sheets were filed against additional arrested and wanted 
accused persons on various dates. 


12.16.10The Special MCOCA Court delivered its judgment on 02.08.2016 (Ex. PW25/E). Out of the 20 accused 


persons, 12 were convicted. Out of these 12 the following 7 were convicted of the offence punishable under 
Section 10(a) of the UAPA for being the members of SIMI: Mohammad Amir Shakil Ahmed @ Shaikh Amir 
Shaikh Shakil, Bilal Ahmed Abdul Rajak Ansari, Sayyed Akib Sayyed Jafaruddin, Afroz Khan Shahid Khan 
Pathan, Faisal Ata-Ur Rehman Shaik, Mohd. Aslam s/o Haji Mohd Latif @ Aslam Kashmiri @ Mohd. Salim 
@ Yusuf @ Imran, Jabiuddin Sayyed Zakiuddin Ansari @ Jabi Ansari. 


12.16.11 All 12 convicted individuals have filed appeals against their convictions in the Special MCOCA Court's 


judgment. These appeals are currently pending before the Bombay High Court. The appeals challenge the 
convictions and sentences imposed by the Special MCOCA Court. The State of Maharashtra has also filed an 
appeal against the acquittal of the remaining 8 accused persons who were not convicted by the Special 
MCOCA Court. This appeal is also pending before the Bombay High Court. 


12.16.12CR. No. 05/2006, MCOCA Special Case No. 21/2006 PS-ATS Mumbai: The case CR. No. 05/2006 


was registered in relation to seven bomb blasts that occurred on local trains on the Western Railway of 
Mumbai and its suburbs on 11.07.2006. The blasts were a coordinated attack as part of a larger conspiracy 
involving an organized crime syndicate. The offences were initially registered separately under the 
jurisdiction of concerned police stations but were later combined and assigned to the Anti-Terrorism Squad 
(ATS), Mumbai, due to the gravity and seriousness of the incidents. 


12.16.13 During the investigation, a total of 13 individuals were arrested, and 15 more were identified as 


wanted accused. The initial charge sheet was filed on for the offence punishable under Section 3(1), 3(2), 
3(3), 3(4), 3(5) of MCOCA, 1999 r/w Sections 10, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 40 of UAPA r/w Sections 302, 
307, 326, 32, 324, 427, 436, 121- A, 122, 123, 124-A, 201, 212, 120B of IPC r/w Sections 6 and 9B of 
Explosives Act, 1884 r/w Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 of Explosive Substances Act, 1908 1/w Section 3 8& 4 of 
Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act r/w Sections 151, 152, 153, 154 of Railways Act, 1989 r/w 
Section 12(1)(c) of Passports Act, 1967. 


12.16.14Special MCOCA Court convicted 12 accused persons out of 13 vide the judgment dated 30.09.2015 (Ex. 


PW25/F) under various Sections of law. From above, nine convicted accused persons were revealed to be 
members of Student Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) which is an unlawful association under the UAPA, 
banned by the Central Government. Their names are as follows: Tanveer Ahamad Mohd Ibrahim Ansari, 
Mohd Faisal Atari Rehman Shaikh, Ehtesham Kutubuddin Siddiqui, Shaikh Mohammad Ali Alam Ansari, 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 77 


Mohd. Sajid Marggub Ansari, Muzzammil Ataur Rehman Shaikh, Suhail Mehmood Shaikh, Zameer Ahmed 
Latifur Rehman Shaikh and Asif Khan Bashir Khan @ Junaid @ Abdulla. The conviction in respect of death 
penalty confirmation and appeals filed by the accused persons are pending before the Bombay High Court at 
Mumbai. 


12.16.15CR No. 31/2011 Police Station — ATS Mumbai. On 22.08.2011 the ATS Thane Unit received a tip-off from a 
secret informer about a person named Haroon Naik, who was staying in Room No. 103 at Amber Guest 
House, Dadar (East), Mumbai. He was suspected to be in possession of a large quantity of counterfeit Indian 
currency notes intended for circulation. ATS officers raided the guest house and found Haroon Naik. During 
the search, they recovered a tourist bag containing bundles of counterfeit Indian currency notes of Rs. 1000 
and 500 denominations. Additionally, they seized foreign currency from Saudi Arabia, a mobile SIM card, a 
driving license, a gift card, an international calling card, a mobile handset, an electronic air ticket, baggage 
tags, and an Indian passport among other items. During the investigation, Haroon Naik confessed to 
possessing the counterfeit currency notes and revealed his plan to circulate them as genuine. Consequently, 
an offence was registered under Sections 489A, 489B, and 489C of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) at ATS 
Kalachowky Police Station. 


12.16.16Haroon also disclosed the involvement of two other individuals: Asrar Ahmed Abdul Hamid Tailor @ Sagari 
and Azhar UI Islam Mohd. Ibrahim Siddiqui @ Munna. The investigation revealed that Asrar had arranged a 
meeting between Haroon and the wanted accused Riyaz Bhatkal at the SIMI office in Kurla, Mumbai. Riyaz 
Bhatkal facilitated Haroon's visit to Pakistan for militant training. Similarly, Azhar was sent to Pakistan for 
militant training to carry out subversive activities in India. 


12.16.17Efforts to trace and apprehend other accused individuals, including Din Mohd., Tarique Ismail, and Riyaz 
Bhatkal, were unsuccessful. On 16.11.2011, the investigating officer filed the charge sheet after obtaining the 
necessary sanctions from the State Government/Competent. 


12.16.18Vide the judgment dated 07.02.2018 (Ex. PW25/G) the trial court sentenced Haroon Rashid Abdul Hamid 
Naik and Asrar Ahmed Abdul Hamid Tailor to six years of rigorous imprisonment under Section 489-C of 
the IPC. They were acquitted of charges under Sections 10, 11, 13, and 18 of the UAPA. The State 
Government has appealed against their acquittal in Criminal Appeal No. 592 of 2019 


12.16.19 CR No. 02/2012 - Police Station- ATS Mumbai. On 03.06.2012, the Aurangabad Unit of the Anti- 
Terrorism Squad (ATS), Maharashtra, received credible information about Abrar @ Munna @ Abdulla @ 
Ismail, an active member of the unlawful organization Student Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) and Indian 
Mujahideen (IM). Abrar, an absconder in the Ahmedabad Serial Blast case of 2008, was expected to meet his 
associates in Aurangabad to commit a terrorist act. Based on the information, the ATS laid a trap and arrested 
Mohd. Abrar Khan @ Munna Babu Khan, Age 32 years, R/o Chandan Nagar, Indore, (MP) and Shaker @ 
Khalil Akil Khilji, Age 20 years, R/o Gulmohor Colony, Burhanpur Road, Khandwa (MP). A cognizable 
offence was registered at Begumpura Police Station (Cr. No. 25 of 2012) under Sections 307, 333, 335, 336, 
338, 352, 353, and 34 of the IPC, read with Sections 3, 25, and 27 of the Arms Act and Section 135 of the 
Bombay Police Act. This case was investigated by the State CID, Crime, Aurangabad Unit . 


12.16.20 Following the interrogation of the arrested individuals, the ATS Akola Unit conducted further raids on 
March 27, 2012, in Chikhali and Sailani villages in Buldana District, resulting in the arrest of Akhil Yusuf 
Khilji, Age 45 years, R/o Gulmohor Colony, Khandva (MP) and Jaffer Hussain Iqbal Hussain Qureshi, Age 
32 years, R/o Sales Tax Colony, Magekhadva, Madhya Pradesh. During the house searches, ATS seized one 
firearm, five live cartridges, and inflammatory literature belonging to SIMI. Consequently, a separate offence 
was registered at ATS Kalachowky Police Station (CR No. 02/2012) . 


12.16.21 During the investigation, the following individuals were arrested: Akhil Yusuf Khilji (Since deceased), Jaffer 
Hussain Iqbal Hussain Qureshi, Mohd. Abrar Khan @ Munna Babu Khan, Anwar Ibrahim Hussain, Shaker 
@ Khalil Akil Khilji and Amman @ Sharafat @ Sarfaraj 


12.16.22 On 21.09.2012, a charge-sheet was filed against five accused persons (RCC No. 2742/2012). A 
supplementary charge sheet against the sixth arrested accused was filed in 2016.As of the latest update, five 
prosecution witnesses have been examined. The case is pending trial before the Special Court at Akola . 


12.16.23 LAC No. 04/2006 Police Station - ATS Mumbai. During the course of investigation of Railway 
Bomb Blast Case, ATS team Mumbai received information that one member of the "Student Islamic 
Movement of India" (SIMI) Ehtesham Qutubuddin Siddiqui was carrying out the activities and ideology of 
SIMI in spite of the Central Government declaring it an unlawful association. On the basis of said 
information raid was conducted by ATS team on 28.07.2006 at house of accused Ehtesham Qutubuddin 
Siddiqui at Mira Road, District Thane. during search of the said house of the accused, books having titles 
"Jihadi-Fi-Sabiullah”’,"Jihadi Azgar", "Jihadi-Fisibililah Quo", 4 CDs, one micro cassette taperecorder, two 
micro cassettes, one chart showing names of office bearers of SIMI at the Central & State levels, diaries of 
attendance were recovered from him. First Information Report was registered as LAC No. 04/2006, under 


78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART IH—SEC. 3(11)] 


Sections 10, 13 UAPA at ATS Police Station Kalachowky, Mumbai. During course of interrogation of 
accused Ehtesham Qutubuddin Siddiqui, Danish Riyaz Shaukat Ali Shaikh, Minaz Mukhtar Nachan and Saif 
Atik Nachan, it was revealed that Shakil Warsi Abu Nasir was an active member of banned association SIMI 
and used to visit the accused Ehtesham Qutubuddin Siddiqui and attend meetings of SIMI along with other 
accused persons. 


12.16.24 It was found that the accused persons namely Ehtesham Qutubuddin Siddiqui, Danish Riyaz Shaukat Ali 
Shaikh, Minaz Mukhtar Nachan, Saif Atik Nachan were all active SIMI members and were promoting its 
ideology. 


12.16.25 After trial in the case the Court had delivered Judgment on 21.10.2016 (Ex. PW25/L) and thereby 
convicted accused Ehetesham Qutubuddin Siddiqui for the offences punishable under Sections 10(a), 13(1) of 
UAPA and acquitted other 3 accused persons. 


12.16.26 It is further stated by the witness that the investigation in said case is in progress and charge sheet is 
yet to be filed against accused namely, Asrar Ahmed Abdul Hamid Tailor, Irshad Salim Khan, Hafij Hussein 
Tajuddin Mulla, Padikkal Abdul Karim Shibli @ Ali, Ezaz Akram Khan and Eliyas Akram Khan @ Ellu and 
wanted accused persons. 


12.16.27 The testimony of this witness and the contents of the affidavit support the continuation of the ban on 
SIMI as necessary for the integrity and sovereignty of India. The detailed evidence and findings underscore 
the ongoing threat posed by SIMI's activities. 


12.17 The Government has examined Mr. Vasant Jadhav, Deputy Commissioner, State Intelligence 
Department, Headquarters, Mumbai (Maharashtra) as the witness PW26. He is the duly appointed Nodal 
Officer for the State Of Maharashtra [except Mumbai City and Anti Terrorist Squad (ATS)]. In his affidavit 
of evidence he has deposed regarding various cases pending against members of SIMI Organization which 
were investigated by various police stations in the State of Maharashtra. He has stated that the members of 
the said association are still active in radicalizing and brainwashing the gullible youth through provocative 
speeches against India. He has also stated that the members are indulging in a lot of activities, aiming at 
destroying the sovereign territory of India. They are also a threat to the peace, criminal harmony, internal 
security, and secular fabric of Indian society. The cases included in his affidavit of evidence are as follows: 


12.17.1 C.R. No. 3182/2006, Sadar Police Station, Nagpur: - On 08/08/2006 PSI Sanjay Patange, acting on orders 
from the Senior Police Inspector, investigated the activities of the banned organization SIMI. Reliable 
information indicated that the accused Shakil Warsi, Shakir Ahmed and 3 others were holding a secret 
meeting to create provocative and objectionable information to incite Muslim youths to commit subversive 
acts against the nation in the name of Jihad. The investigation revealed that the accused were actively 
involved in spreading SIMI's ideology. Sections 10 and 13 of the UAPA were invoked in the case against the 
accused persons. During investigation it was found that the accused person are related to the banned 
organization SIMI. The accused were arrested, and a chargesheet was filed on 03.10.2006. The trial is 
ongoing with some witnesses already examined. 


12.17.2 C.R. No. 3065/2009, Murtijapur Police Station, Akola: On 19.07.2009 P.I. P.R. Giri received secret 
information that members of the banned organization SIMI were gathering at Chotti Masjid, Mana, for a 
meeting. A nakabandi (checkpoint) was set up, and the police intercepted an Indica car carrying the accused. 
Upon searching the car, the police found and seized objectionable materials, including CD titled "Darusal 
Quran", papers written in Urdu language, pamphlets and other objectionable materials related to SIMI's 
ideology and intended to provoke violence and communal disharmony. Cr.No. 3065/2009 for the offences 
punishable under Sections 10 & 13 of UAPA was registered. The accused persons namely Abdul Rajjaq, 
Syed Ibrahim, Musad Khan, Mohmmad Rafiq Abdul Rehman, Abdul Ahad Abdul Samad, Mohmmad Harun 
Gyasuddin, Mohmmad Siddiq Abdul Wahab and Sheikh Mahemud/Munnabhai Sheikh Lai are facing trial 
before the Court. 


12.17.3 C.R. No. 131/2012, Nizampura Police Station, Thane: The case is already discussed herein above while 
considering the evidence adduced by PW24, Mr. Nilesh Nanabhau Sonawane, Assistant Commissioner of 
Police, Detection-1, Crime Branch, Thane City, Maharashtra. 


12.17.4 C.R. No. 117/2010, Aundha Police Station, Hingoli: The case has been discussed in detail hereinafter in the 
evidence of PW32 Mr. Maroti Dnyanoji Thorat, Sub Divisional Police Officer (SDPO), Basmat, District 
Hingoli, Maharashtra. 


12.17.5 Crime No. 103/2001 registered at PS- M.LD.C. Jalgaon on 28.07.2001 under Sections 153A, 120B, 121, 
121A, 122, 123, 201, r/w 34 of IPC and Sections 4(a), 4(b), and 5 of the Indian Explosives Substance Act, 
1908: This case is discussed in detail hereinafter in the evidence of PW27 Mr. Pramod Abhiman Pawar, 
Deputy Superintendent of Police, Jalgaon, Maharashtra. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 79 


12.17.6 Crime No. WL04/2015, under section 26 (1) (i) of the Indian Forest Act, 1927, and under Sections 9, 39, 51, 
52 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, Range Forest Office - Aundha Nagnath: This case is discussed in 
detail herein after in the evidence of PW30, Mr. Kundlik Rambhau Hore, Range Forest Officer in Aundha 
Nagnath, Dist. Hingoli, Maharashtra subsequently in this report. The same may be referred for details. 


12.17.7 Crime No. 15/2023 dated 11.01.2023 P.S.- Padgha, Thane (1२): This case has already been discussed in detail 
while considering the evidence of PW21 Mr. Amol Nandkumar Salunkhe, Assistant Police Inspector, PS- 
Padgha, Thane (Rural), Maharashtra. 


12.17.8 Crime No. 0203/2022 dated 26.06.2022, P.S. - Padgha, Thane (R): This case has already been discussed in 
detail in the evidence of PW23 Mr. Rahul Ramchandra Zalte, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Ganeshpuri 
Division, Distt.-Thane (Rural) Maharashtra. 


12.17.9 Crime no. 100/2021 dated 06.03.2021, P.S. - Padgha, Thane (R): This case has already been discussed in 
detail in the evidence of PW-22 Mr. Prakash Shivdas Chavan, Head Constable/2616, presently posted at 
Kulgaon Police Station, Thane Rural (Maharashtra). 


12.17.10 Mr. Vasant Jadhav has stated that the above mentioned cases show the active role of the members or 
sympathizers of SIMI, engaged in spreading its ideology, provoking communal disharmony, and participating 
in unlawful activities. He also stated that SIMI's objectives include governing human life based on the Quran, 
propagating Islam, and conducting Jihad for the cause of Islam. He has further stated that SIMI's activities are 
detrimental to national security and communal harmony. His evidence underscores the need for the continued 
ban to prevent SIMI from regrouping and engaging in more sinister activities. His affidavit provides detailed 
instances of SIMI members' involvement in provocative and anti-national activities even after the imposition 
of the ban, emphasising the importance of maintaining the prohibition. 


12.18 The Government has further examined PW 27 Mr. Pramod Abhiman Pawar, Deputy Superintendent 
of Police, Jalgaon, Maharashtra. His affidavit details the evidence and ongoing investigations related to 
Crime No. 103/2001, PS- M.I.D.C. which involves members of SIMI, justifying the continued ban on the 
organization. 


12.18.1 Crime No. 103/2001 registered at PS- M.LD.C. Jalgaon on 28.07.2001 under Sections 153A, 1208, 121, 
121A, 122, 123, 201, r/w 34 of IPC and Sections 4(a), 4(b), and 5 of the Indian Explosives Substance Act, 
1908 based on intelligence inputs that members of SIMI were involved in planning and executing activities 
intended to disturb communal harmony and threaten national security. The investigation was conducted by 
the Jalgaon Police under the supervision of Mr. Pawar. The accused were suspected of conspiring to commit 
acts of terrorism, including the use of explosives. Surveillance operations were conducted to monitor the 
activities of the suspected SIMI members. Based on the surveillance, raids were conducted at various 
locations in Jalgaon where the accused were found to be engaged in planning and executing unlawful 
activities. During the raids, several accused were apprehended, and incriminating materials were seized, 
including explosives and provocative literature. Several individuals namely Iliyas Shaikh Yusuf, Shakeel 
Ahmed Abdul Hannan, Irfan Abdul Rauf, Rizwan Shaikh Rashid, Md. Wakarul Husen Mujffar Husen, Guljar 
Ahmed Gulam Mohammad, Mushtaq Shaikh Shafi, Shaikh Rashid Shaikh Chand, Parwej Khan Riyajuddin 
Khan and Asif Khan Bashir Khan were found involved in the offence. Some of the accused persons were key 
members of SIMI. They were actively involved in planning and executing unlawful activities and found to 
have played significant roles in coordinating with other members and arranging meetings to further SIMI's 
objectives. Various explosives and related materials were seized during the investigation, including bomb- 
making materials and detonators. Objectionable materials and literature related to SIMI were found, 
indicating their intention to provoke communal disharmony and incite violence. This included pamphlets, 
books, and written plans for terrorist activities. CDs and other digital materials containing provocative 
content promoting SIMI's ideology were seized. These contained videos and images meant to incite violence 
and recruit new members. (Emphasis supplied) 


12.18.2 Statements from witnesses and confessions from some of the accused confirmed their involvement in SIMI 
activities. The accused admitted to planning terrorist activities and trying to recruit young people to their 
cause. The seized materials underwent forensic examination, confirming their connection to SIMI and their 
potential to cause significant harm. The explosives were found to be viable and capable of causing mass 
destruction. 


12.18.3 The initial charge sheet was filed on 24.10.2001 detailing the involvement of the accused and the materials 
seized. Supplementary charge sheets were filed on 20.10.2006 and 23.03.2007 following further 
investigations and arrests. 


12.18.4 The trial for the initial group of accused concluded with the 2nd Ad-hoc Addl. Sessions Court, Jalgaon, 
convicting six accused namely Shaikh Ilyas ShaikhYusuf, Shaikh Shakeel Ahmed Abdul Hannan, Shaikh 
Irfan Abdul Rauf, Shaikh Rizwan Shaikh Rashid, Md. Wakarul Husen Mujffar Husen and Guljar Ahmed 
Gulam Mohammad on 19.05.2006. The court found them guilty of conspiracy to commit acts of terrorism, 


80 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


12.18.5 


12.18.6 


12.18.7 


12.19 


12.19.1 


12.19.2 


12.19.3 


12.19.4 


inciting communal violence, and possessing explosive materials. The certified copy of the judgment dated 
19.05.2006 passed by the Ld. 2nd Ad-hoc Addl. Sessions Judge, Jalgaon in Sessions Case No. 126/2002 was 
produced as Ex. PW27/B. 


The supplementary trials for the later arrested accused concluded with the District Judge-4 and Additional 
Sessions Judge, Jalgaon, convicting two accused namely Asifkhan @ Juned@ Abdulla Bashir Khan 
Parwejkhan Riyajuddin Khan on 01.04.2017. They were found guilty of similar charges, including being part 
of a larger conspiracy to destabilise the nation. The certified copy of the judgment dated 01.04.2017 passed 
by the Ld. District Judge-4 and Additional Sessions Judge, Jalgaon in Sessions Case No. 173/2006 was 
produced as Ex. PW27/C. 


It is further stated by the witness that several accused have been convicted and are serving their sentences. 
Some remain absconding, and efforts are ongoing to apprehend them. The convictions have reinforced the 
need for continued vigilance against SIMI activities. 


The witness stated that SIMI's activities pose a significant threat to national integrity and sovereignty. The 
organization's persistent efforts to incite violence and recruit individuals for terrorist activities underscore the 
ongoing risk it presents. He stated that lifting the ban on SIMI would enable its activists to engage in terror 
acts, undermining the law and order situation in the country. The continued ban is necessary to prevent the 
resurgence of SIMI's activities and protect national security. 


Mr. Siraj Hajaratsaheb Inamdar, ACP, SB-1, CID, Mumbai City, Maharashtra has been examined 
by the Central Government as the PW28. His affidavit of evidence Ex. PW28/A details the evidence and 
ongoing investigations related to several cases involving members of SIMI, justifying the continued ban on 
the organization. The said cases are as follows: 


LAC No. 1692/2001 - P.S. - Dharavi: On 28.09.2001 the Dharavi Police Station registered a case (LAC No. 
1692/2001) against Mohd. Munaf @ Munna Yusuf Vora for being a member of the banned organization 
SIMI. The police raided his shop, Vora Plastics, located at 146/C, Main Road, Dharavi, Mumbai-17, and 
seized pamphlets related to SIMI in Hindi, Urdu, and English. The shop was raided by PSI Rashid Shaikh and 
staff, leading to the seizure of SIMI-related pamphlets. An FIR was registered under Sections 10 and 13 of 
the UAPA. Munaf was arrested on the same day. Following Munaf’s interrogation, his associate, Sajid, was 
identified and arrested on 30.09.2001. A search of Sajid's residence resulted in the seizure of additional SIMI- 
related pamphlets and receipt books. Sajid was arrested and pamphlets were seized under panchanama by PSI 
Rashid Shaikh. Both accused were subsequently released on bail. A charge sheet was filed on November 1, 
2001, in the court of the Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate, 12th Court, Bandra, Mumbai. The case was registered 
as CC No. 1128/P/2001 and is pending trial. The case is pending for trial before the Ld. Metropolitan 
Magistrate, 12th Court, Bandra, Mumbai. 


CR_No. 152/2008 Registered with the DCB, CID, Mumbai : Case CR. No. 152 of 2008 involves the 
investigation of individuals connected to terrorist activities, including bomb blasts. The case was handled by 
the Cyber Cell, DCB, CID, Mumbai, and later by the Criminal Intelligence Unit (Operations), DCB, CID, 
Mumbai. On 15.08.2008 Property Cell, DCB, CID, Mumbai, arrested car thief Afzal Mutalib Usmani in Uttar 
Pradesh. During interrogation, Usmani admitted to stealing cars used in bomb blasts in Surat and 
Ahmedabad. Cases related to these thefts were registered at Vile Parle, Nagpada, and Khar Police Stations. 
On 24.08.2008 CR No. 314/2008 was registered by PSI Sunil D. Jadhav under Sections 295(A), 50501), 
50601), and 507 of IPC. 


The investigation was initially handled by the Cyber Cell, DCB, CID, Mumbai. On 23.09.2008 the 
investigation of CR No. 314/2008 was transferred to the Criminal Intelligence Unit (Operations), DCB, CID, 
Mumbai, and re-registered as CR No. 152/2008. Usmani was arrested in connection with this case. 


On 24.09.2008 following Usmani's interrogation, multiple arrests were made in Sewree, Kurla, and other 
areas of Mumbai. The arrested included Sadique Israr Ahmed Shaikh, Mohd. Arif Badruuddin Shaikh, 
Mohd. Jakir Abdul Haq Shaikh, Ansar Ahmad Badshah Shaikh. During interrogation, they admitted their 
involvement in the said crime and Bomb Blasts in Gujarat and other states. They have also admitted to having 
received the motor cars from Afzal Mutalib Usmani and the same were used in the said bomb blasts. Two 
revolvers, one carbine with two magazines and 38 live cartridges were recovered at the instance of accused 
Sadique Israr Ahmed Shaikh under Memorandum Panchnama from a garment factory at Sewree. The said 
factory belongs to the wanted accused Abu Rashid Iqlak Ahmed Shaikh. The accused persons namely Sadik 
Israr Shaikh, Arif Badruddin Shaikh @ Arif Badar @ Laddan and Mohamad Ansar Ahemad Badsha Shaikh 
gave confessional statements. As per their statement, they have admitted their guilt. The contraband of 10 kg 
of Gelatin, 15 Detonators, 4 Timers and 8 kg of ball bearings were also recovered at the instance of accused 
Mohd. Arif Badruuddin Shaikh @ Arif Badar @ Laddan under memorandum panchnama. Interrogation of 
the initial suspects led to further arrests, including Asif Bashir Shaikh, Mohd. Mansoor Asgar Peerbhoy and 
Mubin @ Salman Kadar Shaikh. Four laptops, wireless routers & cards, spy locators, Wifi location detector, 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 81 


12.19.5 


12.19.6 


12.19.6 


12.19.7 


12.19.8 


12.19.9 


RF signal detectors. Reliance wireless net connector, two hard disc, three CPU, one TV, one VCD player, 
CDs, one pistol with seven live cartridges, folding tent, two sets of walkie-talkies, two knives, jacket, life 
jackets, three glass suction plates, one toy pistol, mask, wire cutter, glass cutter, stamp, stamp pad, sleeping 
injections, tablets, Jehadi religious books, audio cassettes, mobile phones, three pen drives, one cheque and 
other religious materials were recovered at the instance of accused Asif Bashir Shaikh under panchnama from 
Pune. Mohamad Akbar Ismail Chaudhari @ Saeed, Anik Shafiq sayyad @ Khalid, Majid Akhtar Shaikh, 
Yasir Anis Sayyad @ Hujefa, and Farooq Sharfuddin Tarqas @ Abdulla @ Peter were also found along with 
the above contraband. They were also arrested in this case. 


Prior approval was obtained to apply MCOCA Sections from Jt.C.P. (Crime), Mumbai on 07.10.2008. 
Sanction for prosecution under MCOC Act, 1999, was obtained from the Commissioner of Police, Mumbai, 
on 12.02.2009. A charge sheet was filed against 21 accused persons before the MCOCA Court, Mumbai. 
Investigations revealed a broader network, leading to arrests in Mangalore, Pimpri, and Parbhani. Recovered 
items included 5 hand grenades and Rs. 11 lacs in cash. Arrested individuals included Mohammad Atiq 
Mohammad Iqbal, Dustgir Feroz Muzawar, Fazal Rehman Mussadiq Khan Durani, and Dr. Anwar Abdulgani 
Bagwan. 


The arrested accused confessed that they were active members of banned SIMI organization as well as they 
had used the money received by selling stolen vehicles for giving effect to the criminal activities of SIMI. As 
such wanted accused Riyaz Bhatkal, Iqbal Bhatkal and his associates have started their terrorist activities 
under the name of "Indian Mujahideen". Thus, SIMI members have connection with the terrorist organization 
"Indian Mujahideen." (Emphasis added) 


All 21 accused were placed in judicial custody, with the case pending trial as MCOC Special Case No. 04 of 
2009. A supplementary charge sheet was filed on 15.10.2011 against Mobin Abdul Khan @ Irfan and Amin 
Ayub Shaikh, who were arrested on 20.07.2011 and placed in judicial custody. The witness stated that despite 
the ban on SIMI, investigations indicated continued illegal and anti-national activities by its members. The 
witness emphasized the necessity of maintaining the ban to prevent further disruption to national security and 
communal harmony. 


CR _ No. 275/2001 - Police Station Kurla : On 28.09.2001 the instant case was registered by PSI Ugale u/s. 
143, 144, 145, 147, 149, 353 IPC r/w 10, 13, UAPA based on information regarding the involvement of 
several individuals in SIMI activities. The primary accused included Shafiq Ahmad Ali Ahmad, Altaf 
Abdulla Chaugule, Mohammad Ali Barkat Ali, Irshad Khan Salim Khan, Inteshyam Kutubuddin Siddiqui, 
Tanvir Ahmad Ansari, Mohsin Hidaytulla Mirza, and Mujmil Hasan Bagdadi. After being produced in court 
for remand, the accused and their supporters raised slogans that were inflammatory and aimed at disrupting 
communal harmony. The slogans included "Hindustan Murdabad"" SIMI Zindabad" and other provocations. 
The police attempted to control the situation, but the accused and their supporters continued their disruptive 
behaviour, causing a commotion within the court premises. 


The accused and their supporters engaged in physical scuffles with the police officers present. They pushed 
and assaulted police constables on duty, leading to a tense situation that required significant police 
intervention to control. Four additional individuals were arrested during this incident for their involvement in 
the scuffle and their support of the accused. These individuals were identified as Sarjeet Shaikh Asif Shaikh, 
Abdul Khan Khalid Khan, Shirtaj Ahmad Shaikh Mansoori, and Abdul Rahim Shaikh Ab. Rashid Shaikh. 


The investigation revealed that the accused were actively involved in SIMI's illegal activities, including 
attending meetings and distributing pamphlets aimed at inciting communal disharmony and promoting SIMI's 
agenda.Searches conducted at the residences of the accused led to the seizure of various materials linked to 
SIMI, including pamphlets, books, and other propaganda materials in Hindi, Urdu, and English. 


12.19.10 The investigation also uncovered connections between the accused and other criminal activities, 


further highlighting the organized nature of their involvement in SIMI's unlawful operations. 


12.19.11 On 19.01.2003 the charge sheet was filed against the accused before the Ld. Metropolitan 


Magistrate, 518 Court, Kurla, Mumbai. The charge sheet included evidence gathered during the 
investigation, such as witness statements and seized materials. On 20.11.2014 the trial court, in its judgment, 
acquitted several accused due to insufficient evidence but directed the filing of a separate charge sheet against 
those who were declared absconders. 


12.19.12 On 30.12.2017 Sarjeet Shaikh Asif Shaikh (one of the absconders) was detained at Chhatrapati 


Shivaji International Airport based on a lookout notice and subsequently brought to trial. 


12.19.13 LAC NO. 34 OF 2006 Registered with the DCB, CID, Mumbai and LAC No.1106/2006 Police 


Station - Ghatkopar : LAC No. 34 of 2006 was initially registered as LAC No. 1106 of 2006 at Ghatkopar 
Police Station and subsequently transferred to the DCB CID Unit VII. The case involves individuals linked to 
the banned organization SIMI who were planning to commit unlawful activities during the Ganesh Utsav 


82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


festival in Mumbai. On 1.8.2006 the DCB CID Unit VII received information that two members of the SIMI, 
Shabbir Ahmed Mashiullah from Malegaon District Nashik and Nasif Ahmed Jamir Ahmed Ansari from 
Mumbai, were preparing to disrupt public peace during the Ganesh Utsav festival with the intention of 
causing damage to life and public property. They had allegedly gone to Pakistan via Dubai in May/June 2003 
to receive training in handling arms, ammunition, and bomb-making, and re-entered India via Kathmandu in 
August 2003, destroying their passports to hide evidence of their visit. 


12.19.14 The accused Shabbir Ahmed Mashiullah and Nasif Ahmed Jamir Ahmed Ansari were interrogated 
after their arrest and confessed to being members of SIMI. They revealed that they had participated in SIMI 
meetings and had been trained in Pakistan to carry out unlawful activities aimed at causing public harm. 
During the investigation, it was revealed that Riyaz Mohammad Ismail Shah (Riyas Bhatkal) and Tariq Ismail 
Abdul Sattar, along with an accomplice named Aziz, had facilitated their travel to Pakistan for training and 
their return to India. PSI Shripad B. Kale lodged a complaint with Ghatkopar Police Station, leading to the 
registration of LAC No. 1106 of 2006 under Sections 10 and 13 of the UAPA. 


12.19.15 Nasif Ahmed Jamir Ahmed Ansari gave a disclosure statement and led the investigation team to his 
residence at Flat No. 43, A/G/4, Saibaba Nagar, Road No. 6, Shivajinagar, Gowandi, Mumbai-43. 
Incriminating materials related to the SIMI organization were recovered, including the magazine "Student 
Islamic Movement of India Rudal, 1998-2000", pamphlets, and books in Urdu and Hindi languages. It was 
discovered that Nasif Ahmed Ansari received Rs. 20,000 from another terrorist named Sufi in Dubai via 
Western Union at Akbar Ali Chembur, Mumbai. Shabbir Ahmed Mashiullah had also attended SIMI 
meetings in Malegaon. Accused Tariq Ismail Abdul Sattar and Mohammad Ali Alam Shaikh (Aziz) assisted 
the arrested accused in obtaining passports, visas, and plane tickets for their travel to Dubai and onward to 
Pakistan. 


12.19.16 After completing the investigation, a charge sheet was filed before the Ld. Additional Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate, Mumbai. One of the wanted accused Mohd.Ali Alam Shaikh @ Aziz who was 
absconding was arrested by the police on 10.11.2011. Supplementary charge sheet dated 07.12.2011 was filed 
in the Court of the Ld. Addl. CMM, Esplanade Court, Mumbai in CC No865/PW/2011. Accused No.1 
Shabhir Ahmed Mashiullah expired on 02/03/2015. Vide the judgment dated 25/09/2019 the accused no. 2 
Nafis Ahamad Jamir Ahamd Ansari and accused no 3 Mohd.Ali Alam Shaikh @ Aziz were held guilty of 
commiting for the offence punishable under section 10 of UAPA. 


12.19.17 Special Case No. 2 of 2003, Mumbai: This case involves multiple bomb blasts that occurred in 
Mumbai, linked to terrorist activities planned and executed by members of the banned organization SIMI. 
The blasts resulted in significant casualties and property damage, prompting an extensive investigation by the 
Mumbai Police and other agencies. 


12.19.18 On 06.12.2002 an explosion at Mumbai Central Railway Station injured 23 people. The blast occurred 
during the bandobast duty for Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar's death anniversary. The bomb exploded near 
McDonalds Hotel, causing extensive damage and spreading panic. On 27.01.2003 an explosion occurred at 
Monghibai Market Road, Vile Parle. The blast resulted in one fatality and injuries to 32 people. The damage 
to property was estimated at Rs. 2 lakhs. Initial investigation at the site revealed a bomb explosion caused by 
an explosive device placed on a cycle. On 13.03.2003 an explosion on a Karjat local train at Mulund Railway 
Station resulted in 11 deaths and injuries to 82 people. The blast caused significant damage to the train 
compartment and surrounding areas. 


12.19.19 Several suspects were arrested following the blasts. Key individuals were interrogated, leading to the 
recovery of evidence, including explosive materials, documents, and confessions linking them to SIMI and 
the blasts. Confessions were recorded under Section 32 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA), revealing 
detailed plans and execution of the blasts by the accused. 


12.19.20 The investigation identified multiple individuals involved in the planning and execution of the 
blasts. The accused in Special Case No. 2 of 2003 were key members of the banned organization SIMI, 
involved in planning and executing multiple bomb blasts in Mumbai. Saquib Abdul Hamid Nachan, a central 
figure, orchestrated the conspiracy and coordinated with other members to carry out the attacks. Ateef Nasir 
Mulla, Hasib Zubeir Mulla, and Gulam Akbar Abdul Sattar Khotal played significant roles in the operational 
aspects of the blasts, including the procurement and assembly of explosive devices. Noor Mohammed Ansari, 
Dr. Wahid Jabbar Ansari, and Anwar Ali Khan were actively involved in the logistics and transportation of 
explosives. Farhaan Abdul Malik Khot, Mohammad Kamil Shaikh, Muzammil Akhtar Ansari, Haroon 
Rashid Loha, Rashid Ahmed Ansari, Adnan Bilal Mulla, and Mohd. Sayyad Sadiq Turaballi assisted in 
various capacities, from facilitating communications to providing safe houses for the conspirators. 


12.19.21 The investigation led to the recovery of substantial evidence linking the accused to the bomb blasts. 
Confiscated items included explosives, detonators, and materials used in bomb-making, such as gelatin sticks 
and ball bearings. From the accused persons’ residences and hideouts, law enforcement recovered detailed 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 83 


maps and plans outlining the targeted locations for the blasts. Electronic devices, including laptops and 
mobile phones, were seized, containing communications and instructions for executing the attacks. 
Additionally, the authorities recovered financial records and documents evidencing monetary transactions for 
purchasing explosive materials and funding the operations. The thorough recovery of these items provided 
crucial evidence for prosecuting the accused and establishing their roles in the terrorist activities. 


12.19.22 A charge sheet was filed against the accused under various Sections of POTA, IPC, and the 


Explosive Substances Act. The case was registered as Special Case No. 2 of 2003 before the Designated 
POTA Court, Mumbai for trial for the offences under Section 3, 4, 5, 20, 21(2), 21(4) of POTA Act, 2002 r/w 
under Section 120B, r/w 302, 34, 307,324, 326, 427, 121A, 122 of IPC r/w under Section 5, 9(B)of the 
Explosive Act, 1884 r/w under Section 3, 4, 5 of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 r/w Section 3 of 
Damage to Public Property Act r/w under Section 151,152, 153 of the Indian Railways Act. 


12.19.23 Initially, 17 accused were arrested. During the trial, two accused (Mohd. Sayyed Sadiq Turab Ali 


and Rashid Ahmed Abdul Malik Ansari) died, and one accused (Arif Hussain Sabir Hussain Shaikh) was 
released due to insufficient evidence. Vide the judgment dated 06.04.2016, the Special Court convicted 10 
accused persons for several offences. The convicted individuals filed criminal writ petitions in the Bombay 
High Court against their convictions. The State also filed appeals against acquittals and for enhanced 
punishments. He has placed on record the copies of the documents relating to the record of the aforesaid 05 
cases as Ex. PW28/B to Ex. PW28/F. 


12.19.24 It is stated by the witness that the investigation and legal proceedings of Special Case No. 2 of 2003 


12.20 


12.20.1 


12.21 


12.211 


12.21.2 


highlight the extensive efforts by law enforcement agencies to bring the perpetrators of the Mumbai blasts to 
justice. The case underscored the challenges in prosecuting individuals involved in terrorist activities and the 
need for robust legal frameworks to address such threats to national security. He stated that the accused were 
involved in promoting SIMI's ideology, inciting communal violence, and planning terrorist activities. That the 
SIMI aims to disturb communal harmony and promote terrorism. He advocated for the continuation of the 
ban on SIMI as necessary for the integrity and sovereignty of India. 


Ms. Madhuri Dilip Baviskar, Assistant Commissioner of Police, Sadar Division, Nagpur City, 
Maharashtra has been examined as the witness PW29. Her affidavit Ex. PW29/A details the evidence and 
ongoing investigations related to Crime No. 3182/2006 registered at Sadar Police Station on August 8, 2006, 
under Sections 10 and 13 of the UAPA and which involves members of SIMI, justifying the continued ban on 
the organization. On 08.08.2006, PSI Sanjay Patange received reliable information about a secret meeting 
held by members of SIMI at Sadar, Nagpur City. The meeting was held to create provocative objectionable 
information and spread it to others to encourage Muslim youths to commit subversive acts in the name of 
Jihad against the nation. 


Shakil Warsi was identified as the Organizer of the secret meeting and as a key member of SIMI. He was 
actively involved in planning and executing the meeting to spread SIMI's ideology and provoke subversive 
acts. He was arrested on August 8, 2006. Shakir Ahmed was a participant in the secret meeting and identified 
as an active member of SIMI. He assisted in organizing the meeting and spreading SIMI's provocative 
materials. He was also arrested on August 8, 2006. Three other accused were also found to be participants in 
the secret meeting and identified as members of SIMI. They were also on August 8, 2006. Charge sheet in the 
case was filed on October 3, 2006, by the then Assistant Commissioner of Police N.D. Gore. The trial is 
ongoing with 3 witnesses examined so far. 


Mr. Kundlik Rambhau Hore, the Range Forest Officer, Aundha Nagnath, District Hingol1, 
Maharashtra is examined as the witness PW30. His affidavit of evidence Ex. PW30/A detailed the evidence 
and ongoing investigations related to WL No. 04/2015 registered at Range Forest Office, Aundha Nagnath, 
Hingoli, which involves members of SIMI, justifying the continued ban on the organization. The case was 
registered under Section 26(1)(i) of the Indian Forest Act, 1927, and Sections 9, 39, 51, 52 of the Wildlife 
Protection Act, 1972. 


On 09.08.2015 Forest Guard Shivramkrushna Sitaram Chavan, Sukapur beat, under the range forest office 
Aundha Nagnath, received secret information about illegal hunting activities in the reserve forest 
compartment no. 612A. The investigation team led by P. G. Kokitkar, RFC, Mobile Squad, Hingoli, along 
with Divisional Forest Office field staff, discovered a dead Nilgai (Blue Bull) with parts of its body 
dismantled, indicating poaching. An auto rickshaw and a motorcycle used in the poaching were seized as part 
of the investigation. The accused persons namely Sajjad Khan Yunus Khan Pathan, Vakaroddin Ifroddin 
Inamdar, Dr. Sayyad Afaq Hussain Khatib, Musabhai, Nawab Bhai and Shekh Najir Sheikh Mohd. were 
detained and their confessions were recorded. Statements from witnesses were also recorded. The dead body 
of the Nilgai was examined by the Veterinary Officer, and an autopsy was conducted. 


The investigation revealed that one of the accused, Vakaroddin Ifroddin Inamdar, had previous criminal 
records including involvement in crimes registered under the IPC and the UAPA. It was confirmed that 


84 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


42.22 


42.22. / 


12.22.2 


12.22.3 


12.22.4 


12.22.5 


12.22.6 


12.22.7 


12.23 


12.23.1 


Vakaroddin Ifroddin Inamdar was an active member of SIMI. After completing the investigation, the charge 
sheet was filed in the court of the Ld. Judicial Magistrate First Class (JMFC) at Aundha Nagnath on October 
7, 2015. The trial is still pending, and charges have not been framed yet. 


PW 31 is Mr. Manohar Ramchandra Dabhade, Sub Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) of Murtijapur, 
District Akola, Maharashtra. His affidavit Ex. PW31/A filed in evidence before this Tribunal details the 
evidence and ongoing investigations related to Crime No. 3065/2009, registered at Murtijapur Police Station 
under Sections 10 and 13 of the UAPA and which involves members of SIMI, justifying the continued ban on 
the organization. 


On 19.07.2019 Police Inspector P.R. Giri received a tip-off from an informer about a meeting of SIMI 
members at Chotti Masjid in Mana, near Murtijapur, District Akola. The meeting was reportedly aimed at 
discussing SIMI's ideology and planning future activities. Based on the information, a nakabandi was ordered 
on NH-6 from Mana to Borgaonmanju to intercept the suspects. Additional SP sent a message to the Control 
Room at 15:15 hrs to enforce the nakabandi. Police stopped an Indica car bearing registration number MH 23 
E 3773. Inside the car, three individuals were found: Abdul Rajjag, Syed Ibrahim, and Musad Khan. A search 
of the car in the presence of two panch witnesses led to the recovery of items, including a CD titled "Darusal 
Quran" and papers written in Urdu. Head Constable Aslam Khan translated the Urdu materials, revealing 
them to be related to SIMI and containing objectionable content aimed at inciting violence. 


An offence was registered at Murtijapur Police Station under Cr. No. 3065/2009, citing Sections 10 and 13 of 
the UAPA. The FIR and translations of the materials were documented as evidence. 


Statements from witnesses confirmed the accused's membership in SIMI. The investigation extended to other 
individuals named in the secret information. The investigation revealed that the accused were active members 
of SIMI, involved in provoking the Muslim community under the guise of jihad to incite anti-social and anti- 
national activities, including riots between Hindu and Muslim communities. 


Despite the initial investigation report under section 169 of Cr.P.C. indicating insufficient evidence against 
accused Nos. 4 to 8 (Mohammad Rafiq Abdul Rehman, Abdul Ahad Abdul Samad, Mohammad Harun 
Gyasuddin, Mohammad Siddiq Abdul Wahab, and Sheikh Mahmood/Munnabhai Sheikh Lai), the court of 
the Ld. JMFC, directed the prosecution of all accused. 


On 15.09.2014, a charge sheet was filed before the trial court. The objectionable documents and CD 
containing provocative lectures were seized and presented as evidence. The materials reflected SIMI's 
ideology and intentions to spread and promote terrorism and other destructive activities. 


It is stated that the seized documents contained highly provocative language intended to inspire SIMI 
members and other youths. The CD included speeches advocating jihad and the liberation of Kashmir, 
Bangladesh, and Pakistan, indicating a clear intent to conduct and promote terrorist activities in India. The 
materials revealed plans to unite SIMI associates, promote the organization’s mission, and carry out 
retaliatory actions for the Malegaon blast. The ideology focused on creating communal rifts, damaging the 
secular fabric of Indian society, and undermining national integration. 


The trial is ongoing under RCC No. 160/2014, with charges yet to be framed as of 05.06.2024. It is stated by 
the witness that the accused were involved in promoting SIMI's ideology, inciting communal violence, and 
conducting meetings to plan further activities. It is further stated that SIMI aims to disturb communal 
harmony and promote terrorism. The seized materials and statements reveal plans to retaliate for the 
Malegaon blast and engage in destructive activities. The witness has further stated that SIMI's activities pose 
a significant threat to national integrity and sovereignty. He stated that lifting the ban on SIMI would enable 
its activists to engage in terror acts, undermining the law and order situation in the country. The affidavit 
supports the continuation of the ban on SIMI as justified and necessary for the integrity and sovereignty of 
India. It also states that the ban is essential to prevent the resurgence of SIMI's activities and protect national 
security. 


PW32 is Mr. Maroti Dnyanoji Thorat, Sub Divisional Police Officer (SDPO), Basmat, District 
Hingoli, Maharashtra. In his affidavit of evidence Ex. PW32/A he has deposed regarsing the case Crime No. 
117/2010 registered at PS- Aundha Nagnath, Hingoli under Sections 353, 143, 147, 148, 504, 332, 427, 295, 
149 IPC & Section 135 Mumbai Police Act. 


The case CR No. 117/2010 is associated with an incident during the Ganesh Visarjan procession in Aundha 
Nagnath, Maharashtra, on 22.09.2010. The event escalated into a violent confrontation resulting in injuries 
and damage to property. On 23.09.2010 at 12:30 AM, the Ganesh Visarjan procession reached Qaziana 
Masjid. Devotees were chanting provocative slogans like "Ye to abhi zaki hai, Ayodhya abhi baki hai" which 
led to build up of tensions. Accused No. 1-12 namely Jakioddin Rashidoddin Kazi, Ziauddin Rashidoddin 
Kazi, Laiqoddin Rashidoddin Kazi, Shaikh Ijaz Shaikh Khaled, Shaikh Baba Shaikh Ikrmoddin, Syed Noor 
Syed Khaja, Sarfraz Wahid Khan Pathan, Shafiyoddin Rashidoddin Kazi (a former member of SIMD), 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 85 


12.23.2 


12.23.3 


12.23.4 


12.24 


42.24. / 


42.24. 2 


12.24.3 


12.24.4 


Anikoddin Rashidoddin Kazi, Salimoddin Issakoddin Khatib, Shaik Iqbal @ Billa Shaikh Khaled and Shaikh 
Jabbar Shaikh Ibrahim became agitated due to the slogans and started throwing stones at the procession and 
police personnel. Accused No. 13-24 namely Manoj Shankarrao Deshmukh, Gajanan Kantrao Renake, Gokul 
Subhash Kale, Sunder Uttamrao Deshmukh, Baban Manikrao Sonvane, Sachin Marotrao Dev, Anil Kisan 
Dev, Amol Vishwanath Gotare, Pramod Kisan Dev, Nagesh @ Babu Rangnath Yennawar, Vijay Ramprasad 
Yeutkar and Maroti Shivajirao Raje retaliated by pelting stones at Zaki Kazi's house, leading to a broader 
communal clash. 


Police Inspector Mr. Chatrabhuj Kakade and his team were on duty to manage the procession. Police 
personnel, including Police Naik B.No. 370 Nanarao Pole, Police Naik No. 477 Mr. Mane, Police Head 
Constable B.No. 334 Hurgule, and Police Head Constable B. No. 199 Mr. Pathan, were injured while 
attempting to control the situation. 


On 30.11.2010, the charge sheet was filed against the 24 accused individuals, which was later submitted to 
the Ld. JMFC court, Aundha Nagnath. Vide the judgment dated 16.03.2008 (Ex. PW32/D) all the 24 accused 
were convicted under Section 147 of IPC (Rioting) and fined Rs. 1500 each with a default sentence of 15 
days imprisonment. Injured police personnel were awarded compensation of Rs. 5000 each from the fine 
amount. Accused were acquitted of other charges under Section 248(1) of Cr.P.C. due to lack of separate 
punishment under Section 143 of I.P.C. The Ld. District Judge-2 and Additional Sessions Judge, Basmath, 
Hingoli vide the judgment 15.09.2023 (Ex. PW32/E) dismissed the appeal and upheld the conviction. 


It is stated that one of the accused, Shafiyoddin Rashidoddin Kazi, was linked to the banned organization 
Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI). 


PW35 is Mr. Shriram Meena, Assistant Director, Enforcement Directorate, Raipur Zonal Office, 
Raipur. In his affidavit of evidence Ex. PW35/A he has deposed regarding the case ECIR/RPSZO/01/2014 
dated 24.01.2014 recorded by Enforcement Directorate, Raipur against Dhiraj Sao and others. It is stated that 
this investigation was conducted under the Money Laundering Act, 2002, based on the facts recorded in FIR 
No. 567/2013, dated December 25, 2013, registered by the Khamtarai Police Station in Raipur, Chhattisgarh. 
The FIR contained allegations of violations of Sections 3, 13, 17, and 40 of the UAPA, which are scheduled 
offenses under the PMLA, 2002. Subsequently, a chargesheet bearing No. 156/2014, dated June 19, 2014, 
was filed against Dhiraj Sao and others by the Khamtarai Police Station. 


Dhiraj Sao, son of Late Bindeshwari Sao, resided in Raipur since 2010-11 and earned his livelihood by 
selling chicken and mutton. He was a permanent resident of Chhattu Dhanama, Kakan, Jamui, Bihar. Sao 
came in contact with a Pakistani national named Khalid over the phone, who offered him money to receive in 
his account and transfer by way of cash deposits into other accounts as instructed. Khalid promised him 
commissions for these transfers. 


Sao agreed to Khalid's instructions and opened an account with ICICI Bank in Raipur on January 25, 2012. 
He started receiving money from different locations across India. After closing this account, he opened 
another account with ICICI Bank in Jamui, Bihar, for receiving funds. Following instructions from Khalid 
and his Indian accomplice, Sao withdrew money from ATMs and deposited it into the accounts of Zubair 
Hussain, Aysha Banu, and Raju Khan, members of banned organizations SIMI and Indian Mujahideen. Sao 
received a 13% commission for these transactions. Zubair Hussain received a 10% commission. These cash 
deposits created a web of transactions originating from a Pakistani national to many middle players, 
eventually reaching individuals linked to SIMI/IM. 


Zubair Hussain, a resident of Mangalore, earned his livelihood through the bidi business and had previously 
worked in Dubai. In May 2012, he opened an account with ICICI Bank in Mangalore to receive funds for 
terror funding. Approximately Rs. 84,38,600/- was deposited into his account from various locations in a 
short span of eight months. Hussain misused several bank accounts to divert funds received from different 
sources to terrorist outfits linked to SIMI and Indian Mujahideen. Despite being aware of the funds' illicit 
origins, Hussain engaged in these transactions for the sake of earning quick money. He admitted to the Bihar 
Police that he received a 10% commission for these acts. During the investigation, attempts to record his 
statement under PMLA were unsuccessful as he refused to receive summons and avoided the investigation, 
indicating his intention to conceal his criminal activities. 


Aysha Banu, Hussain's wife, also a resident of Mangalore, opened an account with ICICI Bank in 2012 for 
receiving funds exclusively for unlawful activities and terror funding. She received approximately Rs. 
2,13,97,800/- in her account over eight months. The funds were subsequently withdrawn from ATMs and 
handed over to various individuals linked to terrorist outfits with her husband's assistance. Banu received a 
10% commission amounting to Rs. 21,39,780/-. Investigations revealed that she purchased a residential 
property with the proceeds of crime. She admitted that her husband operated her bank account using forged 
signatures, and although she was unaware of the depositors, she knew the funds illegitimate sources. Banu 


86 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART IIH—SEC. 3(11)] 


12.24.5 


12.24.6 


12.24.7 


12.24.8 


12.24.9 


knowingly assisted her husband in laundering approximately Rs. 2.13 crore and committed the offense of 
money laundering under PMLA, 2002. 


The funds credited to the accounts of Zubair Hussain and Aysha Banu were part of a larger scheme involving 
multiple transactions from various locations across India viz a viz Bahal, Kapurthala, Sonepat, Moga 
(Punjab-Haryana) Jodhpur, Hanumangarh(Rajasthan), Raxaul (Bihar). Their accounts received significant 
deposits within a short span, indicating efforts to layer the money to conceal its sources and ultimately use it 
for terror-related activities. The involvement of multiple intermediaries facilitated these transactions, with 
commissions paid at each stage. 


Zubair Hussain and Aysha Banu were charge-sheeted in two different cases in Chhattisgarh and Bihar under 
in two states(Chhattisgarh and Bihar) under Sections 420, 467, 468, 471, 120(B) of IPC and Sections 17,18, 
18(B), 21, 381 40 of UAPA and out of two cases, they have been convicted in the charge-sheet filed by 
Chhattisgarh Police for the offence of raising funds for terrorist act and a terrorist organisation under section 
17, 40(1 )(b) & 40(1)(c) of the UAPA. That charge sheet no. 11/2014 dated 03.02.2014 in FIR NO. 454/13 
dated 07.11.2013 of Kavaiya Thana, Lakhisarai, Bihar related to similar act of terror funding revealed that 
Ayesha Bano, Zubair Hussain of Mangalore and others were involved. Hussain's confessional statement 
before Bihar Police revealed his involvement in terror funding activities and interactions with other accused 
individuals who coordinated money transfers. Analysis of call data records confirmed continuous 
communications between the accused and contacts in Pakistan, indicating cross-border implications of their 
activities. 


A provisional attachment order was issued by the Enforcement Directorate on October 13, 2017, attaching 
properties worth Rs. 2,81,156 belonging to Aysha Banu and others. The Adjudicating Authority confirmed 
this order on 22.01.2018. After the investigation done by E.D., Prosecution Complaint (P.C.) (Ex. PW35/K) 
in the present case was filed on 30.06.2018 arraying Dheeraj Sao, Avinash Ranjan, Shrawan Mandal, Pappu 
Mandal, Raju Khan, Aysha Banu, Zubair Hussain and Khalid as accused persons. Vide order dated 
08.11.2019(Ex. PW35/L) the Special Court (PMLA) has taken cognizance against all the accused persons 
except Khalid (Pakistani National), whose whereabouts are yet to be ascertained. 


It is stated by the witness that the Scheduled offence case was transferred to the Special Court in terms of 
Section 44 (1)(c) of the PMLA, 2002 from the N.I.A. Court, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh. That the accused persons 
Dhiraj Sao, Zubair Hussain, Aysha Banu and Pappu Mandal have been convicted by the Special Court in 
Special Session Trial case No 01/2020 of State Police case vide its Judgment/order dated 24.11.2021 (Ex. 
PW35/M). The relevant extract of the translated judgment as relied on by the witness in his affidavit is 
reproduced as follows: 


“The gist of entire analysis is that Accused disclosed in their memorandums that they are 
affiliated with terrorist organization called SIMI and they were promoting activities of this 
terrorist organization by collecting money from them and thereafter transferring that money in 
the bank accounts of different persons. But since memorandum itself is not admissible in evidence 
therefore confessions made in a memorandum cannot be in the nature of any offence. But it has 
been revealed (Facts discovered) in the memorandums given by Accused Dheeraj Sao, Pappu 
Mandal and Sukhen Haldhar that they came in contact with Zuber Hussain and Ayesha Bano 
who were members of the terrorist organization called SIMI and they were getting money for 
promoting terrorist activities in India and were transferring that money in the accounts of 
different persons after deducting their commission from it. All these facts have been revealed by 
them in their memorandums and police officers were not aware of these revelations earlier and 
the facts discovered have been held to be admissible in evidence. It_is, therefore, held that 
Accused Dheeraj Sao, Zuber Hussain, Ayesha Bano, Sukhen Haldhar and Pappu Mandal are 
members_of terrorist organization called SIMI and received monies for promoting terrorist 
activities and transferred the monies received by them in the accounts of different persons and 
thereby promoted terrorist activities of banned terrorist organization called Students of Islamic 
Movement of India (SIMI) and they were very well aware that money transferred by them will be 
used for terrorist activities in the country. Accused Dheeraj Sao used e-mails and bank accounts 
of other persons for calling money for furthering terrorist activities of the above banned 
organization. Prosecution has also successfully proved charges under Sections 17, 40 (1)(b) and 
40 (1)(c) of UAPA, 1967, against Accused Dheeraj Sao, Zuber Hussain, Ayesha Bano and Pappu 
Manda!. Resultantly Accused Dheeraj Sao, Zuber Hussain, Ayesha Bano and Pappu Mandal are 
convicted for offence under Sections 17, 40 (1)(b) and 40 (1) (c) of UAPA, 1967.” (Emphasis 
supplied) 


The affidavit concludes by asserting that the evidence gathered clearly demonstrates the involvement of SIMI 
in anti-national activities. It requests the Tribunal to uphold the declaration of SIMI as an unlawful 
association in the public interest to curb its illegal activities. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 87 


42.25 


12.25.1 


12.25.2 


12.25.3 


12.25.4 


12.25.5 


12.25.6 


12.25.7 


12.25.8 


Shri Rajesh Kumar Gupta (PW-39) tendered his affidavit of evidence as Ex.PW-39/A. He stated that 
he is presently posted as Director (CT) in the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
and is authorized to depose before this Tribunal as he has been dealing with all the relevant records in his 
official capacity. He deposed that the notification No. 8.0. 354(E) dated 29th January, 2024 issued by the 
Central Government is based on the information and material received from the central intelligence and 
investigation agencies, States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh with regard to the unlawful activities of the Students 
Islamic Movement of India (SIMI). That based on these information, a note was prepared for the 
consideration of the Cabinet Committee on Security and draft notification was also annexed to the said note 
and sent to the Cabinet Secretariat and thereafter, the Cabinet Committee on Security took the decision and 
approved the proposal contained in the above note in the meeting held on 24th January, 2024. 


He stated that accordingly, the declaration was made and published vide notification dated 24th January, 
2024, bearing No. S.O. 354(E). He further deposed that in terms of sub-section(1) of Section 5 read with sub- 
section (1) of the UAPA and vide notification dated 16th February, 2024, bearing No. 8.0. 722(E), this 
Tribunal was constituted and the background note was submitted to this Tribunal in terms of Rule 5 of the 
Unlawful Activities Prevention Rules 1968, vide letter dated 26th February, 2024 based upon the 
material/information as contained in the concerned files. 


He further deposed that on the basis of the inputs received from the Intelligence agencies and the 
Governments of various States/UTs about unlawful activities of SIMI earlier the Central Government had 
declared SIMI as an unlawful association under the provisions of the UAPA for the first time on 27th 
September, 2001. And thereafter, in view of the continuous unlawful activities of SIMI, the organisation was 
further banned from time to time on 26.09.2003, 08.02.2006, 07.02.2008, 05.02.2010, 03.02.2012, 
01.02.2014 and 31.01.2019. That after the declaration: of SIMI as an unlawful association, the Tribunals had 
also confirmed all the notification of declaration except Notification of declaration dated 07.02.2008. The 
order dated 05.08.2008 of the Tribunal, not confirming notification dated 07.02.2008 on technical grounds, 
was stayed by the Supreme Court of India vide order dated 06.08.2008, 25.08.2008 and 11.09.2008 in SLP 
(c) No. 19845 of 2008. 


Mr. Gupta deposed that various cases registered by various State Governments and UT Administration, 
National Investigation Agency and Directorate of Enforcement throw light on the unlawful and subversive 
activities of the cadres/members of banned organisation. 


Mr. Gupta further deposed that the officers concerned of the different States/UT have filed affidavits before 
this Tribunal in respect of cases registered in their respective States/UT against the cadres/members of SIMI 
under various provisions of law including the UAPA, Indian Penal Code etc. 


It is also deposed that the officers concerned of the National Investigation Agency (NIA) and Directorate of 
Enforcement (ED) have also filed affidavits before this Tribunal in respect of the cases registered against the 
members of SIMI under various Sections of the UAPA, Indian Penal Code, 1860 and Prevention of Money 
Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002. 


The witness PW39 has further deposed that various witnesses have already adduced evidence during the 
course of proceedings before this Tribunal in support of the declaration as contained in notification 
No. 8.0. 354(E) dated 29th January, 2024 and that the evidence adduced clearly establishes that SIMI is 
continuously indulging in activities of secession and cessation which pose a serious threat to the internal 
security of the country. 


It is further stated that in addition to the above evidence, various intelligence inputs show that SIMI is 
continuing its unlawful activities which are prejudicial to the security of the country. Considering all these 
facts, circumstances and evidences, which have been adduced before this Tribunal also, the SIMI has been 
banned under Section 3(1) of the UAPA. 


It is stated that as per the information received from various agencies, the cadres/members of the SIMI have 
been indulged in radicalizing and brainwashing the minds, and indoctrination of youth through provocative 
speeches for destroying the sovereignty of Union of India and that they have indulged in unlawful activities 
aimed at disrupting the sovereignty and integrity of India, peace, communal harmony, secular fabric of the 
Indian society and internal security and hence, it is justified that banning of SIMI is necessary in the interest 
of national security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. He further deposed that the original files 
(duly indexed) containing above mentioned central intelligence reports/inputs are being submitted in three 
sealed covers for the perusal of this Tribunal. He further deposed that the Central Government seeking the 
privilege for the original files mentioned above, relies on section 123 of Evidence Act read with Rule 3(2) 
and proviso to Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968. He deposed that the contents of 
the above files are privileged and confidential in nature and the same cannot be made available to the banned 
association or to any third party as the Government considers it against the public interest to disclose the 


88 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


12.25.9 


12.25.10 


12.25.11 


13. 


14, 


15. 


16. 


same to either the banned association or to any third-party inter-alia in terms of the provisions of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968. 


PW39 then deposed that the nature of the proceedings and the scope of inquiry before the Tribunal and the 
treatment which has to be given to documents in respect of which privilege has been claimed by the 
government or its nodal agency has been authoritatively laid down under paras 20-22 by the Supreme Court 
in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind Vs Union of India (1995) 1 SCC 428 in the specific context of the provisions of the 
UAPA and that vide the said judgment the Supreme Court, after interpreting the scheme of the UAPA and 
the rules framed thereunder, has unequivocally upheld the right of the government/prosecution/nodal 
agencies to claim privilege in respect of confidential documents in public interest. It is further stated that the 
documents for which claim of privilege is being sought, by their very nature, are confidential and sensitive in 
nature and, therefore, cannot be supplied as a public document as dissemination of the same to public at large 
may impede/impeach the ongoing investigations/prosecutions against the incumbent banned organization or 
its members and can also entail cross border nation security concerns and therefore, the said documents can 
be verified by the Tribunal only. 


It is further stated that SIMI is indulging in anti-national activities posing a serious threat to the 
sovereignty and integrity of India. If the SIMI is not declared as unlawful, the activists and sympathizers of 
SIMI will pose a serious threat to the communal harmony, internal security and territorial integrity of the 
country. It is further submitted that through material available on record and inputs received from various 
agencies the SIMI has been incessantly encouraging and continuously pursuing the agenda of inciting and 
orchestrating violence in the country. 


He lastly deposed that in view of the submissions made by him, the declaration made by the Central 
Government vide Notification No. 8.0. 354(E) dated 29th January, 2024 may be confirmed and upheld in 
public interest as well as national interest. 


As held by the Supreme Court in Jamaat (supra), this Tribunal must develop a procedure to 
objectively assess the credibility of the material presented before it and weigh it as if adjudicating a dispute 
between two parties. The outcome will determine whether there is sufficient cause to declare the association 
unlawful. The material presented to the Tribunal includes affidavits sworn by police officers, some of whom 
are also investigating officers with direct knowledge of the facts uncovered during investigations and 
statements made to them. Other witnesses include supervisory and nodal officers who have gathered 
information based on records from various police department offices. This material is admissible under 
Section 35 of the Indian Evidence Act. The credibility of the accused's statements is further supported by the 
consistency of similar facts and evidence emerging from statements recorded by different police officers 
from various jurisdictions. 


The testimony of PW 33, Mr. Vipin Kumar, DSP, NIA has shown that the accused persons arrested 
in the case RC-31/2022/NIA/DLI namely Athar Parvej and Jalaluddin were connected with SIMI members 
and were taking the help of such members for planning the commission of terrorist acts. The testimony of 
PW 20, Mr Vinod Kadam, DSP, NIA has shown that the accused persons arrested during the investigation of 
the case no. RC—29/2023/NIA/DLI have been working on the instructions of foreign ISIS handlers and of the 
accused Saquib Nachan who was previously the All India General Secretary of SIMI. He has shown that 
another accused namely Adil Elias Khot was also connected with SIMI and that the other accused persons 
investigated in the said case were SIMI sympathisers. The recovery of huge quantities of explosives and 
instruction manuals for making explosive devices indicate the danger which the erstwhile members/office 
bearers/sympathisers SIMI still pose to national security. 


Ms. Susheela R. DSP, NIA while deposing as PW 36 has stated before the court that the accused 
Shihabuddin @ Sirajuddin @ Khalid @ Rajesh, who was one of the main accused persons in the case RC- 
04/2020/NIA/DLI was a SIMI member. He was providing legal aid to the persons involved in committing 
offences related to SIMI. He had also been shown to have conspired to collect the firearms used in murdering 
the police officials with respect to which the case FIR No. RC—06/2020/NIA/DLI was registered. Regarding 
case number RC—28/2023/NIA/DLI, DSP Susheela R. has shown to the Tribunal that the accused persons 
found involved in the said case have led to the recovery of huge quantities of firearms and communication 
equipment like walkie-talkie. One of the main accused namely T. Naseer found connected with the offence, 
was a SIMI member and he was still not desisting from committing illegal activities even while being in 
custody as ample evidence was found that he was radicalising fellow prisoners in jail towards violent 
activities against the Indian State. 


The witness PW19, R.Ranjit Singh, DSP/NIA while deposing with respect to the case No. RC- 
16/2019/NIA/DLI has shown that the SIMI members like Syed Bukhari, Mohammed Ibrahim @ Ibrahim 
Jamali have been instrumental in forming pro Al-Qaeda and pro ISIS groups in India for violently 
establishing Islamic State (the main objective of the SIMI). He has shown that the accused persons connected 
with SIMI have planned anti-India activities while being in the UAE. This shows that the SIMI sympathisers 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 89 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


25. 


26. 


have been using foreign soil and perhaps seeking international support to commit activities which are against 
the interest of the Indian State. 


The government by examining PW3 Abhilash MJ, Inspector, NIA regarding RC- 
02/2019/NIA/KOC has shown that Sheikh Hidayatullah, an ex-SIMI member, is still propagating the 
ideology of ISIS/ Daesh. It has been shown that this accused is recruiting vulnerable youth for committing 
terrorist attacks in India. 


PW2 Umesh Rai K, Inspector, NIA has deposed that the investigation of the case RC- 
02/2020/NIS/KOC has revealed that the PFI members earlier associated with SIMI are maintaining 
operational nexus with terrorist organisations like Lashkar-e-Taiba, Al Qaeda and ISIS/Daesh. He has 
deposed that one of the main accused identified in the said case namely Muhammad Ali @ Kunhappu Haji 
was earlier a member of SIMI and thereafter he had joined PFI which is also an unlawful association. 


The testimony of PW38, T. V. Rajesh, DSP/NIA has shown that the former office bearers and/or 
members of SIMI namely E.M. Abdul Rehman, ex-National Secretary, SIMI; E. Abubacker, ex-State 
President SIMI and founding chairman of Popular Front of India (PFI); P. Koya, ex-SIMI member and 
founding member of PFI and A.S. Ismail have been raising funds from within India and abroad for 
committing terrorist acts in various parts of India. They have also been found involved in radicalising and 
recruiting Muslim youth to join organisations like the ISIS and for provoking them to commit violent and 
unlawful activities. The collection of such funds is also the subject matter of investigation by the 
Enforcement Department as has been deposed by Mr Ankur Sharma, Assistant Director, E.D. with respect to 
the connected case No. ECIR/STF/17/2022. 


The government has successfully shown to this Tribunal that members of SIMI like Abdul Rageeb 
Qureshi, forming part of the testimony of PW- 37, Mr Wanenlo Woch, Additional Superintendent of Police, 
NIA have been conspiring to commit terrorist attacks on government establishments. 


The testimony of PW-21 API Amol Nandakumar Salunkhe has shown that despite the ban, the 
activists having affiliation with the association SIMI, like Kasib Sattar Balere @ Kasif are still not desisting 
from flouting orders passed lawfully by government authorities. 


The testimonies of witnesses like ACP Anita Prabha Sharma, DSP Sanjay Sharma, DSP Kuldeep 
Tiwari, SP Pranay S. Nagvanshi, DSP Arvind Singh Tomar, DSP Harsh Upadhyay, ACP Kishore Vasudev 
Parab, ACP Siraj Hazratsaheb Inamdar and Assistant Director Mr Shriram Meena have established before the 
Tribunal that the accused persons investigated in the cases with respect to which these witnesses have 
deposed, have been found guilty by the respective courts in such cases. These witnesses have deposed 
unequivocally about the relationship of such convicts with the association SIMI. 


It is also noteworthy that the testimony of these witnesses has remained unchallenged. The 
respective statements have been supported by the relevant documents including the copies of respective FIRs, 
charge sheets, confessional statements made during the investigation and certified copies of the judgements 
delivered in the respective cases. 


It has also been proved before this Tribunal that several SIMI members/office bearers/sympathizers, 
accused of various offences have also been found involved in more than one cases. Annexure - III to this 
Order shows the details of such accused persons along with the particulars of the cases in which they have 
been found to be commonly involved. 


Five witnesses of the Police have given information including intelligence reports of the various 
accused in sealed covers which have revealed about the activities in which the members/activities of SIMI 
are involved and which are being carried out by the frontal organisations formed apparently to subvert the 
bans imposed on the said association. It has been stated in these reports that despite the ban, the cadres of 
SIMI are being used by other terrorist outfits. They also disclose names of other accused involved in the 
larger conspiracies who have not been arrested as yet. Materials in sealed cover also reveal a number of 
frontal organisations and connect with other terrorist organisations. The reports disclose sensitive information 
which leads to the conclusion that the network of SIMI office bearers/activists/members/sympathisers is still 
operating in different States in a systematic manner. The reports are sensitive in nature and therefore, their 
disclosure would be injurious to public interest. These reports show that former SIMI activists after the ban 
on SIMI are participating in different organizations and carrying out their hidden agenda and through 
organizations such as Wahadat-e-Islami Hind and IYF, they are again committing anti-national acts by 
mobilising Muslim youth. The reports also indicate that former members have been participatintg in 
programs which are being held under different banners. 


The material produced in sealed covers by the PW39 Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gupta, Director, Ministry 
of Home Affairs, Government of India, contains the note put up to the Cabinet Committee on Security along 
with the documents supporting the note and the grounds on which the Notification dated 29% January, 2024 


90 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


27. 


26. 


29. 


was issued. It also contains the intelligence inputs and correspondence in relation thereto. The said material 
shows that despite the ban on SIMI, the unlawful activities of its members/sympathizers continue unhindered. 


Based on the evidence and material provided to the Tribunal, it is evident that SIMI (Students 
Islamic Movement of India) continues to engage in unlawful and terrorist activities despite being banned. 
The organization is expanding its ranks by indoctrinating young boys and operating through front 
organizations. SIMI maintains connections with various terrorist groups such as Al-Qaeda, LeT (Lashkar-e- 
Taiba), JeM (Jaish-e-Mohammed), ISIS, and IM (Indian Mujahideen). It continues to receive both domestic 
and international funding, which supports its activities in India. The ban on SIMI has been in effect since 
2001, with only a brief interruption. Despite this, it’s activities have continued in flagrant violation of law. 


From the evidence presented before this Tribunal, it is clear that several accused persons, who have 
committed various offences across different jurisdictions, have been identified as members or activists of 
SIMI. By conspiring together, they committed numerous offences aligned with SIMI's ideologies and 
propaganda. Additional evidence has been introduced in the form of witness statements and court findings 
from competent jurisdictions. These findings reveal that some of the accused involved in the aforementioned 
offences were indeed members of SIMI. Furthermore, some of these individuals have been convicted for 
being members of the unlawful association, raising funds for it, and participating in its activities. This 
evidence effectively establishes the fact that despite the previous bans, the SIMI is still active through its 
members and various offences have been committed in furtherance of the objectives of SIMI. 


From the material placed before the Tribunal and as noted above, it is evident that members/activists 
of SIMI who were involved in commission of heinous offences and unlawful activities prior to the eighth ban 
continued with such offecnces and activitie 


s even after the last ban with the help of the other members within and outside the country, on their own and/or with 


XII. 


the support of other terrorist organizations. 
CONCLUSION 


After thoroughly analyzing the evidence presented before this Tribunal, it is of the conclusion that 
there is sufficient material to hold that the conditions outlined in Section 2(p)(i) and (ii) of the UAPA are 
met. Therefore, based on the findings mentioned above, it is held that there is sufficient cause to declare the 
Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) an “unlawful association.” Consequently, an order is issued 
under Section 4(3) of the UAPA to confirm the declaration made in the Ministry of Home Affairs' 
notification S.O. 354(E) dated 29th January 2024, which was issued under Section 3(1) of the UAPA. This 
confirmation reaffirms the government's action of banning SIMI. 


Justice PURUSHAINDRA KUMAR 10 071२0 ७, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal 


July 24, 2024 


[F.No.14017/49/2024-NI-MFO] 
ABHIJIT SINHA, Jt. Secy. 
ANNEXURE - I 
DETAILS OF CASES REGISTERED AGAINST SIMI ON OR AFTER 317 JANUARY 2019 


NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY (NIA) 


1. 


lil. 


Case Crime No. RC-02/2019/NIA/KOC has been registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
against ex-SIMI cadre Sheik Hidayathullah Y @ Firoze Khan @ Firozy. Sheik Hidayathulla was a part of 
conspiracy in propagating the ideology of proscribed terrorist organisation ISIS/Daesh, and also recruiting 
vulnerable youths with a view to carry out terrorist attacks in South India especially in the cities of Kerala and 
Tamil Nadu. During the search conducted in his premise, various documents relating to SIMI were seized. He 
has been charge-sheeted in the instant case under section 38 and 39 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Act, 1967; 


Case Crime No. RC-02/2022/NIA/KOC has been registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
against ex-SIMI leader Mohammed Ali @Kunhappu Haji @Kunjappu Sahib @Kunjappukka. The accused is 
an ex-SIMI member and former state vice-president of Popular Front of India (PFI), Kerala. He used to 
arrange and supervise arms training conducted at Periyar Valley campus Aluva on various occasions. He 
propagated violent jihad to the cadres of Popular Front of India and also justified the terrorist activities in 
Popular Front of India meetings. He has been charge-sheeted under various provisions including section 16, 
18A, 18B, 38 and 39 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; 


Case Crime No. RC-16/2019/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
against Mohammed Ibrahim @Ibrahim Jamali, who is an ex-State Secretary of the proscribed organisation 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9] 


Iv. 


Vi. 


Vil. 


Vill. 


1x. 


ENFORCEMENT DIRECTORATE (ED) 


Xl. 


SIMI, was the main leader of the pro-jihadi jamaat formed in UAE with the intention of propagating violent 
extremist ideology of proscribed terrorist organisations including Al-Qaeda and ISIS. He has also subscribed 
and disseminated pro-ISIS/ Daish material advocating violent jihad and establishment of Islamic Khilafat, 
while delivering lectures on such topics during the meetings and classes organised by the unlawful jamaat in 
the United Arab Emirates. The accused has been charge-sheeted in the instant case on 1 st January, 2020 
before the NIA Special Court, Chennai; 


Case Crime No. RC-06/2020/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) which 
pertains to the murder of Shri SSI Wilson on 8" January, 2020. During investigation serious involvement of 
@S. Shahabudeen @Shihabudeen @Sirajudeen @Khalid was revealed which resulted in his arrest on 6 th 
January, 2021. It was also revealed that this accused has been continuing with covert anti national activities as 
the former SIMI member having association with hard core ISIS cadres. He was also involved in publication 
of provocative and highly objectionable material inciting others to commit terror acts; 


Case Crime No. RC-29/2023/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
against Saquib Nachan, ex-National General Secretary of SIMI. He was main conspirator and radicalising 
Muslims for violent Jihad or Hijarat. He was giving ‘Baith’ (Pledge and Allegiance to ISIS) to Muslim 
youths. Further, he motivated other persons to take ‘Baith’ of ISIS. He is alleged to have established ‘Al 
Sham’ like area in Padga village, wherein sharia law is followed; 


Case Crime No. RC-31/2022/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
against Athar Parvej and Mohd. Jalaluddin of Phulawari Sharif, Patna relating to conspiracy of disrupting the 
visit of Hon’ble Prime Minister in July 2022. Both the accused were arrested and charge-sheeted under 
various provision including section 17, 18, 18A, 18B 38 and 39 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 
1967; 


Case Crime No. RC-28/2023/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
against T. Naseer, ex-SIMI member, later joined Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), a proscribed terrorist organisation. 
He used to select newly lodged Under Trial prisoners and got them transferred to his barrack. He further 
convert, radicalise and recruit them for furthering the activities of LeT in Central Prison, Bengaluru from 
2017 onwards. In furtherance to their conspiracy and on the instructions of T. Naseer, co-accused arranged 
arms and ammunitions and explosives in collusion with other accused. He was involved in raising funds in the 
Prison for furthering their activities of proscribed terrorist organisation. The accused has been charge-sheeted 
in the case under the provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. He has been charge- 
sheeted on 12th January, 2024; 


Case Crime No. RC-04/2020/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
against Shihabudeen @ Sirajudeen @ Khalid @ Rajesh, ex-SIMI member. In May 2019, he met Khaja 
Mohideen and others in a rented house at Annan Ninaivu Nagar, Puzhal and joined the terrorist gang formed 
by Khaja Mohideen for establishing Khilafat or Islamic Rule in India, as part of furthering the objectives of 
the proscribed terrorist organisation ISIS/Daish in India. He has received funds from Khaja Mohideen for 
procurement of fire arms and ammunition. He was charge-sheeted on 9 th March, 2021; 


Case Crime No. RC-01/2023/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
against ex-SIMI cadre A. R. Qureshi. He along with his associates hatched the conspiracy to join the ISIS for 
the cause of Islamic Jihad and targeted killing in India. He has been charge-sheeted in the instant case under 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; 


Case Crime No. RC-14/2022/NIA/DLI has been registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
against E.M. Abdul Rehman, ex-National Secretary, SIMI, E. Abubacker, ex-State President SIMI and 
founding chairman of Popular Front of India, P. Koya, ex-SIMI member and founding member of PFI, A. S. 
Ismail, ex-SIMI member and State President of PFI, Tamil Nadu. Accused were, conducted meetings for 
expansion of PFI (banned organisation) through radicalising and recruiting Muslims, providing weapons 
training classes across the country under the garb of ‘Beginners Course’ and other seemingly innocuous 
programs, collection of funds and facilitating funds to persons for commission of unlawful activities and was 
involved in conspiracy to commit violent unlawful and terrorist act. All the aforesaid accused were charge- 
sheeted on 18th March, 2023; 


Case Crime No. ECIR/STF/17/2022 has been registered by the Directorate of Enforcement against the office 
bearers, Ex-SIMI members and cadres of PFI (now banned), along with others, for conspiring and raising or 
collecting funds within India and abroad through banking channels, Hawala, donations, etc. for committing or 
getting committed, terrorist acts across India. These cadres and members are also involved in activities 
supporting and furthering the proscribed terrorist organisations like SIMI and ISIS; 


92 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


Xil. 


Case Crime No. ECIR/RPSZO/05/2020 dated 27th February, 2020 has been registered by the Directorate of 
Enforcement under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002, Umair Siddiqui and Others. Umair 
Siddiqui a suspicious activist of SIMI, used to give shelter to various members of the banned organisation 
SIMI and Indian Mujahiddin terrorist organisation from the year 1999. Umair Siddiqui and his group 
organised a camp of SIMI in forest of Barnawapara and the purpose of the meeting was to strengthen the 
organisation SIMI and collect funds for aiding the terrorist of Indian Mujahiddin and SIMI; 


MAHARASHTRA 


xiii. 


XIV. 


Case Crime No. 203/2022 has been registered at Padgha Police Station, Thane (R) under sections 153(a), 
153(1)(a)(b) and 153(2) of the Indian Penal Code for writing of provocative text on Jamma (Moti) Mosque 
Padgha, Borivali, Thane to create a communal rift between two religions or communities and lead a violence 
and increase enmity between the two groups and disrupt social harmony. The case is pending trial in court; 


Case Crime No. 15/2023 has been registered at Padgha Police Station, Thane (R) under sections 37(1)(3), 135 
of the Maharashtra Police Act 1951, read with section 194(d), 129, 177 of the Motor Vehicle Act 1988, for 
raising slogans and hold rally for getting the bail to Atik Nachan in Ahmedabad NIA Court and violation of 
prohibition order of Collector and District Magistrate, Thane. The case is pending for trial in court; 


MADHYA PRADESH 


XV. 


Case Crime No. 1/2023 has been registered at STF Police Station, Khandwa under sections 121, 121A, 122, 
123, 120B of Indian Penal Code against Abdul Ragib, being a member of various pro-ISIS, pro-Caliphate 
telegram channels. He regularly watched videos related to ISIS and also downloaded the same; 


RAJASTHAN 


XVI. 


XVII. 


Case Crime No. 493/2019 has been registered at Kotwali Police Station, Gangapur, Sawai Madhopur under 
sections 147, 341, 342, 323, 15.0, 295A, 296, 298 of Indian Penal Code against Mohd. Salam @Salla for 
attackand pelting stones from the top of Jama Masjid on the rally of Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) on 25th 
August, 2019 on the occasion of its Foundation Day; 


Case Crime No. 488/2019 has been registered at Kotwali Police Station, Gangapur, Sawai Madhopur under 
sections 147, 148, 149, 332, 353, 427 of Indian Penal Code against Alim for attack and pelting stones from 
the top of Jama Masjid on the rally of Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) on 25th August, 2019 on the occasion 
of its Foundation Day; 


ANNEXURE - I 


DETAILS OF CASES IN WHICH JUDGEMENT HAVE BEEN DELIVERED AND ENDED WITH 


CONVICTION OF ACCUSED SIMI ACTIVISTS ON OR AFTER THE BAN IMPOSED ON 
317 JANUARY, 2019. 


KERALA 


Crime number 356/2008, PS- Edakkad, Kannur district- It is alleged that the 24 accused persons 
between the years 2006-2008 had hatched a criminal conspiracy in Kannur and other places in India and 
abroad with intent to facilitate and promote terrorism and thereby waged war against the Government of 
India. They conspired with the proscribed terrorist organisation, LeT. The accused persons under the 
leadership of the accused T. Naseer conducted Jihadi classes and selected other four accused persons for 
training in LeT Camp in Jammu and Kashmir. These accused persons trained in weapons in Jammu and 
Kashmir to wage war against the Government of India and while undergoing training, three of them were 
killed in exchange of fire with Indian Security Forces while the fourth managed to escape. The case was re- 
registered by the NIA as RC-02/2010/NIS/DLL. The Special Court for Trial of NIA cases convicted 13 out of 
24 accused persons. The Kerala High Court vide the order dated 09.05.2022 upheld the conviction of 10 
accused persons while acquitting the remaining three. 


MADHYA PRADESH 


1. 


Two SIMI activists have been sentenced to two years imprisonment and a fine of rupees one thousand each 
under Section 295A of Indian Penal Code by the court of Addl. District Magistrate, Jabalpur in Case Crime 
No. 706/2006 registered at Gohalpur Police Station, Jabalpur under section 153A, 34, 153B, 195A, 124A of 
the Indian Penal Code. 


Three SIMI activists have been sentenced three years simple imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand 
each under section 419 of the Indian Penal Code, two years simple imprisonment and fine of rupees ten 
thousand each under section 10A of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, seven years simple 
imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand each under section 13(1)(a), 13(1)(b) of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967 and five years simple imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand each under 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 93 


lil. 


Iv. 


Vi. 


Vil. 


Vill. 


1x. 


section 13(2) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 by the Court of Additional Chief Judge, 
Bhopal in Case Crime No. 95/2008 registered at Kotwali Police Station, Bhopal under section 419 of Indian 
Penal Code and section 10, 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; 


One SIMI activist has been sentenced three years imprisonment by the court of JMFC, Indore in Case Crime 
No. 192/2008 registered at Khazrana Police Station, Indore under section 153A, 153B of Indian Penal Code 
and section 10, 11, 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. 


Two SIMI activists have been sentenced three years rigorous imprisonment under section 419 of the Indian 
Penal Code by the court of District, Bhopal in Case Crime No. 205/2008 registered at Shahjahanabad Police 
Station, Bhopal under section 419 of Indian Penal Code. 


One SIMI activist has been sentenced ten years of imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand under 
section 394 of Indian Penal Code, five years imprisonment and fine of rupees fifty thousand under section 450 
of the Indian Penal Code by the court of District, Indore in Case Crime No. 802/2008 registered at Khazrana 
Police Station, Indore under section 395, 397, 506 of the Indian Penal Code and 25 and 27 of Arms Act, 1959. 


Three SIMI activist have been sentenced three years rigorous imprisonment and fine and two SIMI activists 
have been sentenced six months imprisonment and fine of rupees one thousand under section 143 of the 
Indian Penal Code, three years rigorous imprisonment and fine of rupees one thousand under section 153A of 
Indian Penal Code, three years rigorous imprisonment under section 153B of Indian Penal Code, two years 
rigorous imprisonment and fine of rupees one thousand under section 10 to the Unlawful Activities 
Amendment Act, 2004, three years rigorous imprisonment and fine of rupees one thousand condition to extra 
three months imprisonment in case of non-payment of fine under section 13 of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967 by the court of Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Indore in Case Crime No. 05/2009 
registered at STF/ATS Police Station, Bhopal under section 147, 149, 153A, 153B of Indian Penal Code and 
section 10, 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; 


Two SIMI activists have been sentenced life imprisonment and fine of one thousand each condition to extra 
six months imprisonment in case of non-payment of fine under section 395, 397 of Indian Penal Code by the 
court of Special Judge, NIA, Bhopal in Case Crime No. 456/2009 registered at BNP Police Station, Devas 
under section 395, 397 of Indian Penal Code and section 10, 13, 16, 17, 20, 21 of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967 and section 25, 27 of the Arms Act, 1959; 


One SIMI activist has been sentenced two years imprisonment and another one SIMI activist has been 
sentenced ten years rigorous imprisonment by Additional Sessions Judge, Indore in Case Crime No. 13/2010 
registered at Bhanwar Kuwan, Indore under section 395, 397, 450, 398 of Indian Penal Code and section 25, 
27 of Arms Act, 1959; 


One SIMI activist has been sentenced life imprisonment and fine under section 302, 307 of Indian Penal Code 
and section 16(1)(a) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 by the court of Special Judge, NIA, 
Bhopal in Case Crime No. 35/2011 registered at GRP Ratlam Police Station, Indore (Rail) under section 307, 
302, 34 of Indian Penal Code and section 10, 13, 16, 18 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 and 
25, 27 of Arms Act, 1959; 


Four SIMI activists have been sentenced by the Special Judge, NIA, Bhopal in Case Crime No. 22/2013 
registered at STF/ATS Police Station, Bhopal as details given below: - 


a. One SIMI activist has been sentenced ten years rigorous imprisonment and fine of rupees ten 
thousand under section 307 of Indian Penal Code, three years rigorous imprisonment and fine of 
rupees two thousand under section 25(1-B) A, 27 of Arms Act, 1959; 


b. One SIMI activist has been sentenced ten years rigorous imprisonment and fine of rupees ten 
thousand under section 307 of Indian Penal Code, three years rigorous imprisonment and fine of 
rupees two thousand under section 25(1-B) A, 27 of Arms Act, 1959, seven-year rigorous 
imprisonment and fine of rupees five thousand under section 468 of the Indian Penal Code; 


c. One SIMI activist has been sentenced life imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand under 
section 120B of Indian Penal Code read with section 4(B) of Explosive Substances Act 1908, 
life imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand under section 120B of Indian Penal Code read 
with section 5(B) of Explosive Substances Act 1908, seven years rigorous imprisonment and 
fine of rupees five thousand under section 468 of Indian Penal Code, life imprisonment and fine 
of rupees ten thousand under section 16 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; and 


d. One SIMI activist has been sentenced life imprisonment and fine of rupees ten thousand, 
separately under both section 4 and 5(B) of Explosive Substances Act 1908, life imprisonment 
and fine of rupees ten thousand under section 16 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Act, 1967; 


94 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


Xi. 


Xi. 


xiii. 


XIV. 


Five SIMI activists have been sentenced rigorous life imprisonment and fine of rupees two thousand under 
section 16B, 18 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 along with Section 25 of Arms Act 1959 by 
the Special Judge, NIA, Bhopal in Case Crime No. 01/2014 registered at STF/ATS Police Station, Bhopal 
under section 307, 34, 120B, 107, 115 of Indian Penal Code and section 10, 13(1), 13(2), 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 
38, 39 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 and section 3, 4, 5, 6 of the Explosive Substances 
Act 1908 and section 25 of Arms Act, 1959; 


Crime no. 434/13 P.S. Sendhwa, Distt. Badwani under Sections 307, 34 IPC. Subsequently it led to the 
registration of the Crime no. 22/13 on 26.12.2013 in Police Station A.T.S./S.T.F. Bhopal under Sections 307, 
34, 467, 468, 471, 120B and 201 of IPC, Sections 25 and 27 of the Arms Act, Sections 3,4,5 and 6 Explosive 
Substance Act and Sections 3, 10, 13 and 13(1)(2) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act. The case is 
related to the arrest of the prisoners related to the association SIMI and who had escaped after breaking from 
Khandwa jail and who were also wanted in the murder of the ATS Const. Sitaram Const. Shiv Pratap. The 
Court of the 24th Additional Sessions Judge and Special Judge, NIA, Bhopal, vide the judgment dated 
16.09.2022, convicted the following accused persons in the said case: Irfan Nagori, Abu Faisal, Mohd. Sadik 
and Umer Dandoti and sentenced them to various terms of prison ranging from ten years rigorous 
imprisonment to life imprisonment. 


Crime no 01/2014 was registered at Police Station ATS/STF Bhopal for the offences under Section 25 Arms 
Act, Sections 307, 34, 120B, 107 and 115 IPC & Sections 3, 10(a) & 10(b), 13(1)(2), 16, 17, 18, 20, 38 and 
39 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act & Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the Explosive Substances Act. The 
case was related to the seizure of explosive substances and detonators from the SIMI members. Vide the 
judgment dated 28.02.2019, the Court had convicted the accused persons namely Javed Nagauri, Abdul Aziz, 
Abdul Wahid, Jubair Hussein and Mohd. Adil and sentenced all of them to life imprisonment. Accused Majid 
Nagori and Khalid Ahmad were killed in a police encounter in the jurisdiction of Gunga Poilce Station, Distt. 
Bhopal on 31.10.2016. The accused persons namely Abu Faizal, Irfan Nagori, Umer, Sadik and Sazid were 
acquitted of all charges by the court. This acquittal has been challenged before the Madhya Pradesh High 
Court. 


Cr. No. 541/13 Registered at Police Station Kotwali, Khandwa against the members of banned organization 
SIMI. The was registered regarding the attack on police officials who were trying to apprehend the suspected 
SIMI member who had escaped from Khandwa Jail. The Special Court of NIA Bhopal vide the judgment 
dated 07.12.2023 in Cr. No. 541/13 (S.T. Reg. No.154/2015) had convicted the accused Abu Faizal in the 
said case and sentenced him to life imprisonment. The other accused Abid Mirza was acquitted of all charges 
by the court. This acquittal has been challenged in the Madhya Pradesh High court. 


UTTAR PRADESH 


1. 


lil. 


Five cases were registered vide a common FIR No. 590/2014 at Police Station- Kotwali City, District- Bijnor 
viz. Crime No. 964/2014 under Sections 121, 1220f IPC; Crime no. 965/2014 under Sections 13, 18, 23 of 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act; Crime No. 966/2014 under Section 25 Arms Act; Crime No.967/2014 
under Section 25 Arms Act and Crime No. 968/2014 under Sections 4 and 5 of Explosives Substances Act. 
Three crime case numbers were registered vide a common FIR No. 597/2014 viz. Case Crime No. 974/2014 
under Sections 121A, 122, 120B IPC; Case Crime No. 975/2014 under Sections 4 and 5 of Explosive 
Substances Act and Case Crime No. 976 of 2014 under Sections 13, 18, 23 of Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act. Three crime case numbers were registered vide a common FIR No. 598/2014 viz. Case 
Crime no. 977/2014 under Sections 121A, 122, 216, 120B IPC; Case Crime No. 978 of 2014 under Sections 
4 and 5 Explosive Substances Act and Case Crime No.979/2014 under Sections 13, 18, 23 of Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act. 


On 12.09.2014 one bomb blast took place in the house of Leela Devi at Jatan Mohalla, Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh. 
During investigation, it was revealed that six tenants were residing in the house of Leela Devi on the day of 
the incident. After analysis of CCTV footage and other material six persons namely Mohd Amjad, Zakir, 
Sheikh Mehboob, Mohd Salim, Aslam and Mohd Ejajuddin @ Aijaz were indentified. All the accused 
persons had absconded after the incident took place. 


During investigation it was found that these six persons were associated with the banned organization SIMI 
and had escaped from Khandwa Jail, Madhya Pradesh on 10.10.2013. The other arrested accused persons in 
this case were Husna, Nadeem, Furkan, Raees and Abdulla who had provided logistic support and had 
facilitated the escape of the above mentioned accused persons. After registration, these FIRs were firstly 
transferred to ATS UP Police, Lucknow and subsequently to the NIA which resulted in registration of FIR 
no. RC-01/2015/NIA/DLI, RC-10/2015/NIA/DLI & RC-11/2015/NIA/DLI. After investigation by the NIA, 
the charge sheet was filed. The accused persons namely Husna @ Husana, Abdullah, Races Ahmed, Nadeem 
and Fukran were convicted by the trial court vide the judgment dated 30.06.2022. 


[भाग त--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 95 


GUJARAT 


The Sessions Case No. 38 of 2009 titled ‘State of Gujarat v. Jahid @ Javed Kutubuddin Shaikh and 
Ors.’. This case pertained to the 22 bomb blasts which took place at different places in Ahmedabad city on 
26.07.2008 as well as to the subsequent recovery of unexploded bombs. Vide the judgment dated 18.02.2022 
the learned Additional Sessions Judge (Special Designated Judge for Speedy Trial of Serial Bomb Blast 
Cases), Court No. 4, Ahmedabad, Gujarat convicted several accused persons. Out of the 80 accused against 
whom trial was conducted, accused no. 79 and 80 expired during the course of trial. Out of the remaining 78 
accused, 38 have been awarded capital punishment, 11 have been awarded life imprisonment and 29 were 
acquitted. 


TAMIL NADU 


1. 


Case Crime No.722/1999 was registered on the information that on 25.6.1999 at about 1615 hrs in the 
Coimbatore City, some persons were seen distributing May and June 1999 issues of the SIMI magazine titled 
‘Seithi Madal', containing sedition articles. They knew that the said articles could bring hatred and excite 
disaffection towards the government established by law and that the articles were prejudicial to communal 
harmony between Muslims and other religions. The Ld. Additional District and Sessions Court, Coimbatore, 
Fast Track Court No. 2 vide a detailed judgment dated 29.02.2012 convicted five accused persons namely 
Samimul Islam, Syed Abdur Rahman, Syed Mohammed, Khadar Bhaba and Shah Jahan (who were the 
members of SIMI) for the offences u/s 124A and 153B IPC. 


Vide the judgment dated 19.12.2019 the Madras High Court set aside the conviction of all the convicts for 
the offence under Section 124A IPC. The convicts namely Syed Mohammed, Khadar Bhaba and Shah Jahan 
were acquitted for the offence under Section 153B IPC. However, the conviction and sentence imposed by 
the trial Court on Samimul Islam and Syed Abdur Rahman for the charge under Section 153B IPC was 
confirmed. 


MAHARASHTRA 


1. 


iii. 


Crime No. 100/2021 was registered at Padgha Police Station on March 6, 2021, under Sections 188, 269 IPC 
read with Section 51(B) of the Disaster Management Act. On 06.03.2021, at about 9:30 AM, in Navi Vast, 
Borivali village, Padgha, Tal-Bhiwandi, Dist-Thane the accused, Adil Elias Khot, organized a religious 
program "Sharte-A-Nabi" without safety measures during the COVID-19 pandemic, violating prohibitory 
orders. He thereby breached the prohibition order issued by the District Magistrate issued Under No. 
Gruha/Ka/-l/T-I/ManaiAadesh/V_ shi/23-21, dated 25.02.2021. Vide the judgment dated 11.12.2021 the 
accused was found guilty of the offence punishable under section 269 IPC and Section 51(b) of Disaster 
Management Act. 


LAC No. 34 of 2006 was initially registered as LAC No. 1106 of 2006 at Ghatkopar Police Station and 
subsequently transferred to the DCB CID Unit VII. The case involves individuals linked to the banned 
organization SIMI who were planning to commit unlawful activities during the Ganesh Utsav festival in 
Mumbai. Vide the judgment dated 25.09.2019 the accused Nafis Ahamad Jamir Ahamd Ansari and accused 
Mohd.Ali Alam Shaikh @ Aziz were held guilty for the offence punishable under section 10 of Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act. 


The case Crime No. 117/2010 registered at PS- Aundha Nagnath, Hingoli under Sections 353, 143, 147, 148, 
504, 332, 427, 295, 149 IPC & Section 135 Mumbai Police Act. The case is associated with an incident 
during the Ganesh Visarjan procession in Aundha Nagnath, Maharashtra, on 22.09.2010. The event escalated 
into a violent confrontation resulting in injuries and damage to property. Vide the judgment dated 16.03.2018 
all the 24 accused were convicted under Section 147 of IPC and fined Rs. 1500 each with a default sentence 
of 15 days imprisonment. Injured police personnel were awarded compensation of Rs. 5000 each from the 
fine amount. The appeal against the conviction has been dismissed 15.09.2023. 


CHHATTISGARH 


FIR No. 567/2013, dated December 25, 2013, registered by the Khamtarai Police Station in Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh. The allegations are to the effect that the accused persons namely Dhiraj Sao, Zubair Hussain, 
Aysha banu & Pappu Mandal have been collecting funds from different sources in their bank accounts 
knowing fully that the same will be used for unlawful activities by the members of SIMI. They used to get 
commissions for this act. They also were in touch with Pakistani national in this regard. The said accused 
persons Dhiraj Sao, Zubair Hussain, Aysha Banu and Pappu Mandal have been convicted by the Special 
Court in Special Session Trial case No 01/2020 case vide its Judgment/order dated 24.11.2021. 


96 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


SYNOPSIS/CHART OF EVIDENCE ADDUSED BEFORE THE HON’BLE TRIBUNAL 


ANNEXURE-ITI 


In the matter of 


STUDENTS ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF INDIA(SIMD) 
A. State of Kerala 
SI District/Affidavit FIR No. Name of Accused ChargesIP Common Accused ( inCr. 5 - 2 Pending 
No. C/UAPA /FIR No.) 3 £ 2 Investigation 
3 z | 2 
9 < < 
1 448/2010 1.P.K.AbdulRahimanS/ IPC A1.P K. Abdul Rahman is Pending 
of o MoideenKhader Section124 also accused in Cr. 533/2013 Trial in the 
Kozhikode ee 5818] A, 153 A and 697/2013 of Nadakkavu Hon’ble 
है Ci Town PS ie AMA VAS 220. ४2 1/ए 34. PS Special Addl 
Kozhikode City Kalam Sessions 
3.Mahin C.A S/o Abdul Court( 
हि Marad 
Rahiman ८ 
ases), 
4.Abdul Raasik S/o Kozhikkode 
Abdul Rahiman as SC 420/19 
5..Haneef.K.T, S/o 
Kunhimoideen 
2 Kozhikkode City 533/2013 bman.P, s/o Hassankutty IPCSection A2.P K. Abdul Rahman is Pending trial 
of : 153-A& also accused in 448/2010 of in the 
Nadakkavu | 2.P. KAbdulRahimans/ 0 153-B. Kozhikode Town PS and Hon’ble 
PS Moideen Khader 697/2013 of Nadakkavu PS JFCM Court 
‘ -Iv, 
3. MujeebRahman,s/o Kozhikkode 
Abdurahiman Cc 
as CC 
180/20 and 
the trail in 
this case is 
stayed by the 
Hon’ble 
High Court 
of Kerala. 
3 Kozhikkode City 697/2013 1.Muhammed Hashim IPCSection A2.P K. Abdul Rahman is Pending trial 
of @ Hafsa,s/o Abdul 153-A also accused in 448/2010 of before 
Nadakkavu | Azeez &153-B Kozhikode Town PS and Hon’ble 
PS 533/2013 of Nadakkavu PS JFMC- IV 
2. P.K Abdurahiman, Kozhikode 
S/o MoideenKhader as CC 
3. Siddiq TP, S/o 230/201 
Chekku 
B. NIA, Kochi 
[ SR.No. District/Affida FIR NO. Name of the accused Charges(IPC/UAPA) Comm Convi Acqu Absconding Pending 
vit on ction ittal Investigation 
Accuse 
d(in 
Crime/ 
FIR 
no.) 
1.) NIAKochi RC- Mohammed Ali@ KunhappuHaji Sections120B N/A Charge} N/A Alreadyarr Final report 
02/2022/NI @Kunjappu Sahib@ &amp;153A ofIPC yet to ested on already filed 
A/KOC KunjappukkaA ge-57/2023Date of andsections 13, be 22.9.2022 before the 
Birth :18.5.1965 18,18A &amp; 200f framed and Hon’bleSpeci 
UA (P)Act. isinjudicial al Court for 
KarayilMarakkar @Marakkar, custody. NIA 
H.No. 220, casesErmakul 
KarayilHouse, ValancheryPost,Katti am,Kerala on 
pparuthi,Malappuram,Kerala. 17.3.2023. 
2.) NIAKochi RC- ShiekHidayatullah @Firoze Khan 120B ofIPC read N/A Trial Under | Now J/C Charge 
02/2019/ @Firozy (A-3),age 38/2019,S/o with Sections 38 and is Trial Sheeted on 
NIA/KOC Yakoob @K. A. Yakoob,No. 25, 39 of the Unlawful going 07.12.2019 
1“Floor, Kulanthai Activities on 
(Prevention) 
Gounder Street,South Act,1967 
Ukkadam,Coimbatore,Tamil Nadu 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


97 


C. Delhi Police 
| Sr.No. | District/Affidavit | FIR no. Name of the Charges Common Conviction | Acquittal | Absconding | Pending 
accused (IPC/UAPA) Accused (in Investigation. 
crime/ FIR 
no.) 
1. ACP Ved Parkash | 532/2001 Hanif Sheikh @ | 3/10/13 UAP Act a 7 & Charge-sheet 
(Special Cell/SR, Mohd. Hanif @ &amp; filed, 
Saket, New Haneef Hudai 153A/153B/120B/174 हि 
Delhi) IPC (arrest on Pending for 
24/02/2024) cognizance 
(i) 158/1998 7 Acquittal 7 a 
dated 
01.12.1998, 
u/s 
153(B)/295 
/34 IPC, PS 
Bazarpeth, 
Bhusawal, 
Maharashtra 
(ii) FIR No. | Acquittal 7 a 
104/1999 
u/s 
153 (A) IPC 
PS 
Bazarpeth, 
Bhusawal, 
Maharashtra 
(iii) FIR a Acquittal 7 a 
No. 
3038/1999 
u/s 144 
CrPC 
&amp; 188 
IPC, 
D. NIA, Kolkata 
[ Sr.No. District/Affi FIR. No. Name of the Charges Common Conviction | Acquittal Absco Pending 
davit accused. (IPC/UAP Accused (in nding Investigation. 
A) Crime/FIR no.) 
1. Kolkata RC- AbdulRagqibQureshi(4 120B ofIPC | KotwaliPS, No. No. No Pending Trial 
01/2023/NIA/D | 0 years)S/o and18, MPCaseNo. 14/20 
LI AbdulWakilQureshiR | 20,38 09. 
/o &amp; 
IndiraColony,Khanda 390f 
wa, MadhyaPradesh UA(P)Act. 
E. State of Maharashtra 
| Sr.No. | District/Affidavit | FIR no. Name of theAccused Charges(IP ommon Conviction | Acquittal | Absconding Pending 
C/UAPA) Accused(in हे 
rime/FIR Investig 
0.) ation 
Ls Thane Rural/Mr 15/2023 1. RehanAsphakSuse 37(1)(3) r/w Trial 
Anmol 135 of Pending. 
NandkumarSalun 2. Musab Haseeb Mulla | Maharashtra 
khe, API, Padgha. ‘ ‘ Police Act, 
3. Atif Atiknachan 1951 & 129, 
4. Abdul Kadir Suse 177 of Motor 
Vehicles Act 
5. Kasif Sattar Balere 
(SIMI) 
2 Thane Rural/ Mr 100/2021 Adil IlyiasKhot 188, 269 Conviction/ Admitte 
Prakash Shivdas IPC, 51B pleaded d guilty/ 
Chavan, Head (PS- Disaster guilty penalty 
Constable, Kulgaon) Management imposed 
Kulgaon. Act 
3. Thane Rural/ Mr 203/2022 Kasib Sattar Balere 295A, 153A 15/2023 Pending 
Ramchandra (1), (A) Trial 
Zalte, Dy SP, (PS- (B)(2) of IPC | PS- 
Ganeshpuri Padgha) Padgha 


98 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


Division (PW-21) 

4. Thane City/Mr 131/2012 1. Saquib Abdul 307,120B, Trial 
Nilesh Nanabhau, (PS-Crime Hameed Nachan. 153A- IPC Pending. 
ACP, Crime Branch) 

Branch. 2. Guddu Khan. Section 15 of 

UA(P) Act & 

3. Shamil Nachan. 3(i), 3(2), 
3(4) of 

4. Akif Nachan. MCOCA, 
3,25&27 of 

5. Tanveer Jamindar. Arms Act 

6. Abu Bakar @ Saif 

Sheikh. 

S ATS Mumbai/ Mr 06/2010 Himayat Inayat Beg @ 302, 307, Himayat 1.Mohsin Ismail Trial 
Kishor Ahmed Beg Inayat 326, 324, Inayat Beg Chaudhary pending 
VasudeoParab, (ATS Mirza @ Yusuf 427, 120B @ Ahmed against 
ACP, ATS Mumbai) IPC, section Beg Inayat 2.Riyaz Ismail accused 
Mumbai Ahmed Siddhibappa 3,45 of Mirza @ Shabari @ Riyaz no.02 

Zafar @ Yasin Bhatkal Explosive Yusuf Bhatkal 
Act & 16, 18 
21 of UA(P) Convicted 3.Iqbal Ismail 
Act death Shabari @Iqbal 
penalty. Bhatkal 
4. Fayyaz Kagzi 
5. Sayyed Jabiuddin 
Sayyed Jakiuddin 
LAC ile Mohd 23(1)(a) of Accused Accused 1. Fayyaz 
No.03/06 Amir Shakil Ahmed Maharashtra no.1,10, no. Kagzi 
- @ Shaikh Amer Control of 11,14, 19, 2,4,8,12, @ 
(ATS — Shaikh Shakil Organized 21,822 13, Julfikar 
Mumbai) Crime Act& have been 15,16& Fayyaz 
2. é Mohd 3(1) (ii), convicted 17 has Ahmed 
Zuber Sayyed Anwar 3(2), 3(4) for life been sa 
MACOCA imprisonm acquitted 2. haikh 
Mone Act, 1999 t Ejaz 
Muzaffar Mohd Sh : a Shaikh 
Tanveer Raheem 
? Chand 
4. Abdul Accused 
Azeem Abdul Jameel no.3&9 has 3 Shaikh 
Shaikh @ Raja been Masood 
5. Mushtaq a ed oe 
Ahmed MohdIssak yeat, ‘Alined 
6. Javed 
fs 4 Rahul 
Ahmed Abdul Majid Abdul 
7. Afzal ete Rehman 
Khan Nabi Khan eee /Shaikh 
has been 
8. Riyaz sentenced oe Junaid 
Ahmed Mohd Ranjan for 8 years. @ 
@ Raju Rasheed 
Abdulla 
9. Dr Mohd @ Abu 
Sharif Shabbir Ahmed Abdul 
Aziz@ 
10. Bilal Junaid 
Ahmed Abdul Rajak @ 
11. Sayyed eens 
Aakif Sayyed 82 
Jafaruddin HOES 
12. Khatib By. “age 
Imran Akhil Ahmed 
13: Shaikh 


VikarMohd Shaikh 
Nisar 


14. Afaroz 
Khan Shahid Khan 
Pathan 

15. Mohd 
Samad Shamsher 

16. MohdAkil 
Mohd Ismail Momin 
17. Firoz 
Tajuddin Deshmukh 
18. Shaikh 


Abdul Nadeem 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


99 


@Nayyu @ Sammer 
19. Faisal 
Ataur Rehman Shaikh 
20. Mustafa 
Mehmood Sayyed @ 
Munna Mustafa 
21. Mohd 
Aslam 
22. Sayyed 
Jabibuddin Sayyed 
ZakiuddinAnsar @ 
Jabi @ Jabi Ansar 
Te 05/2006 1. Kamal 3(1) 6), 3(2), Accused Accused Azam 
(ATS Ahmed Mohammed 3(3), 3(4), no.1,3,4 no.06 has Chima 
Mumbai) Vakil Ansari 3(5) of 512, 13 been @ 
MACOCA, have been acquitted Babaji 
2. Dr Section 10, convicted 
Tanveer Ahmed 13,16, 17 18, to death. Rizwan 
Mohd Ibrahim /Ansari 19, 20 & 40 Accused MohdD 
awre 
3. MohdFAis UA(P) Act, no. 2,5,6, 7, ye 
Section 9,10, 11 
aalAtaur Rehman Rahul 
Shaikh 302,307, have been ‘At 
a 326, 325, sentenced eke 
4. Ehtesham 324, 327, for life. Shaikh 
Kutubuddin Siddiqui | 436, 121A, 
122, 123, Hafiz 
5. Mohd 124A, 201, Zuber 
Majid MohdShafi 212, 120B @ 
IPC, Section Mohd 
6. Shaikh 6.9B 
है > Zuber 
Mohd Ali Alam Explosives Samssh 
Shaikh Act Section ul 
is Moby Fane pate 
| i be Rayeen 
Sajid Margu Ansari व 9658 4 
1. Kamal Act, Section Sohail 
Ahmed Mohammed 3,4 of Usman 
Vakil Ansari Prevention of GaniSh 
Damage to aikh 
2: Dr Public 
Tanveer Ahmed Property Act Aslam 
Mohd Ibrahim /Ansari | Section151, Hafizul 
ae 152, 153 & lah 
3. ie i ee 154 of 
aalAtaur Rehman रे ४ 
: Railway Act Sabit 
Shaikh and Section 
4. Ehtesham oe © ee ee 
Kutubuddin Siddiqui] (°° 7४ ce: 
5. Mohd le 
Majid MohdShafi 
6. Shaikh ie 
Mohd Ali Alam a 
Shaikh Ehsanu 
7. Mohd Hal 
Sajid Margu Ansari Abu 
8. Abdul Hee 
Wahid Din Mohd Abdul 
Shaikh Razak 
9. Muzzamm Abdul 
ilAtaur Rehman Rahman 
Shaikh 
10. Suhail 
Mehmood Shaikh 
11. Zameer 
Ahmed latifurRehman 
?Shaikh 
12: Naveen 
Hussain Khan 
13: Asif Khan 
Bashir Khan @ Junaid 
@ Abdulla 
a 31/2011 i Haroon 489A, 489B, Accused Accused Din 
(ATS) Rashid Abdul Hamid 489C, IPC no.1&2 no.3 Moham 
naik @ Umar convicted acquitted mad 
Akbar@ Mushtaq Akhtar 
Shaikh @ Salauddin Hussain 
@ 


100 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


2: Asaram 
Ahmad Abdul 
Hameed Tailor @ 
Safari 


3. Azhar-UI 
Islam Mohammad 
Ibrahim Siddiqui @ 
Munna 


Maulana 


2. Tarique 
Ismail 


3. Riyaz 
Bhatkal 
and 
others 


02/2012 


1.Akhil Yusuf Khilji 


2. Jafar Hussain Iqbal 
Hussain Qureshi 


3.Mohd Abrar@ 
Ismail@Munna@ 
Haider @ Abdul 
Rehman babu Khan 


5. Shaker @ Khalil 
6.Azhar @ Khalil 
7.Mohd Salik 


8.Amman@ Arafat @ 
Sarfaraz Mustakin 
Khan 


307, 333, 
335, 336, 
338, 352, 
353 & 34- 
IPC section 
3,25, 27 
Arms Act 
and section 
135 of 
Maharashtra 
Police Act. 


Pending 
trial 


10. 


04/2006 
(ATS 
Mumbai) 


1.Ehtesham 
Kutubuddin Siddiqui 


2.Danish Riyajuddin 
Shaukat Ali Shaikh 


3.Minaj 
MuktharNachan 


4. SaifAteequeNachan 


5.Shakil Warsi Abu 
Nasir Warsi 


6. Asrar Ahmed Abdul 
Hamid Tailor 


7. Irshad Salim Khan 


8. Safdar Husain 
Nagori @ Husain 
@Liyakatbhai @ iqbal 
@ Musabhai @ Bade 
Bhayya 


9.Hafiz Husain @ 
Adnan@Zaid@ 
Tameem @ Rasheed 


10. Kamruddin Chand 
MohdNagori @ Raju 
@ Abdullah @ Hanif 
@ Dildar 


11.Shibly Peedikachal 
Abdul Kareem@ Sabit 
@AL@ 
Hidayat@Naushad. 


12.Shahbaz Hussain @ 
Shahbaz Ahmed 
Mumtaz Ahmed 
@Shanu 


13.Abdus Subhan 
Qureshi @ Kasim @ 
Zakir @ Qab 


14, Ejaz Akram Khan 


15. IliyasAkram Khan 
@ Illu 


10&13 of 
UA(P) Act. 


Accused 
10.01 
convicted 


Accused 
no.02 to 
05 has 
been 
acquitted 


1.Ekrar Shaikh 
Abdul @ Bhre 
Ujjain MP 
2.Akbar Baig @ 
Hamja 


Trial 
pending 
against 
accused 
no.8,10 
& 12 


Against 
accused 
no.6,7,9, 


investiga 
tions is 
in 
progress. 


11. 


Mr Vasant 
Jadhav, DC, SID 
(Nodal Officer) 


12 


Jalgaon/ Mr 
Pramod Abhiman 
Pawar Dy SP 
(Home) 


103/2001 
(PS- 
Jalgaon) 


1.Rashid Chand Shaikh 
(dead) 


2. Shaikh Rizwan 
Abdul Rashid 


3. Siddique Aziz 
Shaikh 


153A, 120B, 
121, 121A, 
122, 123, 
201 r/w 34 
IPC & 4(७), 
460) & 5 of 
Indian 
Explosives 


1. Shaikh 
Rizwan 
Abdul 
Rashid 


2. Shaikh 


Irfan 
Abdul 


1.Siddiq 
ue Aziz 
Shaikh 


2.Sharif 
Sarfaraz 
Khan 


3.Syed 


1.Asif Sapadu 
Shaikh 


2.Hanif ismail 
Sheikh 


3.Khalid Ajmal 
Khan 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


101 


4. Asif Supadu Shaikh Substance Rauf Shah 4.Sheikh Mushtaq 
Act, 1908. Haisf Shaikh RAfi 
5. Hanif Ismail Shaikh . Shaikh Raza 
aati Illiyas Fiurdous 
6. Khalid Ajmal Khan ae RaZa 
Shai Yusu: 
. haikh Irfan Abdul 4. Khalid 
vt * कलम ASIAD 
F z . aki Khan 
8.Shaikh 11985 Shaikh Shaikh per 
9.Sheikh Mushtaq Hannas | Khan 
Shaikh Rafi - Wakarul 
10.Shaikh Shakil Muzafar 
Shaikh Hannas Hussain 
11.Sharif Sarfaraz . Gulzar 
Khan Ahmed 
Gulam 
12.Wakarul Muzaffar Mohann 
Hussain ed Wani 
@ 
13.Gulzar Ahmed Ashraf 
Gulam Mohanned Munir 
Wani @ Ashraf Munir Baig 
Baig 
. Asif 
14. Syed Shah Hasif Khan 
Raza Firdaus Raza Bashir 
15. Asif Khan Bashir Khan 
Khan . Parves 
16.Parves Khan ae 
Riyajuddin Khan din 
17. Khalid ASIAD Khan 
Khan Ahmad Khan 
13. Mumbai 1692/2001 MohdMunaf @ 10,13 of UA Pending 
City/Siraj Mumbai MunnaUsuf Vora (P) Act Trial. 
HajratsahebInamd | City. 
ar ACP, CID 
14. 152/2008 1.Afzal Mutalib 295(A), Pending 
(DCB, CID, | Usmani 505(ii), trial 
Mumbai 506(ii) & 
City) 2.Sadique Israr Ahmed 507 IPC 


Shaikh 


3. MohdArif Badruddin 
Shaikh @ ArifBadar @ 
Laddan 


4. MHD Jamil Abdul 
Haq Shaikh 


5.Anwar Ahmad 
Badshah Shaikh 


6. Asif Bashir Shaikh 


7. Mohd Mansoor 
AsgarPeerbhoy 


8.Mubin @ Salman 
Kadar Shaikh 


9.Mohd 
AtiqueMohdlIqbal 


10.Mohd Akbar Ismail 
Chaudhari @ Saeed 
Anik 


11. Anik Shafiq Sayyad 
@ Khalid 


12. Majid Akhtar 
Shaikh 


13. Yasir Anis SAayyad 
@ Hujefa 


14. Faroog Sharfuddin 
Tarqas @ Abdulla@ 
Peter 


15.Mohd Ahmad Ali 
16. JavedMohd Ali 


17.Ahmad 
AbubakkarBawa 


19.Mohd Naushad 


102 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


Mohd Irshad Sayyad 


19.Dustgir 
FerozMuzawar @ 
Afroz @ Mujib 


20.Fazal Rehman 
Musssadiq Khan 
Durani @ Salklauddin 


21. Dr Anwar 
AbdulganiBhagwan 


22. Mobil @ Irfan 
Abdul Shakjur Khan 


23.Amin @ Raja Ayub 
Shaikh 


15. 275/2001 1.Shafiq Ahmad Ali 143, 144, Accused Trial 
(Kurla Ahamad 145, 147, no. 2,4, pending 
Police 149, 353 IPC 5, 6,7, 8, against 
Station) 2.Altaf Abdulla & 10,13 10 & 11 accused 

Chaugule UA(P) Act acquitted no.1,3,9 
3.Mohd Ali Barkat Ali le 
4 Jrshad Khan Salim 

Khan 

5.Ehtesham 

Kutubuddin Siddiqui 

6.Tanvir Ahmad Ansari 

7.Mohsin Hidayatullah 

Mirza 

8.Mujmil Hasan 

Baghdadi 

9.Sarjeet Shaikh Asif 

Shaikh 

10.Abdul Khan Khalid 

Khan 

11.Shirtaj Ahmad 

Shaikh Mansoori 

12. Abdul Rahim 

Shaikh Abdul Rashid 

Shaikh 

16. LAC di: Shabbir 10&13 of Accused 
No.34/ 06 Ahmed UA(P)Act no.02&03 
(DCB, CID, है convicted 
Mumbai) 2: Nasir 

Ahmed Jamir Ahmed 
Abnsari 

Accused 
3. Mohd Ali 10.01 died. 
Alam Shaikh @ Aziz 

17. POTA Spl di Saquib 3, 4, 5, 20, Accused Accused Accused no. 14 to 
Case Abdul Hamid Nachan 21(2), 21(4), no. | to 10 no. 11 to 18 absconded 
No.02/ ’ है of POTA convicted 13 
2003 2. Atif Nsasir | Act, 120B, acquitted 
(Mumbai) Mulla 302,34, 307, 

: 324, 326, 
. pita HasinZube 427, 121A, 
122 Of IPC 
4. Ghulam Sections 
Akbar Abdul Sattar aes 
9(B) of 
Khotal के 
Explosive 
a Mohd Act, 3,4,5 of 
Kamil Mohd Jamil the 
Shaikh Explosive 
Substance 
6. Farhan Act, section 
Abdul Malik Khot 3 of the 
Damage to 
7. Noor Public 
Mohd Abdul Malik Property Act, 
Ansari 151, 152 & 
8. Dr Wahid | 15) ofthe 
Abdul Jabbar Ansari एशीएफब७ 0० 
9. Anwar Ali 
Javed Ali Khan 
10. Mukammil 


Akhtar Abdul Rahim 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


103 


Ansari 


11. Mohd 
Nasim Moinuddin 
Paloma 


12. Mohd 
Haroon 
MohdYaminLohar 
13. Adnan 
Bilal Mulla 

14. Tahreer @ 
Nissar Ahmed Ansari 


@ Janab @ Yusuf 
Shaikh 


15; Dr Akmal 
Abdul Hamid Nachan 
16. AM 
Bashir 
17. Sohail 
Shaikh 
18. Siraj 
18 Nagpur city/ Mr 3182/2006 ils Shakil Warasi 10,13 Pending 
Madhuri UAPA trial 
‘DilipBaviskar, 2. Shaikh Ahamad 
ACE Ses 3. Reha khan 
Division 
4. Mohd Attaullah 
Khan 
5. Jiyaur Rehman 
6. Vakar bag 
7. Imtiaz Ahamed 
8. Dr Mohammad 
Abrar 
9, Mohd Shakir 
19. Hingoli/ 04/2015 Sajjad khan Younis 26(1)(D IFA 1.Musabhai Pending 
MrKundalikRamb | (Hingoli) Khan Pahan 1927, u/s न Trial 
hauHore, RFO 9,39, 51, 52 2.Navabhai 
Hingoli. 2.Wagqaroddin Ifroodin WPA 1972 
Inamdar 
3.Dr Afaq Hussain 
KJhatib 
4.Musabhai 
Navabhai 
20. Mr Manohar 3065/2009 1.Abdul Razzak Abdul 10,13 of Pending 
Ramchandra (Murtijapur | Karim UAPA Trial. 
Dabhade, SDPO, 
Murtijapur 2.Sayyed Ibrahim 
Sayyed Mussa 
3.Masood Khan, 
Mahboob Khan 
21. Hingoli/ Mr 1187/2010 1.Jakoddin 353,143,147, All accused 
MAROTI (AundhaNa RasshiddinKazi 148,504, convicted 
DnyanojiThorat, gnath) हि हि 332, 427, 
SDPO Basmath, 2. Ziyauddin 295, 149-IPC 


Hingoli 


RasshidinKazi 


3. Leikuddin 
RasshidinKazi 


4. Shaikh Ijaz Sheikh 
Khalid 


5. Shaikh Baba Shaikh 
Tkromoddin 


6. Stayed Noor Sayyed 
Khaja 


7. Sarfaraz Vahid Khan 
Pathan 


8. Shafiyauddin 
RasshidinKazi 


9. Anikouddin 


104 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


RasshidinKazi 


10.Salimoddin 
Issakoddin Khatib 


11.Shaikh Iqbal alias 
billa Sheikh Khalid 


12. Shaikh Jabbar 
Sheikh Ibrahim 


13, Manoj Shankarrao 
Deshmukh 


14.Gajanan Kangaroo 
Renake 


15.Gokul Subhash Kale 


16. Sunder U 
Deshmukh 


17.Baban 
ManikravSonawane 


18. 
SachinMarutraoSonawa 
ne 


19. Anil Kishan Dev 


20.Amol 
VishvanathGotare 


21. Pramod Kisan Dev 


22. Nagesh Babu 
RanganathUY enarvarkr 


23. Vijay Ram Prasad 
Yeuatkar 


24.MAROTI 
SjhivajiraoRaje 
F. State of Uttar Pradesh 
| Sr.No. | District/Affidavit | FIR no. Name of the Charges(IPC/UA Common Conviction] Acquittal | Absconding| Pending 
Accused PA) Accused(in Investigati 
Crime/FIR on 
no.) 

1. Prayagraj/Mr 324/2001 Shamsher 153A, 225, 295, Trial 
Vivek Alam 120 B, IPC Pending. 
Yadav,ACPPray 
agraj 

2. |] i‘ 384/2001 1. Jalaluddin, 153A, 124A, Trial 

2. Dr 295A, IPC &3(3), Pending 
Arshadullah, 10 & 13 of UA(P) 
3. Alimullah, Act. 
4. Mahibullah 
246/2008 Amir Mahfooj 489A, 489B, 25/2003 Convicte 
489C, 489D IPC d fora 
(PS- (accused have PS- period of 
Ghoorpur) criminal Sahadargan | 8 years & 
history of 3 i fine of Rs 
cases) Lucknow. 50 
(PW-8) thousands 
(Appeal 
is 
pending 
before the 
Hon’ble 
High 
Court.) 
Azamgarh/ Mr 129/2001 Mohd Saleem 153A, 153B, 505 Trial 
Gaurav Sharma, (PS- IPC & 10,13 of Pending. 
CO City, Saraimeer) UA(P) Act. 
Azamgarh 
i 186/2001 1. Javed 153A, 153B, Trial 
ag: Ahamad, 2. 505C,505(2) IPC Pending. 
(PS-Nizamabad) Makbool & 3(1),10,13 of 
Ahamad, UA(P) Act. 
3.Sahjad 


Ahamad, 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


105 


2. Meraj 


4. Farooq 
Ahamad, 
5.Abdul 
Rahman, 
6. Mohd Faiz 
me 09/2019 (PS- MohdFaiz 420, 467, 468, 471 186/2001 Pending 
Nizamabad) IPC & Section-8 of Trial. 
Notary Act. (PS- 
Nizamabad) 
ai 1058/2000 1. Dr Shahid 153A, 505, 295, Pending 
(PS Kotwali) Badra 120B IPC, Trial 
(President of 
simi), 
2. Faizan 
Ahamad, 
3. Abdul Noor 
= 979/2001 1. Amir 153, 153A, 153B, 270/2001 Pending 
हि Rasheed, 505 IPC &3(1),10 (Mughalpur Trial 
PS-Kotwali Sadar 2.Suhail & 13 UA(P)Act a) 
Ahamad 
3. Nadeem 
Ahamad 
4. Barkatullah 
5. Rizwan 
Ahamad 
6. Imtiyaz 
Ahamad, 
7. Abdul Noor 
8. Habib 
Ahamad 
9. Abdul 
Rasilullah 
Kanpurnagat/ 39/2001,PS- 1. Mohd 188, 153A, 153B- Pending trial 
Ms Shweta Chamanganj Suleman IPC & 10 of Crl 
Kumari, ACP Amendment Act 
Sisamau 2. Mohd 
Kanpur Nagar. Anwar. 
3. Mohd 
Saleem 
4. Mohd Riyaz 
Ahamad 
5. Mohd Amir 
a 84/2001 1. Wasif 115, 120B, 121, Pending 
121A, 122, 123, Trial 
PS-Bajariya 2. Mohammad 124, IPC 
Jubair 
Lucknow/ Mr 25/2003 PS- 1.Ubaidurrahman | 153A, 1538, 297, Pending 
Dharmendra Sahadatganj हि 420 IPC & Trial. 
Singh 2. MohdArif Section-7 of Crl 
Raghuvanshi, Law Amendment 
ACP Bazar Act 
Khala, 
Lucknow. 
ATS UP/ 449/2002 Nauman 153A, 153B, 420 Pending 
Kuldeep Badra, IPC & Section 13 Trial 
Tiwari, Dy SP PS- Secretary of of UA(P) Act. 
Charbagh UP SIMI 
Gorakhput/ 609/2001 1. Shahid 153A, 153B, Pending 
Kuldeep Tiwari PS- Badra 124A, 298, 505, Trial 
Dy SP, ATS Kotwalisada 120B IPC 
7, Gorakhpur 2. Hamam 
Ahamad, 
Zonal 
President of 
SIMI 
Mau/ Kuldeep 510/2001 1. Mohd Alim 153A IPC Pending 
Tiwari, Dy SP Trial 
ATS PS-Mohammadabad 2. Mohd Talib 
3. Kalam 
Sant Ravidas 396/2001 1. SuhebAlam 153A,153B, 295A Pending 
Nagar/ Kuldeep of IPC * 10,13 of Trial 


106 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


Tiwari Dy SP PS-Bhadohi Khalid UA(P) Act 
ATS 
3. Anwar 
Rasheed 
4. Abid Imran 
5. Ehtesham 
Ali 
Mathura/ 733/2001, 1. Julfikar 153A, 153B, Trial 
Kuldeep PS-Kotwali है f IPC& 7 Crl Law Pending. 
Tiwari, Dy SP Mathura 2. Rashiduddin | Amendment Act & 
ATS F 10,13 of UA(P) 
3. Farman 
Act 
4. Shahid 
5. Ashfaq 
6. Rahees 
Ahamd& 
7. Nauman 
590/2014 1. Mohd Investigation was 
(Bijnaur Amjad Zakir conducted by NIA 
Bomb Blast 
Case) 2. Sheikh 
Mahboob 
3. MohdSliq 
4. Aslam 
5.Mohd 
Ejijuddin 
Alias Aijaz 
Lakhimpurkhiri 1035/2001 1. Shakeel 10&13 of UAP Pending 
/ MrPreetam है Ahamad Act Trial 
Pal Singh, Dy PS-Kotwali 
SP Nagar 2. EjajAshlam 
3. Mahboob 
Alam 
658/2000 1. Mohd Amir 153A, 153B, 39/2001,PS- Pending 
295A, 505(2) IPC Chamanganj Trial 
PS-Kotwali 
Moradabad/ 1197/2001 1. Mohd 147,153A,153B 266/2001 Pending 
MrAmrinder Bie Haneef IPC, & 13(1), (Mughalpura) Trial 
Singh, IPS PS-Civil 13(2) of UA(P) 
Line Sadar 2.Mohd Act 
Furkan 
3. Mohd Qadir 
4. Khursheed 
Ahamad 
5. Jamal 
Mohammad 
कक 266/2001 1. Farjand Ali 147,148,504, 506, Pending 
153A, 153B IPC & Trial 
PS Mugalpura 2. Mohd Imran 3(1), 13(1), 13(2) 
3. Kadir of UA(P) Act 
4. Mohd Jamal 
5. Furkan 
6. Mohd 
Haneef 
7. Simrej 
8. Khurshid 
|] 270/2001 Rizwan 147, 153A, 153B 979/2001 Pending 
IPC & 3(1), 13(1), B Trial 
PS-Mughalpura 13(2) of UA() PS- 
Act KotwaliSadar| 
alas 572/2001 1. Mohsin 153A, 1538 IPC & | Simrej is Pending 
PS-Nagfani aA 3(1), 13(1), 13(2) accused in Trial 
2. Simrej of UA(P) Act crime 
Tahi 266/2001 
Ss (Mughalpura) 


G. State of Madhya Pradesh 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


107 


Common 
Charges Pending 
Srn District/Affidavit | FIR no. nea ae Accused Conviction Acquittal Absconding 
® ecuse! (IPC/UAPA) (in Crime/ Investigation 
FIR) 
(1) Khalid 
Ahmad, (2) 
(1) Khalid Ahmad, Irfan 
(2) Irfan Nagauri, (3) | U/S 307,34,467, Nagauri, (3) 
Abu Faizal (4)Moh. | 468,471,120B,20 Abu Eaizal 
Sadik, (5) 1 IPC, 25&27 (4)Moh. (1) Irfan 
PS -ATS UmerDandoti,(6) ARMS ACT, 3, Sadik, (5) Nagauri, (2) Ismael. Irfan Judgment 
? Amzad, (7)Mehboob, | 4, 5, 6 Explosive Abu Faizal 2 ; has been 
1 Bhopal Bhopal UmerDandot Muchhale Nil 
9/13 (8)Zakir, (9) Saleek Substance Act, iare (3)Moh. Sadik, Aman ® Gulrez given by the 
(10)Aslam, 66 IT Act, & 3, Common and (4) Court 
(11)Aijazuddin, 10,13(1) (2),15, UmerDandoti, 
(12)Ismael, (13) Irfan] 18, 19,20,23, 38, Accused 
Muchhale, (14)Aman 39 of UAP Act. हि : 
and (15) Gulrez. in Crime 
01/14 ATS 
Bhopal 
(1) Khalid 
Ahmad, (2) 
Irfan 
ane U/S 25 ARMS Nagauri, (3) 
. ACT, 307, 34, Abu Faizal | (1)JavedNagaur (1) Irfan 
oa ene ae 120-B, 107, 115 (4)Moh. 1, (2)Abdul Nagauri, (2) हर 
ps-ats, | 2d) Mohd. 801 (5) | 9८& 3. 10, Sadik, (5) | Aziz,3)Abdul | Abu Faizal Judgment 
2 Bhopal Bhopal Khalid Ahmad, (6) 13(1) (2), 15,16, | UmerDandot Wahid, and (4) (3)Moh. Nil has ‘been 
Irfan Nagauri, (7) Abu eres | : Sadi + given by the 
01/14 Faizal (8)Moh. Sadik 18, 19,20, 38, 39 cae Mohd. Adil adik, (4) Court 
(9) UmerD. de ti (10) of UAP Act, & 3, Common &(5) Zuber. UmerDandoti 
ae ( 11) कि 4, 5, 6 Explosive > लक Hussain , (5) Sazid, 
Mazid and (12) Zuber. Substance Act 
; in Crime 
22/13 ATS 
Bhopal 
PSs rae our Judgment 
3 Kotwali,B 5 8 419 IPC, 3, 10,13 ४ All Three है है has been 
Bhopal i, (2) Safdar Nil Nil Nil ० 
hopal : of UAP Act. accused given by the 
95/08 Nagouri and (3) Cont 
HafizHussain. 
Common 
Sr. Charges 
District/Affidavit | FIR no. Name ot the Accused Conviction | Acquitta] Absconding | PendingInvestigation 
No. eccuses (IPC/UAPA) 
(in Crime/ FIR) 
Abu Faizal 
UIS - and Mohd. 
Fai Iqrar 
(1) Abu Faizal | 395/397 IPC | (1) aburaizal, (2) 
ps- | (2)Moh. वाक्य, eee Zakir&(3) Amzad, | (-Amzad, 
1 1६४8 BNP, (3) Amzad, (4) the Arm At are 2- Nil Nil Judjment has been given 
Dewas Mehboob, and Sections 3, | COmmonAccusedin Mehboob, by the Court 
456/09 | 0) Zakir 10. 13. 16, | Ctime 22/13 ATS | 3- Zakir, 
17) 20; 21 of ||) PhOPAl न कप 
oe ° Killed in 
UAP Act salle 
Encounter) 
Common 
Sr Charges 
re District/A ffidavit FIR no. हक कह (IPC/UAP Accused en Acquittal] Absconding PendingInvestigation 
0५ A) (in Crime/ 
FIR) 
Zakir is a 
Wid Common Mohd. 
Farhat 
Mohd. Farhat 302,307,34 Accused 
PS- GRP, IPC, es (Zakir had 
1 सा Ratlam Zakir & 10,13,16,1 | inCrime | heen killed का Nil das कस 
35/11 8UAPA | 22/13 ATS in police 8 y 
Nizamuddin and 25,27 Bhopal Encounter) 
Arms Act &Cr.No. 
456/09 
Dewas 


108 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


Common 
Sr. Charges A 
District/A ffidavit FIR no. pre one . Accused Conviction Acquittal | Absconding PendingInvest 
No. ecused (IPC/UAPA) igation 
(in Crime/ FIR) 
(1) Abu Faizal 
(1) Abu Faizal (2) Ejajuddin (3) 
(2) Ejajuddin Guddu alias Fai 
(3)... Guddu Mehioah (4) |b 
alias Aslam (5) Jakir,} (1-. es 
PS Mehboob (4) | U/S- 395, 307, 353, (0) Amjad Mehboab, 3 | 
Kotwali Aslam (5) 332,120B, 75 IPC (7)Saleek are [Jakir, 4- Saleek : ; | Judjmet has 
1 Khandwa Khandwa Jakir, (6) and Common 5- Aslam, 6- Abid Mirza, Nil been given by 
541/13 Amjad 3,10,13,16,17,18,19, Eijazuddin had the Court 
(7)Saleek and 20,21 UAPA Accused been killed in 
(og me in Crime 22/13 police 
ATS Bhopal encounter) 
&Cr.No. 
456/09 Dewas 
H. NIA, Bengaluru 
1. RC-04/2020/NIA/DLI (ISIS Al-Hind Module Case) 
Slo District/ FIR no. Name of the Charges Common Conviction Acquittal Absconding Pending 
Affidavit accused (IPC/UAPA) accused (in 
Crime/FIR Investigation 
no.) 
01 Affidavit RC- Shihabudeen Section 120B N/A N/A N/A N/A Further 
04/2020/NIA/DLI ( @ Sirajudeen of IPC 1860, investigation is 
Al-Hind Module @ Khalid @ sections 18, going on 
ISIS Case) rajesh 20, 38 and 39 
of UA(P) Act 
1967 and 
section 25(1) 
(a) of Arms 
Act 1959 
2. RC-28/2023/NIA/DLI (Prison Radicalization Case) 
SINo District/ FIR no. Name of the accused Charges Common Conviction | Acquittal | Absconding Pending 
Affidavit (IPC/UAPA) accused Investigation 
(in 
Crime/FIR 
no.) 
01 Affidavit RC- Tadiyandavida Naseer Section 120B N/A N/A N/A N/A Further 
28/2023/NIA/DLI | @ T Naseer @ Naseer and 201 of investigation 
(Prison @ Umar @ Haji Saab IPC 1860, is going on 
Radicalization @ Mahamad Ali (A- sections 18, 
Case) 1) 18B, 20, 38 
and 39 of 
UA(P) Act 
1967 Act, 
1967. 
02 हि ड़ Junaid Ahmed @ Section 120B है है | Absconding | 
Junaid @ JD @ of IPC, 1860; 
Jamsheeda @ Jaan @ Sections 17, 
Suhana @ DJ Ritz @ 18, 18B, 20, 
Jameela @ Jannu (A- 23, 38, 39 and 
2) 40 of UA(P) 
Act, 1967; 
Section 120B 
of IPC r/w 
25(1B) of 
Arms Act, 
1959; and 
Section 120B 
of IPC 1/w 6 
of Explosive 
Substances 
Act, 1908. 
03 i a Syed Suhail Khan @ Section 120B 7 7 7 N/A 7 
Suhail (A-3) of IPC, 1860; 
Sections 18, 
20, 23, 38 and 
39 of UA(P) 
Act, 1967; 
Section 35 
t/w 25(1B) of 
Arms Act, 
1959; and 
Section 120B 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


109 


of IPC 1/w 6 
of Explosive 
Substances 
Act, 1908. 


04 


है 


7 


Mohammed Umar @ 
Umar (A-4) 


Section 120B 
of IPC, 1860; 
Sections 17, 
18, 20, 23, 38 
and 39 of 
UA(P) Act, 
1967; Section 
35 r/w 25(1B) 
of Arms Act, 
1959; and 
Section 120B 
of IPC r/w 6 
of Explosive 
Substances 

Act, 1908. 


i 


: 


है 


ः 


7 


05 


| 


7 7 


Zahid Tabrez @ Zahid 
(A-5) 


Section 120B 
of IPC, 1860; 
Sections 17, 
18, 20, 23, 38 
and 39 of UA 
(P) Act, 1967; 
Section 
25(1B) of 
Arms Act, 
1959; and 
Sections 5 
and 6 of 
Explosive 
Substances 
Act, 1908. 


i 


I 


है 


7 


7 


| 


है 


7 


Syed Mudassir Pasha 
@ Mudassir @ Sait 
Sab @ MudduSait.(A- 
6) 


Section 120B 
of IPC, 1860; 
Sections 18, 
20, 23, 38 and 


Section 35 
t/w 25(1B) of 
Arms Act, 
1959; and 
Section 120B 
of IPC r/w 6 
of Explosive 
Substances 

Act, 1908. 


1 


1 


है 


- 


7 


07 


है 


7 


Mohammed Faisal 
Rabbani @ Sadath (A- 
7) 


Section 120B 
of IPC, 1860; 
Sections 18, 
20, 23, 38 and 
39 of UA(P) 
Act, 1967; 
Section 35 
t/w 25(1B) of 
Arms Act, 
1959; and 
Section 120B 
of IPC r/w 6 
of Explosive 
Substances 

Act, 1908. 


7 


हु 


है 


- 


7 


08 


हि = 


7 = 


Salman Khan @ 
Salman (A-8) 


Section 120B 
of IPC, 1860; 
Sections 18, 
20, 23, 38 and 
39 of UA(P) 
Act, 1967; 
Section 120B 
of IPC r/w 
25(1B) of 
Arms Act, 
1959; and 
Section 120B 
of IPC t/w 6 
of Explosive 
Substances 

Act, 1908. 


i 


हु 


हि 


Absconding 


i 


I. NIA, Hyderabad 


110 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


| Sr.No. 


District/Affida 
vit 


FIR NO. 


Name of the 
Accused 


Charges 
(ipe/uapa) 


Cmmon 
Accused 
(in 
crime/FI 
R no.) 


Conviction 


Acquittal 


Absconding 


Pending 
Investi- 
gation 


NewDelhi 


RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI 


Ovungal 
Mohammed 
AbdulSalam @ 
0. M. A. Salam 
(2-1), 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 
13,17, 18, 
18A, 18B, 
22C 
ofUA(P)Act 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


NewDelhi 


RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI 


E. M. Abdul 
Rahiman (A-2) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 


ofUA(P)Act 


Pending 
forchargeFramingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


NewDelhi 


RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI 


Anis Ahmed (A- 
3) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 
13,17, 18, 
18A, 18B, 
22C 
ofUA(P)Act 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


NewDelhi 


RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI 


Afsar Pasha (A- 
4) 


Sections 
120B,121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 


of VA(P)Act 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


NewDelhi 


RC-14/2022/NIA/ 
DLI 


VP. 
Nazarudheen @ 


NazarudheenEla 
maram (A-5) 


Sections 
120B, 
121A,122, 


153A IPC and 
sections 


ofUA(P)Act 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


Delhi 


E. Abubacker 
(A-6) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122, 


153A IPC and 
sections 13, 


17, 18, 18A, 
18B, 22C of 


UA(P)Act 


Pending for 
charge 
framing 
before NIA 
Court New, 


Delhi 


NewDelhi 


RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI 


Prof. P. Koya 
@KaleemKoya 
(A-7) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 


ofVA(P)Act. 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


NewDelhi 


RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI 


M.Mohammed 
AliJinnah (A-8) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 
13,17, 18, 
18A, 18B, 
22C 
ofVA(P)Act. 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi. 


10. 


NewDelhi 


NewDelhi 


RC14/2022/NIA/ 
DLI 


RC- 


‘Abdul Wahid 
Sait (A-9) 


A. 5. Ismail (A- 


Sections 120B, 
121A, 122,153A\ 
IPC and sections| 
13,17, 18, 18A, 
18B, 22C 

of UA(P)Act. 


Sections 


120B, 121A, 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi. 


Pending 
forchargeFramingbefore 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


111 


122,153A IPC 
and sections 
13,17, 18, 
18A, 18B, 
22C 
ofUA(P)Act. 


NIACourt New,Delhi. 


11. 


NewDelhi 


RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI 


Mohammed 
Yousuf (A-11) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 


ofVA(P)Act. 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi. 


12. 


NewDelhi 


RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI 


Mohammed 
Basheer (A-15) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 
13,17, 18, 
18A, 18B, 
22C 
ofVA(P)Act. 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


13. 


NewDelhi 


RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI 


Shafeer K.P (A- 
16) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 


ofUA(P)Act 


Pending for 
chargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


14. 


NewDelhi 


RC-14/2022/NIA/ 
DLI 


Jaseer K.P (A- 
17) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
andsections 
13,17, 18, 
18A, 18B, 
22C 
ofUA(P)Act 


Pending 
forchargeFramingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


15. 


NewDelhi 


RC-14/2022/ 
NIA/DLI 


Shahid Nasir 
(A-19) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 
13,17, 18, 
18A, 18B, 
22C 

of VA(P)Act 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


16. 


NewDelhi 


RC-14/2022/NIA/ 
DLI 


Waseem Ahmad 
(A-21) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 
13,17, 18, 
18A, 18B, 
22C 

of VA(P)Act 


Pending 
forchargeFramingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


17. 


NewDelhi 


RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI 


Mohammed 
Shakif (A-22) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 
13,17, 18, 


ofUA(P)Act 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


18. 


NewDelhi 


RC-14/2022/ 
NIA/DLI 


Mohammed 
Farooq 


Rehaman (A-23) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 
13,17, 18, 
18A, 18B, 
22C 
ofUA(P)Act 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


19. 


NewDelhi 


RC- 
14/2022/NIA/DLI 


Yasir Arafat 
Hasan (A-24) 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 
122,153A IPC 
and sections 
13,17, 18, 
18A, 18B, 
22C 
ofUA(P)Act 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 
NIACourt New,Delhi 


20. 


NewDelhi 


RC- 


Popular Front of 
India 


Sections 
120B, 121A, 


Pending 
forchargeframingbefore 


112 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


(PFI)represented | 122,153A IPC NJACourt New,Delhi 
by its chairman and sections 
13,17, 18, 
18A, 18B, 
22C 
of VA(P)Act 
J. NIA, Patna 
| Sr.no | District/Affidavit | FIR no. Name of the Charges Common Conviction | Acquittal | Absconding | Pending 
Accused 
(IPC/UAPA) | Accused Investigation 
(in 
Crime/FIR 
no.) 
1 NIA New Delhi RC31/2022/NIA/DLI | Athar Parvej Sections 121, 7 i Arrested on | Chargesheet 
(७-1) 121A, 122, 12.07.2022 filed against 
153A & 153B him on 
of IPC, 07.01.2023. 
Sections 13, Case is at the 
17, 18, 18A, stage of 
18B & 20 of framing of 
UA(P) Act charges. 
Anwar Rashid Sections 7 7 Arrested on | Suppl. 
120B, 121, 02.05.2023 Chargesheet 
(A-37) 121A, 122, filed against 
153A, 153B Not him on 
of IPC, Geena 27.10.2023. 
oe 10, other NIA Case is at the 
wilds cake stage of 
18,20, 38 & framing of 
39 of UA(P) charges. 
Act 
K. State of Tamil Nadu 
| Sr.No. District/ FIR No. Name of the | Charges Common Conviction Acquittal Abscondi Pending 
५ Accused ng Investigatio 
Affidavit (IPC/ Accused n 
UAPA) R/(in Crime 
(no 
Ly Coimbato B3 Kattur | Shameemul al 153 (u/s 124 (A Nil the ,On 5.1.2004 On Nil No appeal 
recity PS | Islam s/oShahul | (A) and 153(B) sFTC-IL Court | ,18.2.2004 has been 
722/1999 No.1 ,Hameed IPC Coimbatore the filedagainst 
,Kochiyar street convicting Juvenile the order of 
Accused Kayalpattinam, .theaccused viz Justice the High 
Were Thoothukudi 1) Board Court 
responsibl | Now at ,district Shameemullsla released 
e for the | Angappa ,D.No.81 2) Syed ) jm | Abu @ 
appearanc | Naicker Street, Abdur Rahman | Abuthagir 
of | _ Chennai Umari (3) on 
seditious Arrested on Syed probation 
7 eee 01.05.2001. Mohammed | of good 
with 116 (4) Kadar Babha conduc 
captions | Syed Abdur 2 (5) Shajahan to | for a 
‘Kosovo’s | Rahman Umari s/o undergo 3 years | period o 
Lesson to ,K.S.Ahamed RI for 124 (A) three 
India »No.14 2 years RI IPC | years and 
Muslims ,Kallandiars for 153 (A) IPC placed 
and »Royapuram and 2 years for | him under 
‘Kashmir | Now at .Tiruppur 153 (B) IPC the 
India’s | Angappa ,D.No.81 which would supervisio 
; Kosovo’ | ,Naicker - Stree mn | n ० 
a the hennai-1. ,concurrently Probation 
May and Syed 3 with a fine of | Officer u/s 
June 1999 | (० : for -/Rs.1,000 | 15 (3) 
issues of | S/0 Mohammed each count Juvenile 
SIMI’s | Abdul Khader pate 2 हि 
० Nellikuppam jfailing which Justice 
rgan > T 
“News | Cuddalore district. they should) ach te 
ki Now at DNo3&l undergo 3 | board also 
Letter ‘hth soba « Naicker months RI for | ordered to 
ick Street each count. put him 
ie गा under the 
Kadar Babha s/o .4 ae A 1 care of his 
Abdul Hameed es 430 | parents u/s 
1* Main ,No.23 once AHS | 15 (60) 
sRoad 4 ata of the Act 
MahakaviBharathiy pee an ans be executing 
Chennai- ,ar Nagar eet हे bonds 
referred the case 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


113 


118. 

S/o ,Shajahan .5 
E.K.Musthafa, 
Mariamman__,_ 89 
Thippu ,Koil Street 
,Nagar 
,Karumbukadai 
Coimbatore. 

Abu @ 6 
,Abuthagir 

S/o ,(Juvenile) 


,Mohammed Ismail 
Mariamman Koil 
Thippu » Street 
,Nagar 
,Karumbukadai 
Coimbatore. 


Moideen .S.H.M .7 
,S/o.Hussain ,((32 
3233 
AngappaNaicken 
,Mannadi __ ,Street 
Chennai (Arrested 
- on 14.07.1999 
died on 29.08.2001 
at Metha Nursing 
,Setpet ,Home 
Chennai due to 
illness while on 
bail) 


to Juvenile 
Justice Board 
s(JM-IV 


Coimbatore for 
further course of 
judgement. 


Al Shameemul 
Islam & four 
others and Abu 
@ ~~ Abuthagir 
(Juvenile) 
preferred 
appeals before 
sHigh Court 
Madras vide 
.C.A.Nos 
231/2004 = and 
769/2004 
respectively. 


On 
the —_,8.3.2011 
court allowed 
the petitions by 
set aside the 
convictions & 
sentences. The 
court also 
remanded the 
cases to the trial 
courts for 
disposal. 


,Accordingly 
the trial was 
again conducted 
jat FTC-II Court 

Coimbatore. 


,On 29.2.2012 
sthe FTC-II 
Coimbatore 
pronounced 
judgement 
convicting the 
accused Al to 
ASto undergo 3 
years RI for 124 
(A) IPC and 3 
years RI for 153 
which ,(B) IPC 
would run 
concurrently 
with a fine of 
for -/Rs.5,000 
each count. On 
jthe same day 
the court 
directed A6 Abu 
@ Abuthagir to 
appear _ before 
the Juvenile 
Justice Board on 
7.3.12 for 
further course of 
judgement. 


As the accused 
paid ,Al to AS 
the fine amount 
and had already 
served the 
sentence period 
they were 

released 


Appeal: 


Shameemul 
Syed jIslam 
Abdur Rahman 

(CA 
No.306/2012) 
and 3 others 
filed a Criminal 
Appeal (CA 
No.392/2012) 
before the 


worth 
-/Rs.5,000 
each).) 


On 
,16.5.2012 
Juvenile 
Justice 
Board 
(JM-IV 
(Court 
Coimbator 


e 
acquitted 
A6 Abu 


@ 
Abuthagir. 


114 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


Hon’ble High 


Court of 

Madras 
Judgement: 
The Hon’ble 
Justice P.N 
Prakash 


pronounced the 
judgement in 
CA Nos.306 & 
392 of 2012 on 
as 19.12.2019 

follows 


The (a 
conviction and 

sentence 
imposed by 
the trial Court 
on A.l to A.5 
for the charge 
under Section 
124-A IPC are 
set aside and 
they will stand 
acquitted of 
the said 

offence. 


The (b 
conviction and 
sentence 
imposed by 
the trial Court 
on Syed 
Mohammed 
Khadar ,((A.3 
Bhaba_ (A.4) 
and Shah 
Jahan (A.5) for 
the charge 
under Section 
153-B IPC are 
set aside and 
335 a sequitur 
they will stand 
acquitted of 
this offence 
too. 


The (c 
conviction and 

sentence 
imposed by 
the trial Court 
on Samimul 


Islam = (6.1) 
and Syed 
Abdur 


Rahman (A.2) 
for the charge 
under Section 


153-B IPC 
will stand 
confirmed. 


jin the result 
The trial Court 
is directed to 
secure the 
presence of 
Samimul Islam 
(A.1) and Syed 
Abdur Rahman 
(A.2) and 
commit them to 
prison to serve 


out the 
remaining 
period of 


if any. ,sentence 


Since their 
remand _ period 
they set off 

were released 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 115 


L. Enforcement Directorate, Raipur 


Sr. | District/Affidavit FIR no. Name of the Charge | Common Conviction Acqu | Absco Pendin 
no Accused s ittal nding g 
Accused Investi 
ae (in Crime/FIR gation 
no.) 
1. EnforcementDirec ECIR/RPSZO/01/2014 ZubairHussainand | Section Chargesheet No. Chargeshave N.A. N.A. N.A. 
torateRaipur AyshaBanu 3r/w 156/2014dated beenframed 
section4 | 19.06.2014 in FIR 
of No.567 of 2013 
PMLA, reg. by 
2002 KhamtaraiPolice 
Station 
Raipur,Chhattisgar 
hChargesheet No. 
11/2014 dated 


03.02.2014 in FIR 
No.454 of 2013 
reg. by 
KavaiyaThana, 
Lakhisarai, Bihar 


2. KhamtaraiPolice FIR No. 567of 2013 ZubairHussainan Section Chargesheet No. Convictedby N.A. N.A. N.A. 
StationRaipur,Chh | reg.ByKhamtaraiPoliceStatio dAyshaBanu 3,13, 11/2014dated orderdated24. 
attisgarh nRaipur,Chhattisgarh 17, 400f | 03.02.2014 in FIR 11.2021 for 

UAPA No. 454 of 2013 offenceu/s 
reg. by 17,40(1)(b) 
KavaiyaThana, &amp;40(1)(c 
Lakhisarai, Bihar ) of VAPA 

3. Kavaiya FIR No. 45401 2013 reg.by ZubairHussainan Section Chargesheet No. Chargeshave N.A. N.A. N.A. 
Thana,Lakhisarai, KavaiyaThana, Lakhisarai,Bih dAyshaBanu 17,18, 156/2014dated beenframed 
Bihar ar 18(b),2 19.06.2014 in FIR 

1, 38, No.567 of 2013 

40of reg. 

UAPAa | ByKhamtaraiPolic 

nd e Station 

section4 | Raipur,Chhattisgar 

20, h 

467,468 

»471 

&amp;1 

20(B) 

ofIPC 


M. Enforcement Directorate, Delhi 


| Sr.no] District/Affid FIR no. Name of | Charges(IPC/UAP Common Accused(in Convictio Acquitt Abscondin | Pending 
avit the A) Crime/FIR no.) n al g Investigatio 
Accused n 
Directorate of ECIR/STF/17/20 EM Abdu] SECTION 3 OF FIR Arrested and 
गे Enforcement, 22 Rahiman | PMLA No.RC14/2022/NIA/D Pre-Trial 
STF, Hars, LI dated 13.04.2022 Stage 
New Delhi 
Directorate of ECIR/STF/17/20 P. Koya SECTION 3 OF FIR No.RC- Arrested and 
2. Enforcement, 22 PMLA 14/2022/NIA/DLI Pre-Trial 
STF, Hars, dated 13.04.2022 Stage 
New Delhi 
Directorate of ECIR/STF/17/20 E. Abu SECTION 3 OF FIR No.RC- Arrested and 
3. Enforcement, 22 Backer PMLA 14/2022/NIA/DLI Pre-Trial 
STF, Hars, dated 13.04.2022 Stage 
New Delhi 
N. NIA CHENNAI 
Common a a 
Charges Recta i 
Sr.no | District/Affidavit | FIR no. Name of the Accused Accused(in | Conviction | Acquittal | Absconding vee tial ti 
(IPC/UAPA) | Crime/FIR aton 
no.) 
a 120B, 121A & 
४ हि Mohamed Ibrahim 122 of the mee 
1 NIA, Chennai 16/2019/ Jamali (A-4) Indian Penal Pending Trial 
NIA/DLI Code and 
Sections 13, 


116 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(11)] 


17, 18, 18B, 
38, 39 of the 
Unlawful 
Activities 
(Prevention) 
Act, 1967. 


2 NIA, Chennai 


U/s 120B, 302 
r/w 120B, 201 
of IPC, Section 


RC- 25(1) (a) of the 

06/2020/ Shihabudeen (A-7) Arms Act 

NIA/DLI 1959, besides 
16, 18, 20, 38 
and 39 of UAP 
Act 1967 


Pending Trial 


O. NIA MAHARASTHRA 
Charge हु 
= FIR No Name ofthe of the a CHAE Accused Conviction | Acquittal | Absconding iver ah ti 
Ao | Affidavit Accused (IPC/UAPA) n Crime/FIR No) | ~~~ nvestigation 
Arrested on 
1/10/2023 
aftercompleti 
ng 
Sec 120 B of IPC investigation 
Roe 1७ and Section Chargesheet 
Maulana S/o “ 18,20,23,38,39 & 40 is filed before 
Mohammad Najeeb of VA)Act, 1967 Hon’ble Court 
Ashraf (A-1) Sec 3,4 r/w25 (1-8) on 21.03.2024 
of Arms Act 1959. Accusedlodge 
d in Tihar 
Jail, No 
pending 
investigation 
Arrested on 
1/10/2023 
Chargesheet 
is filed on 
Section 120B, 201 before 
Pane S/o of IPC and sec Hon’ble Court 
Waris Khan (A-2) 18,19,20,38 & 39 of on 21.03.2024 
the UA(P)Act 1967 Accused 
lodged in 
Tihar Jail, No 
pending 
investigation 
Arrested on 
2/10/2023 and 
Chargesheet 
29/2023/NIA/ Sec 120 B of IPC is filed before 
1 NIA DLI and Section Common in RC- Hon’ble Court 


3) Shahnawaz Alam 
S/o Shafiuzzama 
Khan (A-3) 


18,20,23,38 & 39 of 
UA(P)Act, 1967 Sec 
4& 5 of Explosive 

Substance Act 1908 


05/2023/NIA/Mum 
case as Accused A- 
8 


on 21.03.2024 
Accused 
lodged in 
Aurther Road 
Jail , No 
pending 
investigation 


4) Hasseb Zubair 


Arrested on 
9/12/2023 and 
Chargesheet 


Mulla s/o Zubair Sec 120 B of IPC is filed before 
Mulla (A-4) and section Hon’ble Court 
13,18,18B,20,38 & on 21.03.2024 
(Ex- SIMI 39 of UA(P) Act. Accused 
Member) lodged in Jail, 
No pending 
investigation 
5) Firoz Dastgir Arrested on 


Kuwari @ Fauroj 
Dastgir Kuwari S/o 
Dastgir Kuwari 


Sec 120 B of IPC 
and section 
13,18,18A,20,23,38, 
39& 40 of UA(P) 


9/12/2023 and 
charge sheet 

is filed before 
Hon’ble Court 


(७-5) Act. Section 25(1-B) 
(b) r/w section 4 of on 3/6/2024, 
(Ex-SIMI Arms Act No pending 
Sympathizer) ; Investigation 
Sec 120 B & 387 of Arrested on 


6) Kasif Sattar 
Balere @ Kashif 
Sattar Balere S/o 


IPC and Sec. 13, 
18,18A, 
18B,20,38,39& 40 


9/12/2023 and 
charge sheet 
is filed before 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


Sattar Balere (0-6) of UA(P)Act Hon’ble Court 
on 3/6/2024, 
(Ex- SIMI No pending 
Member) Investigation 
Arrested on 
7) 9/12/2023 and 
SaifAteequeNachan | 5०० 1203 of IPC Soe ane 
S/o AteequeNachan and sec 13,18,20,38 ae janie 
(A7) & 39 of UA(P) Act. 60027 
(Ex-SIMI Member) No pending 
Investigation 
Arrested on 


8) Rafeel Abdul 


Sec 120B of IPC 


9/12/2023 and 
charge sheet 


Latif Nachan and sec is filed before 

@Rafil S/o Abdul 13,18,18A,20,38 & Hon’ble court 

Latif Nancha (A-8) 39 of UA(P) Act. on 3/6/2024, 
No pending 
Investigation 
Arrested on 


9) Musab Haseeb 


Sec 120B of IPC 


9/12/2023 and 
charge sheet 


Mulla @ Musab and sec : 
Hasib Mulla s/o 13,18,18A,18 B, Bae ok 
Haseeb @ Hasib 20,38 & 39 of on 3/6/2024, 
Mulla (A-9) UA(P) Act. Nowehding 
Investigation 
Arrested on 
10)RehanAsfaqueSu 9/12/2023 and 
se @ Sec 120B of IPC charge sheet 
RehanAsfaqSuse and sec 13,18, is filed before 
S/o Asfaq 20,38 & 39 of Hon’ble Court 
@Asfaque Suse (A- UA(P) Act. on 3/6/2024, 
10) No pending 
Investigation 


11) Farhan Ansar 
Suse S/o Ansar Suse 
(A-11) 


Sec 120B & 387 of 
IPC sec 
13,18,20,38,39 & 40 
of UA(P) Act. 


Arrested on 
9/12/2023 and 
charge sheet 
is filed before 
Hon’ble Court 
on 3/6/2024, 
No pending 
Investigation 


12)Razil Abdul 
Latif Nachan S/o 
Abdul Latif Nachan 
(A-12) 


Sec 120B of IPC & 
Sec 13,18,18A,20,38 
& 39 of UA(P)Act. 


Arrested on 
9/12/2023 and 
charge sheet 
is filed before 
Hon’ble 
Court on 
3/6/2024, No 
pending 
Investigation 


13) Saquib Abdul 
Hamid Nachan @ 


Ravish @Khalid Arrested on 

@Saquib Bhai S/o Sec 120B, 201 & 9/12/2023 and 

Abdul Hamid 387 of IPC and charge sheet 

Nachan Sec13,18,18A,18 B, is filed on 
20,38, 39 & 40 of 3/6/2024, No 

(Ex-SIMI Member UA(P)Act. pending 

and All India Investigation 

General Secretary 

for SIMI) 

Arrested on 
14)Sahgaf Shafique Sec 120B of IPC 9/12/2023 and 
Divekar S/o and Sec charge sheet 
SafiqueDivkar (A- 13,18,18A,18B,20,3 is filed before 
14) 8 & 39 of Hon’ ble court 


(Ex-SIMI Member) 


UA(P) Act. 


on 3/6/2024, 
No pending 
Investigation 


15) Munzir 
Abubakar 
Kunnathpeediakar 
@ Munzir Abubakar 
KunnathPeedikal 
(A-15) 


Sec 120B & 201 of 
IPC and sec 
13,18,20,38 & 39 of 
UA(P)Act. 


Arrested on 
9/12/2023 and 
charge sheet 
is filed before 
Hon’ble Court 
on 3/6/2024, 
No pending 
Investigation 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


16) Yahya Ravish 
Khot S/o Ravish 
SabbirKhot (A-16) 


Sec 120 B of IPC 
and Sec 13,18,20, 38 
& 39 of UA(P) Act. 


Arrested on 
9/12/2023 and 
charge sheet 
is filed before 
Hon’ble Court 
on 3/6/2024, 
No pending 
Investigation 


17) Mukhlis Maqbool 
INachan S/o 
MaqboolNachan (A-17) 


Sec 120 B of IPC 
and Sec 13,18,20, 
23,38 & 39 of 
UA(P) Act. Sec 
25(1-B) (b) r/w 


Arrested on 
9/12/2023 and 
charge sheet 
is filed before 
Hon’ ble Court 


(Ex-SIMI ond of A on 3/6/2024, 

Sympathizer) oe LOD SS OF AAS: No pending 
ae Investigation 

18) Adil IliyasKhot 

S/o 11988 @llyas Sec 120B of IPC on a 

Khot (A-18) and Sec 13,18,20, a 


(Ex- SIMI Member 
and All India 
General Secretary 
for SIMI) 


23,38 & 39 of 
UA(P) Act. Sec 
25(1-B) (b) r/w 
section 4 of Arms 
Act. 


charge sheet 
is filed before 
Hon’ble Court 
on 3/6/2024, 
No pending 
Investigation 


19) Haris Farooqui 
S/o Ajamal 
Farooqui (A-19) 


Sec 120 B of IPC 
and Sec 
13,18,18B,19,20,38, 
39 & 40 of 
UA(P)Act. 


Arrested on 
9/12/2023 and 
charge sheet 
is filed before 
Hon’ble Court 
on 3/6/2024, 
No pending 
Investigation 


20) Anurag Manbir 
Singh @Rehan @ 
Rihan S/o Manbir 
Singh (A-20) 


Sec 120B of IPC 
and Sec 
13,18,20,38,39 & 40 
of UA(P)Act. 


Arrested on 
9/12/2023 and 
charge sheet 
is filed before 
Hon’ble Court 
on 3/6/2024, 
No pending 
Investigation 


21) Rizwan Ali @ 
Abu Salma S/o 
Abdul Hadi (WA-1) 


Common in RC 
05/2023/NIA/Mumb 
ai case as (WA-2) 


Absconding 


He is 
absconding 
accused 
investigation 
in open ,effort 
is going on to 
arrest the 
accused. 


22) Sultan Sikandar 
(WA-4) 


Absconding 


SIMILAR NAMES OF ACCUSED FOUND IN DIFFERENT STATES 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6. 
7 
8 
9 
1 


Zakir: State ofMaharasthra& Madhya Pradesh 

Hafiz Hussain: State of Maharasthra&Madhya Pradesh 

Shihabudeen: NIA, Bengaluru&NIA Chennai. 

Saquib Abdul Hameed Nachan: NIA Maharasthra&State of Maharasthra 
E. M. Abdul Rahiman: NIA, Hyderabad&Enforcement Directorate, Delhi 
P. Koya: Enforcement Directorate, Delhi& NIA Hyderabad 

E. Abu Backer: NIA, Hyderabad&Enforcement Directorate, Delhi 
Musab Haseeb Mulla: State of Maharasthra&NIA Maharasthra 
SaifAteequeNachan: State of Maharasthra& NIAMaharasthra 


0. Kasif Sattar Balere: State of Maharasthra& NIA Maharasthra 


He is 
absconding 
accused 
investigation 
in open, effort 
is going on to 
arrest the 
accused. 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. fina” 


SRIVASTAVA, 


