रजिस्ट्री Ge Sto एल"-(एन)04/0007/2003---22 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—22 


The Gazette of Gudia 


Ol. oil. -ST. Wet. -37.-20122022-241247 
CG-DL-E-20122022-241247 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग WI— खण्ड 1 
PART IT — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


we 28] नई दिल्‍ली, मंगलवार, दिसम्बर 20, 2022/ अग्रहायण 29, 1944 (शक) 
No. 28] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, DECEMBER 20, 2022/AGRAHAYANA 29, 1944 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 20th December, 2022/Agrahayana 29, 1944 (Saka) 


THE LAKSHADWEEP OPEN PLACES (PREVENTION OF 
DEFACEMENT) REGULATION, 2022 


No. 6 oF 2022 
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India. 


A Regulation to prevent defacement by objectionable or unauthorised advertisements in 
places open to public view in the Union territory of Lakshadweep. 


In exercise of the powers conferred by article 240 of the Constitution, the President is 
pleased to promulgate the following Regulation made by her:— 


1. (/) This Regulation may be called the Lakshadweep Open Places (Prevention of Short title, 
Defacement) Regulation, 2022. extent and 


commencement. 


(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep. 


(3) It shall come into force at once. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a)“ Administrator” means the Administrator of the Union territory of 
Lakshadweep appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution; 


(b) “advertisement” includes any effigy or any bill, notice, document, paper or 
other thing containing any words, signs or visible representations; 


(c) “defacement” includes impairing or interfering with the appearance or beauty, 
damaging, disfiguring, spoiling or injuring in any other way whatsoever and the word 
“deface” shall be construed accordingly; 


(d)“objectionable advertisement” means any advertisement which is 
likely to— 
(4) incite any person to commit murder, sabotage or any offence involving 
violence; or 


(ii) seduce any member of any of the armed forces of the Union or of the 
police forces from his allegiance or his duty, or prejudice the recruiting of 
persons to serve in any such force or prejudice the discipline of any such 
force; or 


(iii) incite any section of the citizens of India to acts of violence against 
any other section of the citizens of India or which— 


(A) is deliberately intended to outrage the religious feelings of any 
class of the citizens of India by insulting or blaspheming or profaning the 
religion or the religious beliefs of that class; or 


(B) is grossly indecent, or is scurrilous or obscene or intended for 
blackmail. 


Explanation.—An advertisement shall not be deemed to be objectionable 
merely because words or signs or visible representations are used criticising any 
social or religious practices without malicious intention and with an honest view to 
promote social or religious reforms or social justice; 


(e) “place open to public view” includes any private place or building, 
monument, statue, post, wall, fence, tree or other thing or contrivance which is visible 
to a person being in, or passing along, any public place; 


(f) “property” includes any building, hut, monument, statue, water pipe line, 
structure, wall including compound wall, tree, fence, post, pole or any other erection; 


(g) “public place” means any place (including a road, street or way, whether a 
through fare or not and a landing place) to which the public are granted access or 
have a right to resort, or over which they have a right to pass; 


(A) “writing” includes decoration, lettering or ornamentation produced by stencil. 
No person to 3. On and from the commencement of this Regulation, no person shall affix to, or 


affix, inscribe — ingcribe or exhibit on, any place open to public view,— 
or exhibit any 


objectionable () any objectionable advertisement; or 

advertisement, हे है हि हि 

ete., in any (ii) any advertisement without the written consent of the owner or occupier or 
place open to person in the management of the property in which such place is situated. 

public view. 

Administrator 4. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation or in any other law for the 
to specity by time being in force, where the Administrator is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so 
any ली to do, he may, for the purpose of preventing defacement, by notification in the Official 
where no Gazette, direct that on and from such date, and in such area, as may be specified in the 
person shall notification, no person shall deface any place open to public view by spitting or urinating 
deface any or pasting pamphlets, poster or writing or marking with ink, chalk, paint or with any other 


place open to 
public view. 


2 of 1974. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


material or method, except for the purpose of indicating the name and for such other purposes, 
as may be specified in that notification. 


5. Whoever affixes to, or inscribes or exhibits on, any place open to public view any 
objectionable advertisement shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
aterm which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 


6. Whoever affixes to, or inscribes or exhibits on, any place open to public view any 
advertisement without the written consent of the owner or occupier or person in management 
of the property in which such place is situated shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 


7, Whoever defaces any place open to public view in contravention of the notification 
issued under section 4 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 


8. Whoever in any manner whatsoever causes, procures, counsels, aids, abets or is 
accessory to, the commission of any offence under section 3 or section 4 or section 5 shall 
be punished with the punishment provided for the offence. 


9, Where a person is prosecuted for committing an offence under section 6, the 
burden of proving that he has the written consent referred to in that section shall be on him. 


10. (/) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person who, at the 
time when the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company 
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to 
be guilty of the offence, and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment provided in this Regulation, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence under 
this Regulation has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has 
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any gross negligence 
on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation —For the purpose of this section,— 


(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 


(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 


11. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, any 
offence punishable under this Regulation shall be deemed to be a cognizable offence within 
the meaning of that Code. 


12. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Administrator, 
any local authority or person for anything which is in good faith or in public interest done 
or intended to be done under this Regulation. 


13. (/) The Administrator or any officer authorised in this behalf may, by notice, 
require the owner or the person having control over any place open to public view, to erase 
any writing, free any defacement or remove any mark from such place within such time as 
may be specified in that notice. 


Penalty for 
defacement by 
objectionable 
advertisements. 


Penalty for 
unauthorised 
defacement by 
advertisements. 


Penalty for 
contravention 
of notification 
issued under 
section 4. 


Punishment of 
abettors. 


Burden of 
proof in 
certain cases. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Offences under 
Act to be 
cognizable. 


Indemnity. 


Power of 
Administrator 
to erase 
writing, etc. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY _ [Parr II—Sec. 1] 


(2) Where the owner or person to whom notice is issued under sub-section (/) fails to 
carry out erasing of writing or freeing or removing of defacement within the specified time, 
the Administrator or the authorised officer may cause erasing of writing or freeing or removing 
of defacement to be done and the expenses so incurred shall be paid by the owner or the 
other person and in default of such payment, such expenses shall be recovered from such 
owner or other person as if they were arrears of land revenue. 


Other laws 14. The provisions of this Regulation are in addition to, and not in derogation of, the 
not affected. —_ provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 

Power to 15. The Administrator may, by notification published in the Official Gazette, make 
make rules. 


rules to carry out the provisions of this Regulation. 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. REETA VASISHTA, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India.. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


JAGANATHAN 
ANANTHA 


MGIPMRND—2019GI(S3)—20. 12.2022. KUMAR 


