रजिस्ट्री सं० डी० एल*-(एन)04/0007/2003---26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


प्यारत का रालपन 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-29072026-274900 
CG-DL-E-29072026-274900 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 
सं" 24] 


नई दिल्‍ली, मंगलवार, जुलाई, 28, 2026/श्रावण 6, 1948 (शक) 
No. 24] 


NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, JULY 28, 2026/SRAVANA 6, 1948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 28th July, 2026/Sravana 6, 1948 (Saka) 


THE ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS TOWN AND COUNTRY 
PLANNING (AMENDMENT) REGULATION, 2026 


No. 9 oF 2026 


Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India. 


A Regulation to amend the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Town and Country 
Planning Regulation, 1994. 


In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 240 of the 


Constitution, the President is pleased to promulgate the following Regulation 
made by her:— 


1. (1) This Regulation may be called the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Short title and 
Town and Country Planning (Amendment) Regulation, 2026. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Administrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


2. In the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Town and Country Planning 
Regulation, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Regulation), in section 2,— 


(7) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(a) “accommodation reservation” means the grant of a 
permission to the owner of the land required for public amenity 
specified in any plan prepared under this Regulation and for using the 
potential of such land in the form of built-up space guided by floor area 
ratio, in addition to the area required for such amenity, in lieu of the 
payment of compensation for such land and amenity, to be transferred 
to the Municipal Council or village panchayat, as the case may be; 


(aa) “Administration” means the Administration of the Union 
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands;’; 


(ii) for clause (0), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(b) “Administrator” means the Administrator of the Union 
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands appointed by the President 
under article 239 of the Constitution;’; 


(iii) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(ca) “Authority” means the Area Development Authority 
constituted under section 11A;’; 


(iv) after clause (A), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(ha) “Land Pooling” means pooling of small land parcels from 
land owners into a large land parcel for providing infrastructure in a 
planned manner and returning the reconstituted land to the owners after 
deducting the cost of making provisions for such infrastructure and 
public spaces, by sale of some land or otherwise where infrastructure is 
provided;’; 


(v) for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(@@) “master plan” means a plan which includes an outline 
development plan, development plan, redevelopment or improvement 
plan of a development area and any other plans like Zonal 
Development Plan, Town Planning Schemes or Local Area Plans 
prepared for any development area under this Regulation;’; 


(vi) after clause (४), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(na) “Town Planning Scheme” means a comprehensive plan for 
a particular area in the development area within the master plan, for 
providing detailed proposals for spatial development by specifying the 
manner in which the use of land and development therein shall be 
carried out; 


(nb) “transferable development right” means a development right 
to transfer the potential of a plot designated for a public purpose in a 
plan under this Regulation, expressed in terms of total permissible 
built-up space calculated on the basis of floor area ratio allowable for 
that plot, for utilisation by the owner himself or by way of transfer to 
any other person, from the present location to a specified area in the 
plan as additional built-up space over and above the permissible limit 
in lieu of compensation for the surrender of the concerned plot or area, 
free from all encumbrances, to the Administration or Authority or 
Agency authorised by the Administration, as the case may be;’; 


Reg. 7 of 1994. 


30 of 2013. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(vii) for clause (p), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(p) the expression “land” shall have the meaning assigned to it in 
clause (p) of section 3 of the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act, 2013.’. 


3. In section 9 of the principal Regulation, for sub-sections (/) and (2), the 


following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(1) The Administrator may, from time to time, make any modification 
in a master plan in consultation with the Town Planner or the Authority, as 
the case may be. 


(2) The Central Government may, at any time, whether on a proposal 
from the Administrator or otherwise, make such modifications in a master 
plan as it may deem necessary or expedient and any modification so made 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/) or in 
any other provisions of this Regulation.” 


4. After section 11 of the principal Regulation, the following sections shall 


be inserted, namely:— 


“11A. (7) After the declaration of a development area under 
sub-section (/) of section 11, the Administrator may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute an Authority for such area to be called as the 
Area Development Authority: 


Provided that the Administrator may, instead of constituting an 
Authority for a development area, designate a Government company as the 
Authority for any development area. 


(2) The Authority constituted under sub-section (/) shall be a body 
corporate, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract, and by the said name sue and be sued. 


11B. The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not exceeding 
fifteen other members to be appointed by the Administrator, who in the 
opinion of the Administrator are concerned with the development of the area, 
or public representatives of the area, as the case may be, by notification in 
the Official Gazette. 


11C. The qualifications, salary, allowances and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson and members of the Authority shall 
be such, as may be prescribed. 


11D. (2) The Chairperson and every member of the Authority shall 
hold office for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which he 
enters upon his office and shall be eligible for reappointment: 


Provided that no person shall hold office as the Chairperson or member 
after he has attained the age of sixty-five years. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), a member 
may— 


(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Administrator 
a notice of not less than three months; or 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


Insertion of new 
sections 11A, 
11B, 11C, 11D, 
11E, 11F, 11G, 
11H and 11-1. 


Constitution and 
incorporation of 
Authority. 


Composition of 
Authority. 


Qualifications, 
salary, 
allowances and 
other terms and 
conditions of 
service of 
Chairperson and 
members. 


Tenure of office 
of Chairperson 
and members. 


Removal from 
office. 


Chief Executive 
Officer of 
Authority. 


Officers and 
employees of 
Authority. 


Powers and 
functions of 
Authority. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(0) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions 
of section 11E. 


11E. (1) The Administrator may, by order, remove from office the 
Chairperson or any member, who— 


(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or 


(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the 
Chairperson or a member; or 


(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the 
Administrator, involves moral turpitude; or 


(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to 
affect prejudicially his functions as the Chairperson or a member; or 


(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuation in 
office detrimental to the public interest. 


(2) No member shall be removed under clause (d) or clause (e) of 
sub-section (/) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in the matter. 


11F. (7) The Authority shall have a Chief Executive Officer not below 
the rank of Deputy Collector, to be appointed by the Administrator, who 
shall be the Member-Secretary of the Authority. 


(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as may be delegated to him by the Authority or as may 
be prescribed. 


(3) The terms and conditions of service of, and allowances, if any 
payable to, the Chief Executive Officer shall be such, as may be prescribed. 


11G. (1) The Authority may, with the approval of the Administrator, 
appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the 
efficient performance of its functions under this Regulation. 


(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions 
of service of the other officers and employees of the Authority shall be such, 
as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Administrator, 
consult experts or such other persons whose assistance or advice it may 
require for the purposes of performing any of its functions under this 
Regulation and such experts or other persons may be paid such fee or 
allowances, as may be prescribed. 


11H. (J) The Authority shall have the following powers and functions, 
namely:— 


(a) to undertake the preparation of master plans and other plans 
for the development area; 


(b) to undertake the preparation and execution of Town Planning 
Schemes or Local Area Plan, if so, directed by the Administrator; 


(c) to carry out surveys in the development area for the 
preparation of master plan and other plans or Town Planning Schemes 
or Local Area Plans; 


(d) to control the development activities in accordance with the 
master plan, the development plans and other plans in the development 
area; 


30 of 2013. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(e) to levy and collect such fee for scrutiny of documents 
submitted to the Authority for grant of permission for development, as 
may be prescribed; 


(f) to enter into contracts, agreements or arrangements with any 
person or organisation as the Authority may deem necessary to 
exercise its powers; 


(g) to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of properties, movable 
and immovable, as it may deem necessary by agreement or other 
mechanisms such as land pooling, transferable development rights, 
accommodation reservations or through proceedings under the Right to 
Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 for the purposes of this 
Regulation; 


(A) to execute work in connection with the supply of water, 
disposal of sewerage and provisions of other services and amenities or 
authorise any agency or any local body as may be notified by the 
Administrator in the Official Gazette for the said purposes; 


(i) to levy and collect such fee for the execution of works referred 
to in clause (e) and for provisions of such other services and amenities 
as may be prescribed or authorise any agency or any local body to 
collect such fee as may be notified by the Administrator in the Official 
Gazette; 


(j) to exercise such other powers and perform such other 
functions as are supplemental, incidental or consequential to any of the 
foregoing powers and such other functions, as may be directed by the 
Administrator. 


(2) The functions of the Authority may include all the functions of the 
Town Planner under this Regulation, which may vary in accordance with the 
specific notification for the respective development area under sub-section (/) of 
section 11A. 


11-1. (J) Where the Administrator is satisfied that the purpose for 
which the Authority was established under this Regulation has been 
substantially achieved so as to render the continuity of the Authority as 
unnecessary, the Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare that such Authority shall be dissolved with effect from such date as 
may be specified in the notification: 


Provided that in case of a Government company being designated as an 
Authority, the Administrator may, by notification, remove such company 
from being the Authority. 


(2) On and from the date specified in the notification under sub-section (/)}— 


(a) all properties, funds and dues that are vested in or realisable 
by the Authority shall vest in, or be realisable by the Administrator; 


(8) all liabilities which are enforceable against the Authority shall 
be enforceable against the Administrator; and 


(c) for the purposes of carrying out any development in any area 
which has not been fully carried out by the Authority before its 
dissolution and for the purposes of releasing properties, funds and dues 
referred to in clause (a), the functions of such Authority shall be 
discharged by the Administrator.” 


Dissolution of 
Authority. 


Amendment of 
section 12. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 16. 


Penalties. 


Amendment of 
section 17. 


Amendment of 
section 18. 


Insertion of new 
section 18A. 


Adjudication of 
Penalties. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


5. In section 12 of the principal Regulation,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “such from”, the words “such 
form” shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (3), for the portion beginning with the words “such 
inquiry as he considers” and ending with the words “such permission”, the 
words “the necessary inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, shall, 
within a period of six months and having regard to the nature, size and 
purpose of the proposed development, by order in writing, either grant the 
permission, subject to such conditions, if any, or refuse to grant the 
permission” shall be substituted; 


(c) sub-section (5) shall be omitted. 


6. For section 16 of the principal Regulation, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“16. (1) Any person who uses any land or building in contravention of 
the provisions of section 10 or in contravention of any terms and conditions 
referred to in the proviso to that section shall be liable to a penalty which 
may extend to fifty thousand rupees and in the case of a continuing 
contravention, with further penalty which may extend to two thousand and 
five hundred rupees for each day during which such contravention continues 
after the first penalty. 


(2) Any person who, whether on his own or at the instance of any other 
person or any body including a Department of Government or the 
Administration, undertakes or carries out development of any land in 
contravention of the master plan or without the grant of permission referred 
to in sub-section (2) of section 11 or in contravention of any condition 
subject to which such permission has been granted, shall be liable— 


(a) to a penalty which may extend to two lakh rupees, if such 
development relates to utilising, selling or otherwise dealing with any 
land for the purposes of establishing a colony within a development 
area; 


(6) to a penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees in any case 
other than that referred to in clause (a). 


(3) Any person who obstructs the entry of a person authorised under 
section 15 to enter into or upon any land or building, such person shall be 
liable to a penalty which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees.”. 


7. In section 17 of the principal Regulation, in sub-section (/), for the words 


“any prosecution that may be instituted”, the words “imposition of any penalty” 
shall be substituted. 


8. In section 18 of the principal Regulation, for sub-section (6), the following 


sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(6) Any person failing to comply with an order under sub-section (/) shall 
be liable to a penalty which may extend to three thousand rupees for each day 
during which the non-compliance continues after the service of the order.”. 


9. After section 18 of the principal Regulation, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“18A. (J) The Administrator may, for the purposes of determining the 
penalties under this Regulation, appoint an officer not below the rank of 
Deputy Collector to the Administration or any officer of equivalent rank, to 
be an adjudicating officer to hold an inquiry and impose penalty in such 
manner, as may be prescribed. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) The adjudicating officer may, by an order, after giving the parties a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, impose penalty for contravention or 
violation of any provision of this Regulation. 


(3) The adjudicating officer, for the purposes of holding the inquiry, 
shall have the power to summon and enforce attendance of any person 
acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or 
to produce any document, which in the opinion of such officer, may be 
useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry.”. 


10. In section 19 of the principal Regulation,— 


(a) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(1) Any person aggrieved by an order— 


(i) of the Town Planner under this Regulation may prefer an 
appeal to the Administrator; 


(ii) of the adjudicating officer appointed under section 18A 
may prefer an appeal to such appellate officer as may be 
appointed by the Administrator, who shall be two ranks above the 
adjudicating officer, 


within a period of thirty days from the date of the order appealed 
against: 


Provided that the Administrator or the appellate officer, as the 
case may be, may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period 
of thirty days if he is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not 
preferring appeal within that period.”; 


(6) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The Administrator or the appellate officer, as the case may 
be, after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such orders thereon as he thinks fit, confirming, modifying or 
annulling the order appealed against: 


Provided that every appeal preferred under sub-section (/) shall be 
disposed of as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour shall be made to 
dispose of the appeal within a period of sixty days from the date of its 
filing.”; 

(c) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


“(4) The Administrator or the appellate officer, as the case may 
be, shall send a copy of every order passed by him to the parties to the 
appeal.”. 


11. Section 20 of the principal Regulation shall be omitted. 
12. Sections 27, 28 and 29 of the principal Regulation shall be omitted. 


13. In section 34 of the principal Regulation, in sub-section (2),— 
(a) after clause (e), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ea) the qualifications, salary, allowances and other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson and members of the Authority 
under section 11C; 


Amendment of 
section 19. 


Omission of 
section 20. 
Omission of 
sections 27, 28 
and 29. 


Amendment of 
section 34. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY __ [Part II-—Sec.1] 


(eb) the powers and duties of Chief Executive Officer under 
sub-section (2) of section 11F; 


(ec) the terms and conditions of service of, and allowances, if any 
payable to, the Chief Executive Officer under sub-section (3) of 
section 11F; 


(ed) the salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the 
Authority under sub-section (2) of section 11G; 


(ee) the fee or allowances payable under sub-section (3) of 
section 11G; 


(ef) the fee for scrutiny of documents under clause (e) of 
sub-section (/) of section 11H; 


(eg) the fee for the execution of works and other services and 
amenities under clause (7) of sub-section (/) of section 11H;”; 


(0) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(ga) the manner of inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 12;”; 
(c) after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Ga) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing penalty 
under sub-section (/) of section 18A;”. 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


CORRIGENDA 


In the Lakshadweep Fire and Emergency Service Regulation, 2026 (Reg. 3 of 2026), 
published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 1, dated the 15th May, 
2026, Issue No.16,— 


(1) in page 13, line 3, in the marginal heading, for “emergency training”, read 
“emergency service training”; 


(1) in page 15, line 41, for “section 18”, read “section 19”; 


(iii) in page 19, line 23, in the marginal heading, for “Final expenses”, read “Funeral 
expenses”; 


(iv) in page 21, line 42, in the marginal heading, for “Act”, read “Regulation”. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


MGIPMRND—472 GI—28.07.2026 50001 ८ 


YADAVA ०: 


