रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल०--(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


प्यारत का Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-24072025-264940 
CG-DL-E-24072025-264940 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — asl 
PART II — Section | 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 23] नई दिल्‍ली, बृहस्पतिवार, जुलाई 24, 2025/श्रावण 2, 947 (शक) 
No. 23] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, JULY 24, 2025/SHRAVANA 2, 947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 24th July, 2025/Shravana 2, 947 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
24th July, 2025 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE BILLS OF LADING ACT, 2025 
No. 8 oF 2025 
[24th July, 2025.] 


An Act to make provisions for the transfer of rights of suit and all liabilities 
to the consignee named in a bill of lading and every endorsee of a 
bill of lading, to whom the property in the goods mentioned in the 
bill of lading shall pass, upon or by reason of a consignment or an 
endorsement, and for matters connected therewith or related thereto. 


WHEREAS by the custom of merchants, a bill of lading of goods being 
transferable by endorsement, the property in the goods may thereby pass to the 
endorsee, but nevertheless all rights in respect of the contract contained in the bill 
of lading continue in the original shipper or owner; 


AND WHEREAS it is expedient that such rights should pass with the property; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Rights under 
bills of lading to 
vest in 
consignee or 
endorsee. 


Right of 
stoppage in 
transit or claims 
for freight not to 
be affected. 


Bill of lading in 
hands of 
consignee, etc., 
conclusive 
evidence of 
shipment as 
against master, 
etc. 


Power of 
Central 
Government to 
give directions. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


AND WHEREAS it frequently happens that the goods in respect of which bills 
of lading purport to be signed have not been laden on board; 


AND WHEREAS it is proper that such bills of lading in the hands of a bona fide 
holder for value should not be questioned by the master or other person signing 
the same, on the ground of the goods not having been laden as aforesaid. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


. (४) This Act may be called the Bills of Lading Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. Every consignee of goods named in a bill of lading and every endorsee of 
a bill of lading, to whom the property in the goods therein mentioned shall pass, 
upon or by reason of such consignment or endorsement, shall have transferred to 
and vested in him all rights of suit, and be subject to the same liabilities in respect 
of such goods as if the contract contained in the bill of lading had been made with 
such consignee or endorsee. 


3. Nothing contained in this Act shall prejudice or affect— 
(a) any right of stoppage in transit; or 
(b) any right to claim freight against the original shipper or owner; or 


(c) any liability of the consignee or endorsee by reason or in consequence 
of his being such consignee or endorsee, or of his receipt of the goods by 
reason or in consequence of such consignment or endorsement. 


4. (J) Every bill of lading in the hands of a consignee or endorsee for 
valuable consideration, representing goods to have been shipped on board a 
vessel, shall be conclusive evidence of such shipment as, against the master or 
other person signing the same, notwithstanding that such goods or some part 
thereof may not have been so shipped: 


Provided that the master or other person so signing may exonerate himself 
in respect of such misrepresentation, by showing that it was caused without any 
default on his part, and wholly by the fraud of the shipper, or of the holder, or 
some person under whom the holder claims. 


(2) Nothing in sub-section (/) shall apply where the holder of the bill of 
lading shall have had actual notice at the time of receiving such bill of lading that 
the goods had not been laden on board. 


5. The Central Government may give such directions, as it may deem 
necessary, for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act. 


6. () The Indian Bills of Lading Act, 856 is hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act referred to in sub-section (J), it 
shall not affect,— 


(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything done or 
any action taken or purported to have been or taken or suffered thereunder 
under the Act so repealed; or 


(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or 
incurred under the Act so repealed; or 


9 of 856. 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(c) the operation of any rule, notification, order, notice or direction 
issued, or exemption granted thereunder, in so far as it is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, and shall be in force until it is repealed or 
superseded under the corresponding provisions of this Act; or 


(d) any penalty incurred in respect of any contravention under the Act 
so repealed; or 


(e) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty as aforesaid, and any such proceeding or 
remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty may 
be imposed as if that Act had not been repealed; 


(f) the reference made to the repealed Act under any other legislation, 
rule, order, or any other legal instrument and any such reference shall, in so 
far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be construed as a 
reference to this Act or its corresponding provisions. 


(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of 
0 of 897. section 6 of the General Clauses Act, |897 shall apply with regard to the effect 
of repeal. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054. 


Digitally signed 


KSHITIZ ७७० 
MOHAN एक 205०-२५ 


2:47.96 +05'30" 


MGIPMRND—42GI(S4)—24-7-2025. 


