रजिस्ट्री He डी" Were 


(&)04/0007/2003—24 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—24 


रत क राजलजपन् 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-06022024-251826 
CG-DL-E-06022024-251826 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग 1-- खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


संग 3] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, फरवरी 5, 2024/ माघ 16, 1945 (शक) 
No. 3] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 2024/MAGHA 16, 1945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके | 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced on 5th February 2024:— 
जि, No. 15 oF 2024 


A Bill to prevent unfair means in the public examinations and to provide for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTERI 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Short title and 
Act, 2024. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) “candidate” means a person who has been granted permission by the public 
examination authority to appear in public examination and includes a person authorised 
to act as a scribe on his behalf in the public examination; 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr IK— 


(b) “communication device” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in 
clause (ha) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000; 


(c) “competent authority” shall mean the Ministry or a Department of the 
Central Government administratively concerned with the public examination 
authority; 


(d) “computer network”, “computer resource” and “computer system” 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses (j), (k) and (J) 
of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000; 


(e) “conduct of public examination” shall include all the procedures, 
processes and activities, as may be prescribed, for being adopted for the conduct 
of public examination; 


(f) “institution” means any agency, organisation, body, association of 
persons, business entity, company, partnership or single proprietorship firm, by 
whatever name it may be called, which is other than the public examination 
authority and the service provider engaged by such authority. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, it is clarified that “company” 
includes a company as defined in clause (20) of section 2 of the Companies 
Act, 2013; or a limited liability partnership firm as defined in clause (n) of 
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008; 


(g) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and 
the expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly; 


(h) “organised crime” means an unlawful activity committed by a person 
or a group of persons indulging in unfair means in collusion and conspiracy to 
pursue or promote a shared interest for wrongful gain in respect of a public 
examination; 


(i) “person associated with a service provider” means a person who 
performs services for or on behalf of such service provider irrespective of 
whether such person is an employee or an agent or a subsidiary of such service 
provider, as the case may be; 


(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(k) “public examination” means any examination conducted by the public 
examination authority, as specified in the Schedule, or conducted by such other 
authority as may be notified by the Central Government; 


(J) “public examination authority” means an authority as specified by the 
Central Government by a notification, from time to time for conducting the 
public examinations; 


(m) “public examination centre” means such premises, which is selected 
by the service provider or otherwise selected by the public examination authority, 
to be used for conduct of public examination and which, amongst others, may 
include any school, computer centre, institution, any building or part thereof 
and the same shall include the entire periphery and land appurtenant thereto 
which may be used for security and other related reasons for conduct of the 
public examinations; and 


(n) “service provider” means any agency, organisation, body, association 
of persons, business entity, company, partnership or single proprietorship firm, 
including its associates, sub-contractors and provider of support of any computer 
resource or any material, by whatever name it may be called, which is engaged 
by the public examination authority for conduct of public examination. 


21 of 2000. 


21 of 2000. 


18 of 2013. 
7 of 2009. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(2) Words and expressions used herein but not defined and defined under any other 
law for the time being in force, shall have the same meanings as assigned to them in those 
laws. 


CHAPTER II 
UNFAIR MEANS AND OFFENCES 


3. The unfair means relating to the conduct of a public examination shall include any 
act or omission done or caused to be done by any person or group of persons or institutions, 
and include but not be restricted to, any of the following acts for monetary or wrongful 
gain— 


(i) leakage of question paper or answer key or part thereof; 


(ii) participating in collusion with others to effect leakage of question paper or 
answer key; 


(iii) accessing or taking possession of question paper or an Optical Mark 
Recognition response sheet without authority; 


(iv) providing solution to one or more questions by any unauthorised person 
during a public examination; 


(v) directly or indirectly assisting the candidate in any manner unauthorisedly 
in the public examination; 


(vi) tampering with answer sheets including Optical Mark Recognition response 
sheets; 


(vii) altering the assessment except to correct a bona fide error without any 
authority; 


(viii) willful violation of norms or standards set up by the Central Government 
for conduct of a public examination on its own or through its agency; 


(ix) tampering with any document necessary for short-listing of candidates or 
finalising the merit or rank of a candidate in a public examination; 


(x) deliberate violation of security measures to facilitate unfair means in conduct 
of a public examination; 


(xi) tampering with the computer network or a computer resource or a computer 
system; 


(xii) manipulation in seating arrangements, allocation of dates and shifts for the 
candidates to facilitate adopting unfair means in examinations; 


(xiii) threatening the life, liberty or wrongfully restraining persons associated 
with the public examination authority or the service provider or any authorised agency 
of the Government; or obstructing the conduct of a public examination; 


(xiv) creation of fake website to cheat or for monetary gain; and 


(xv) conduct of fake examination, issuance of fake admit cards or offer letters to 
cheat or for monetary gain. 


4. No person or group of persons or institutions shall collude or conspire to facilitate 
indulgence in any such unfair means. 


5. (1) No person, who is not entrusted or engaged with the work pertaining to the 
public examination or conduct of public examination or who is not a candidate, shall enter 
the premises of the examination centre, with intent to disrupt the conduct of the public 
examination. 


Unfair means. 


Conspiracy for 
unfair means. 


Disruption to 
conduct public 
examination. 


Other 
offences. 


No premises 
other than 
examination 
centre shall be 
used for public 
examination. 


Offences in 
respect of 
service 
providers and 
other persons. 


Cognizable 
offences. 


Punishment 
for offences 
under this 
Act. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr IIK— 


(2) No person authorised, engaged or entrusted with the duties to conduct public 
examination shall, before the time fixed for opening and distribution of question papers— 


(a) open, leak or possess or access or solve or seek assistance to solve such 
question paper or any portion or a copy thereof in unauthorised manner for 
monetary or wrongful gain; 


(b) give any confidential information or promise to give such confidential 
information to any person, where such confidential information is related to or in 
reference to such question paper for monetary or wrongful gain. 


(3) No person, who is entrusted or engaged with any work pertaining to public 
examination shall, except where he is authorised in furtherance of his duties so to do, reveal 
or cause to be revealed or make known to any other person any information or part thereof 
which has come to his knowledge for any undue advantage or wrongful gain. 


6. If any person or group of persons or institution commits any unfair means or 
offence under sections 3, 4 and section 5, the service provider shall forthwith report the 
offence to the concerned police authorities and also inform the public examination authority: 


Provided that if the service provider resorts to unfair means and commits the offence 
or is involved in facilitating an offence, the public examination authority shall report the 
same to the concerned police authorities. 


7. It shall be an offence for the service provider or any person associated with the 
service provider to cause any premises, other than the examination centre, authorised by 
the public examination authority, to be alternatively used for the purpose of holding public 
examination, without the written approval of the public examination authority: 


Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be an offence where any change 
in the examination centre without prior consent of the public examination authority is due to 
any force majeure. 


8. (1) Any person, including the person associated with a service provider, shall be 
deemed to have committed an offence if he individually or in collusion with any other 
person or group of persons or institutions assists any person or group of persons or 
institutions in any manner unauthorisedly in the conduct of public examination. 


(2) Service provider or any person associated with it shall be deemed to have committed 
an offence if he fails to report incidence of any unfair means or commission of any offence. 


(3) Where an offence committed by a service provider is, prima facie, established 
during investigation to have been committed with the consent or connivance of any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of such service provider, such person shall also be liable 
to be proceeded against: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment under the Act, if he proves, that the offence was committed 
without his knowledge and that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of 
such offence. 


CHAPTER III 
PUNISHMENT FOR OFFENCES 


9. All offences under this Act, shall be cognizable, non-bailable and non- 
compoundable. 


10. (1) Any person or persons resorting to unfair means and offences under this Act, 
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not less than three years but which may 
extend to five years and with fine up to ten lakh rupees. In case of default of payment of fine, 
an additional punishment of imprisonment shall be imposed, as per the provisions of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 


45 of 2023. 


45 of 2023. 
45 of 1860. 


45 of 2023. 


45 of 2023. 
45 of 1860. 


45 of 2023. 


45 of 2023. 
45 of 1860. 


45 of 2023. 


45 of 2023. 
45 of 1860. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, the 
provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said Act. 


(2) The service provider shall also be liable to be punished with imposition of a fine 
up to one crore rupees and proportionate cost of examination shall also be recovered from 
such service provider and he shall also be barred from being assigned with any responsibility 
for the conduct of any public examination for a period of four years. 


(3) Where it is established during the investigation that offence under this Act has 
been committed with the consent or connivance of any Director, Senior Management or the 
persons in-charge of the service provider firm, he shall be liable for imprisonment for a term 
not less than three years but which may extend to ten years and with fine of one crore 
rupees. In case of default of payment of fine, an additional punishment of imprisonment 
shall be imposed as per the provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 


Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, the 
provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said Act. 


(4) Nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment under the Act, if he proves, that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge and that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 


11. (1) Ifa person or a group of persons including the examination authority or service 
provider or any other institution commits an organised crime, he shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term not less than five years but which may extend to ten years and with 
fine which shall not be less than one crore rupees. In case of default of payment of fine, an 
additional punishment of imprisonment shall be imposed as per the provisions of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 


Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, the 
provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said Act. 


(2) If an institution is involved in committing an organised crime, its property shall be 
subjected to attachment and forfeiture and proportionate cost of examination shall also be 
recovered from it. 

CHAPTER IV 
INQUIRY AND INVESTIGATION 


12. (1) An officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police or Assistant 
Commissioner of Police shall investigate any offence under this Act. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Central Government 
shall have the powers to refer the investigation to any Central Investigating Agency. 


CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
13. The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the public examination 
authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the 


provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023: 


Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, the 
provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said Act. 


14. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings under this Act, shall lie against 
any public servant, in respect of anything which is done in good faith or intended to be 
done in the discharge of his official functions or in exercise of his powers: 


Organised 
crimes. 


Officers 
empowered to 
investigate. 


Members, 
officers and 
employees of 
public 
examination 
authority to 
be public 
servants. 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith 
by any public 
servant. 


Provisions of 
this Act to be 
in addition to 
other laws. 


Power to 
make rules. 


Laying of 
rules. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Amendment 
of Ordinanace 
38 of 1944. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr I-K— 


Provided that the public servants in the service of any public examination authority 
shall be subject to administrative action in terms of service rules of such public examination 
authority: 


Provided further that nothing shall prevent proceeding against such public servants 
where, prima facie case exists for establishing commission of an offence under this Act. 


15. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any 
other law for the time being in force: 


Provided that the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any such law in force. 


16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) to lay down procedures, processes and activities for being adopted for 
conduct of the public examination; 


(b) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed. 


17. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session, immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


18. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions within 
three years, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary 
for removal of difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


CHAPTER VI 
AMENDMENT TO THE CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 1944 


19. In the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 1944, in the Schedule, after serial 
number 5 and entries relating thereto, the following serial number and entries shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“6, An offence punishable under the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair 
Means) Act, 2024.”. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (k)] 
ANY EXAMINATION CONDUCTED BY— 
1. Union Public Service Commission. 
2. Staff Selection Commission. 
3. Railway Recruitment Boards. 
4. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection. 


5. Ministries or Departments of the Central Government and their attached and 
subordinate offices for recruitment of staff. 


6. National Testing Agency. 


7. Such other authority as may be notified by the Central Government. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr [-K— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Government has introduced several reforms to enhance transparency in examinations 
for recruitment as well as admission to higher education institutions. These, inter alia, 
include introducing self-attestation; shortening examination cycle (from 18-22 months to 6- 
10 months); doing away with interviews for recruitment to Group ‘C’ and ‘D’; introduction 
of computer based tests and issuance of appointment letters through digital means under 
“Rojgar Mela”. 


2. Malpractices in public examinations lead to delays and cancellation of examinations 
adversely impacting the prospects of millions of youth. At present, there is no specific 
substantive law to deal with unfair means adopted or offences committed by various entities 
involved in the conduct of public examinations by the Central Government and its agencies. 
Therefore, it is imperative that elements that exploit vulnerabilities of examination system 
are identified and effectively dealt with by a comprehensive Central legislation. 


3. The objective of the Bill is to bring greater transparency, fairness and credibility to 
the public examination systems and to reassure the youth that their sincere and genuine 
efforts will be fairly rewarded and their future is safe. The Bill is aimed at effectively and 
legally deterring persons, organised groups or institutions that indulge in various unfair 
means and adversely impact the public examination systems for monetary or wrongful 
gains. Candidate as defined in the Bill shall not be liable for action within the purview of the 
Bill and shall continue to be covered under the extant administrative provisions of the 
concerned public examination authority. 


4. The Bill shall serve as a model draft for States to adopt at their discretion. This 
would aid States in preventing the criminal elements from disrupting conduct of their State 
level public examinations. 


5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI DR. JITENDRA SINGH. 
The 29th January, 2024. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for definitions used in the Bill. Item (e) of sub-clause (1) 
of clause 2 provides for the definition of the expression “conduct of public examination” 
which empowers the Central Government to prescribe the procedures, processes and 
activities, for being adopted for the conduct of public examination. 


2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made in accordance with the provisions 
of the Bill are matters of procedure and detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in 
the Bill itself. 


3. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


34 of 2019. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


Bit No. 18 oF 2024 


A Bil] further to amend the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989 (1X of 1989), the 
Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Act, 2000 (XX of 2000) and the Jammu and Kashmir 
Municipal Corporation Act, 2000 (XXI of 2000). 


WHEREAS the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir is 
not in existence and proclamation made by the Government of India vide number S.O 3937 
(E), dated the 31st October, 2019, in terms of section 73 of the Jammu and Kashmir 
Reorganisation Act, 2019 is in force; 


AND WHEREAS in terms of the aforesaid Proclamation, the powers of the Legislature 
of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall be exercisable by or under the authority 
of Parliament. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTERI 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) 
Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement.. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Substitution of 
section 2A. 


Construction 
of reference 
of certain 
expressions 
by certain 
other 
expressions. 


Amendment 
of section 4. 


Amendment 
of section 27. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II-— 


CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR PANCHAYATI Raj Act, 1989 


2. In section 2 of the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989 (hereafter in this 
Chapter referred to as the Panchayati Raj Act), in sub-section (1), after clause (I), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(la) “Other Backward Classes” means the Other Backward Classes declared by the 
Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir from time to time in accordance 
with sub-clause (iii) of clause (0) of section 2 of the Jammu and Kashmir Reservation 
Act, 2004;’. 


3. For section 2A of the Panchayati Raj Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


‘2A. Throughout the Act, for the words “District Planning and Development 
Board” and “District Panchayat Officer” wherever they occur, the words “the District 
Development Council” and “Assistant Commissioner of Panchayat” shall respectively 
be substituted.’. 


4. In section 4 of the Panchayati Raj Act, in sub-section (3),— 
(a) in the first proviso,— 
(i) in clause (a), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be omitted; 
(ii) for clause (9), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(b) the Scheduled Tribes; and 
(c) the Other Backward Classes,”; 


(iii) in the long line, after the words “or of the Scheduled Tribes in that 
Panchayat area”, the words “or of the Other Backward Classes in that Panchayat 
area” shall be inserted; 


(b) in the second proviso,— 


(i) in clause (a), for the words “or, as the case may be, the Scheduled 
Tribes,”, the words “or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes, as 
the case may be,” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (b), for the words “and the Scheduled Tribes”, the words 
“the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes” shall be substituted. 


5. In section 27 of the Panchayati Raj Act, in sub-section (3),— 
(a) in the first proviso,— 
(i) in clause (a), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be omitted; 
(ii) for clause (9), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(b) the Scheduled Tribes; and 
(c) the Other Backward Classes,”; 


(iii) in the long line, after the words “or of the Scheduled Tribes in that 
district”, the words “or of the Other Backward Classes in that district” shall be 
inserted; 


(b) in the second proviso,— 


(i) in clause (a), for the words “or, as the case may be, the scheduled 
tribes,”, the words “or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes, as 
the case may be,” shall be substituted; 


Jammu and 
Kashmir Act 


IX of 1989. 


Jammu and 
Kashmir Act 
XIV of 2004. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


(ii) in clause (b), for the words “or the Scheduled Tribes”, the words “or 
the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes” shall be substituted. 


6. In section 36A of the Panchayati Raj Act, for sub-sections (2) and (3), the following 
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(2) The salary, allowance and other conditions of service of the State Election 
Commissioner shall be such as the Lieutenant Governor may, by rules, determine: 


Provided that if a person who, immediately before the date of assuming office 
as the State Election Commissioner is in receipt of or has received or has become 
entitled to receive a pension, other than a disability pension, in respect of any previous 
service under the Government of India or under the Government of a State or under 
the Government of a Union territory, his pay in respect of service as State Election 
Commissioner shall be reduced— 


(a) by the amount of that pension; and 


(b) if he had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion of the 
pension due to him in respect of such previous service, the commuted value 
thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension. 


(3) The travelling allowance, provision of rent-free accommodation, conveyance 
facilities, medical facilities available to a person at the time of retirement or at the time 
of his appointment as State Election Commissioner, so far as may be, shall be admissible 
to him. 


(4) The power to grant or refuse leave to the State Election Commissioner and 
to revoke or curtail leave granted to him, shall vest in the Lieutenant Governor.”. 


7. For section 36B of the Panchayati Raj Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“36B. The State Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office 
except in like manner and on the like ground as a Judge of a High Court and the 
conditions of service of the State Election Commissioner shall not be varied to his 
disadvantage after his appointment.”. 


8. In section 36D of the Panchayati Raj Act, in sub-section (2),— 


(a) for the opening portion “The Commission shall have power to”, the opening 
portion “The Commission referred to in sub-section (1) shall” shall be substituted; 


(b) in clause (b), for the words “give such directions”, the words “by order give 
such directions” shall be substituted; 


(c) in clause (c), for the word “delegate”, the words “by order, delegate, subject 
to such restrictions mentioned therein,” shall be substituted. 


9. In section 39 of the Panchayati Raj Act, after clause (iii), the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely: — 


“(iv) such other grounds as may be determined by the State Election 
Commission.”. 


10. In section 45A of the Panchayati Raj Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (4),— 
(i) in clause (a), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be omitted; 
(ii) for clause (b), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(b) for the Scheduled Tribes; and 


(c) for the Other Backward Classes,”; 


Amendment 
of section 
36A. 


Substitution of 
section 36B. 


Removal of 
State Election 
Commissioner. 


Amendment 
of section 
36D. 


Amendment 
of section 39. 


Amendment 
of section 
45A. 


Construction 
of reference 
of certain 
expressions 
by certain 
other 
expressions. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Amendment 
of section 
11A. 


12 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr I-K— 


(iii) in the long line, after the words “or of the Scheduled Tribes in the 
district”, the words “or of the Other Backward Classes in the district” shall be 
inserted; 


(b) in sub-section (5), for the words “or, as the case may be, the Scheduled 
Tribes,”, the words “or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes, as the 
case may be,” shall be substituted; 


(c) in sub-section (6), for the words “Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes”, the words “Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward 
Classes” shall be substituted. 


CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE JAMMU AND KasHmir Municipar Act, 2000 


11. Throughout the Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Act, 2000, (hereafter in this Chapter 


referred to as the Municipal Act), for the words “Chief Electoral Officer” and “Backward 
Classes”, wherever they occur, the words “State Election Commission” and “Other Backward 
Classes” shall respectively be substituted. 


12. In section 2 of the Municipal Act,— 
(a) clause (1) shall be omitted; 
(b) after clause (27), the following clause shall be inserted, namely;— 


‘(27a) “Other Backward Classes” means the Other Backward Classes 
declared by the Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir from 
time to time in accordance with sub-clause (iii) of clause (0) of section 2 of the 
Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004;’; 


(c) after clause (29b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(29bb) “State Election Commission” means the Commission constituted 
under section 36 of the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989;’. 


13. In section 11A of the Municipal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other 
Backward Classes” shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other 
Backward Classes” shall be substituted; 


(c) in sub-section (3), for the words “the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other 
Backward Classes” shall be substituted; 


(d) in sub-section (3A), for the words “Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe 
Certificate”, the words “Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or Other Backward Class 
Certificate” shall be substituted; and; 


(e) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely,— 


“(4) The State Election Commissioner shall be the competent authority 
for the purposes of this section.”. 


Jammu and 
Kashmir Act 
XX of 2000. 


Jammu and 
Kashmir Act 
XIV of 2004. 


Jammu and 
Kashmir Act 
IX of 1989. 


Jammu and 
Kashmir Act 


XXI of 2000. 


Jammu and 
Kashmir Act 


XIV of 2004. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


14. In section 282 of the Municipal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section 
shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(2) The Commission referred to in sub-section (1) shall— 


(i) require any person, including an officer or an employee of the 
Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, subject to any privilege 
which may be claimed by that person under any law for the time being in force 
in the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, to furnish information on any 
matter which, in the opinion of the Commission, may be useful for or relevant to 
the subject of enquiry; 


(ii) by order, give such directions to the officers and employees of the 
Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, or any other statutory 
body or society as it considers necessary to ensure smooth and efficient conduct 
of elections under this Act; 


(iii) by order, delegate, subject to such restrictions mentioned therein, 
any of its powers to such officers and employees of the Government of the 
Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir; 


(iv) determine and delimit the municipalities in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act; 


(v) regulate its own procedure, including the fixing of time and place of its 
sittings; and 


(vi) exercise such other powers as may be determined by the Government 
of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, from time to time.”. 


15. After section 282 of the Municipal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


“282A. Sections 36, 36A, 36B, 36C, 37 and section 39 of the Panchayati Raj Act 


[as amended by the Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024] 
shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to this Act.”. 


CHAPTER IV 


AMENDMENTS TO THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUNICIPAL CorPORATION AcT, 2000 


16. Throughout the Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Corporation Act, 2000 (hereafter 
in this Chapter referred to as the Municipal Corporation Act) for the words “Chief Electoral 
Officer” and “Backward Classes”, wherever they occur, the words “State Election 
Commission” and “Other Backward Classes” shall respectively be substituted. 


17. In section 2 of the Municipal Corporation Act,— 


(a) clause (1) shall be omitted; 
(b) clause (6) shall be omitted; 
(c) after clause (37), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 


‘(37a) “Other Backward Classes” means the Other Backward Classes 
declared by the Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir from 
time to time in accordance with sub-clause (iii) of clause (0) of section 2 of the 
Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004;’; 


Amendment 
of section 
282. 


Insertion of 
new section 
282A. 


Application 
of certain 
provisions of 
Jammu and 
Kashmir 
Panchayati 
Raj Act. 1989. 


Construction 
of reference 
of certain 
expressions by 
certain other 
expressions. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Insertion of 
new section 
9A. 
Application 
of certain 
provisions of 
Jammu and 
Kashmir 
Panchayati 
Raj Act, 1989 
and Jammu 
and Kashmir 
Municipal 
Act, 2000. 
Amendment 


of section 
10A. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr [IK— 


(d) after clause (59), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(59a) “State Election Commission” means the Commission constituted 
under section 36 of the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989.’. 


18. After section 9 of the Municipal Corporation Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“QA. Sections 36, 368, 368, 36C, 37 and section 39 of the Panchayati Raj Act 
and sub-section (2) of section 282 of the Municipal Act [as amended by the Jammu 
and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024] shall, mutatis mutandis, 
apply to this Act.”. 


19. In section 10A of the Municipal Corporation Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other 
Backward Classes” shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other 
Backward Classes” shall be substituted; 


(c) in sub-section (3), for the words “the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other 
Backward Classes” shall be substituted; 


(d) in sub-section (3A), for the words “Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe 
Certificate”, the words “Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or Other Backward Class 
Certificate” shall be substituted; and 


(e) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(4) The State Election Commissioner shall be the competent authority 
for the purpose of this section.”. 


Jammu and 
Kashmir Act 
IX of 1989. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2024 seeks to amend 
certain provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989, the Jammu and 
Kashmir Municipal Act, 2000 and the Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Corporation Act, 2000 
(the Acts) in consonance with the provisions of the Part [X and Part [XA of the Constitution. 


2. Part IX and Part IXA of the Constitution relates to “the Panchayats” and “the 
Municipalities”. Clause (6) of articles 243D and 243T of the Constitution empowers the 
Legislature of a State to make provision for reservation of seats in any “Panchayat” and 
“Municipality” in favour of backward classes of citizens. However, the Acts of the Union 
territory of Jammu and Kashmir has no provision for reservation of seats for “Other Backward 
Classes” in the Panchayats and the Municipalities. 


3. According to articles 243K and 243ZA of the Constitution, the superintendence, 
direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of all elections 
to the Panchayats and Municipalities is vested in a “State Election Commission” consisting 
of a “State Election Commissioner”. The similar provision was incorporated in the Jammu 
and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989. However, as per Municipal laws of the Union territory 
of the Jammu and Kashmir the conduct of all elections to the Municipalities and Municipal 
Corporations lies with “the Chief Electoral Officer” of Jammu and Kashmir. 


4. Proviso to clause (2) of article 243K of the Constitution envisages that the State 
Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except in like manner and on the 
like grounds as a Judge of a High Court and the conditions of service of the State Election 
Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. But, section 
36B of the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989 provides that the State Election 
Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except by an order made by the Lieutenant 
Governor on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry conducted 
by a sitting or a retired judge of the High Court, on a reference made to him by the Lieutenant 
Governor. The provisions pertaining to State Election Commissioner in the Jammu and 
Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989 are at variance with the provisions of the Constitution. 


5. In order to provide reservation to the “Other Backward Classes” in the Panchayats 
and the Municipalities in the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and to bring consistency 
in the local bodies laws of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir with the provisions of 
the Constitution, it has become necessary to amend certain provisions of the Acts and to 
introduce a Bill in Parliament, namely, the Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws 
(Amendment) Bill, 2024. With this, justice will be ensured to the citizens of Other Backward 
Classes of Jammu and Kashmir for the first time after 75 years of independence. 


6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The 2nd February, 2024. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY _ [Parr II—Szc. 2] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2024, if enacted, would 
not involve any expenditure either recurring or non-recurring from and out of the Consolidated 
fund of India. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


MGIPMRND—643GI—06-02-2024. 


