रजिस्ट्री Fe Ste Uer—( WA) 04/0007/2003—26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


JN क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-16042026-271849 
CG-DL-E-16042026-271849 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग ता — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं० 12] नई दिल्ली, बृहस्पतिवार, अप्रैल 16, 2026/चैत्र 26, 1948 (शक) 
No. 12] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, APRIL 16, 2026/CHAITRA 26, 1948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on 16th April, 2026:— 
BILL No. 107 oF 2026 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Thirty-first 
Amendment) Act, 2026. 

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In article 55 of the Constitution, for the Explanation, the following 
Explanation shall be substituted, namely: — 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
article 55. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


‘Explanation.—In this article, the expression “population” means the 
population as ascertained at such census, as Parliament may by law determine 
under article 82 or article 170, of which the relevant figures have been 
published.’. 


Amendment of 3. In article 81 of the Constitution,— 
article 81. 
(a) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 


“(1) The House of the People shall consist of— 


(a) not more than eight hundred and fifteen members chosen 
by direct election from territorial constituencies in the States; and 


(5) not more than thirty-five members to represent the Union 
territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law 
provide.”; 


(b) for clause (3), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 


‘(3) In this article, the expression “population” means the 
population as ascertained at such census, as Parliament may by law 
determine, of which the relevant figures have been published.’. 


Amendment of 4. In article 82 of the Constitution,— 
article 82. 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “after each census”, the words 
“of constituencies” shall be substituted; 


(b) for the words “Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of 
seats”, the words “The allocation of seats” shall be substituted; 


(c) for the words “by such authority and in such manner’, the words “in 
such manner and on the basis of such census, by the Delimitation 
Commission,” shall be substituted; 


(d) the third proviso shall be omitted. 


Amendment of 5. In article 170 of the Constitution,— 
article 170. 1 
(a) in clause (1), for the words and figures “Subject to the provisions of 


article 333, the Legislative Assembly”, the words “The Legislative Assembly” 
shall be substituted; 


(b) in clause (2), for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


‘Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “population” means 
the population as ascertained at such census, as Parliament may by law 
determine, of which the relevant figures have been published.’; 


(c) in clause (3),— 


(i) for the words “Upon the completion of each census, the total 
number of seats”, the words “The total number of seats” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) for the words “by such authority and in such manner”, the 
words “in such manner and on the basis of such census, by the 
Delimitation Commission,” shall be substituted; 


(iii) the third proviso shall be omitted. 


Amendment of 6. In article 330 of the Constitution, after clause (3), for the Explanation, the 
दा 330 following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


‘Explanation—In this article and in article 332, the expression 
“population” means the population as ascertained at such census, as Parliament 
may by law determine, of which the relevant figures have been published.’. 


7. In article 332 of the Constitution, for clauses (3A) and (3B), the following 


clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), upon 
readjustment of the number of seats under article 170, the seats which shall be 
reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States 
of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland shall be,— 


(a) if all the seats in the Legislative Assembly of any such State 
are held by members of the Scheduled Tribes, all the seats except one; 


(6) in any other case, such number of seats as bears to the total 
number of seats, a proportion not less than the number of members 
belonging to the Scheduled Tribes which the existing Assembly bears to 
the total number of seats in that Assembly. 


(3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), upon 
readjustment of the number of seats under article 170, the seats which shall be 
reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State of 
Tripura shall be such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a 
proportion not less than the number of members belonging to the Scheduled 
Tribes which the existing Assembly bears to the total number of seats in that 
Assembly.”. 


8. For article 334A of the Constitution, the following article shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“334A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this 
Part or Part VIII, the provisions of this Constitution relating to the reservation 
of seats for women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a 
State, the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, the 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Puducherry and the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall come into effect 
after an exercise of delimitation is undertaken for this purpose. 


(2) The reservation of seats for women in the House of the People, the 
Legislative Assembly of a State, the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi, the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Puducherry and the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir shall cease to have effect on the expiry of a period of fifteen years 
from the commencement of the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth 
Amendment) Act, 2023 unless Parliament may by law extend the period for 
such further time as it may specify in this behalf. 


(3) The seats reserved for women in the House of the People, the Legislative 
Assembly of a State, the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi, the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Puducherry and the 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall be 
allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a State or Union territory. 


(4) Nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House of 
the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State, the Legislative Assembly of 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi, the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Puducherry or the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir after the exercise of delimitation is undertaken, until the 
dissolution of the then existing House of the People or the Legislative 
Assembly of a State or Union territory.”. 


Amendment of 
article 332. 


Substitution of 
article 334A. 


Reservation of 
seats for women 
to take effect. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Article 82 and clause (3) of article 170 of the Constitution provide that upon 
completion of each census, the total number of seats allotted to each State in the 
House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies, and the division of each 
State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such 
manner as Parliament may by law determine. The third proviso to article 82 and the 
third proviso to clause (3), of article 170, inter alia, provide that there shall be no 
fresh readjustment of constituencies until the relevant figures for the first census 
taken after the year 2026 have been published. 


2. The Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001 amended 
articles 55, 81, 82, 170, 330 and 332 to freeze the allocation of seats in the House of 
the People and State Legislative Assemblies on the basis of the 1971 census until 
the first census conducted after the year 2026, while providing for the readjustment 
of territorial constituencies on the basis of the figures of the 1991 census. 


3. Subsequently, the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003 
amended articles 81, 82, 170 and 330 to provide for readjustment of territorial 
constituencies including those reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes, based on the figures of 2001 census, without affecting the total number of 
seats allotted to the States in the House of the People or the State Legislative 
Assemblies. 


4. While the freeze of seats on the basis of population figures of the year 1971 
census served an important policy purpose, the country’s demographic profile has 
since undergone substantial changes, as reflected in the population figures of the 
latest published census, including significant inter-State and intra-State population 
shifts, rapid urbanisation and migration, and disproportionate growth in certain 
regions, resulting in wide disparities in the population and the constituencies. 


5. Meanwhile, the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) 
Act, 2023 (popularly known as ‘Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam’), amended 
article 239AA and inserted articles 330A, 332A and 334A in the Constitution, to 
provide for reservation of nearly one-third of seats for women in the House of the 
People and the Legislative Assemblies (including women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) with the objective of achieving greater 
participation of women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a 
State and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi. The 
said provisions contemplate that such reservation shall become operative after the 
first delimitation is undertaken on the basis of the relevant census taken after the 
commencement of the said Amendment Act. 


6. The next census and the consequential delimitation exercise thereafter will 
take considerable time and thus, delay the effective and dedicated participation of 
women in our democratic polity. Hence, the objective of the proposed Bill is to 
operationalise one-third reservation for women, including women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, in the House of the People and the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States, the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the 
Union territories through delimitation exercise to be undertaken on the basis of the 
population figures of the latest published census. Thus, the implementation of 
reservation of seats for women is linked to the constitutional scheme of readjustment 
in the allocation of seats in the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies 
and re-drawing boundaries of territorial constituencies by the Delimitation 
Commission. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


7. The proposed Bill would facilitate delimitation of territorial constituencies 
and put in operation, the provisions providing for reservation of seats for women in 
the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies. This will also promote 
women empowerment and provide opportunity for women to participate in the 
nation-building process. In addition, the increased representation of women in the 
decision-making process will promote inclusivity and help in achieving the goals of 
Viksit Bharat@2047. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL. 
The \\th April, 2026. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


BiLt No. 109 oF 2026 


A Bill further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, the Government 
of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 and the Jammu and Kashmir 
Reorganisation Act, 2019. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (४) This Act may be called the Union Territories Laws (Amendment) Short title and 
Act, 2026. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment of 
long title. 


Substitution of 
certain 
expression with 
certain other 
expression. 


Amendment of 
section 1. 


Amendment of 
heading of 
Part II. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Amendment of 
section 3A. 


Omission of 
section 3B. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES ACT, 1963 


2. In the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (hereafter in this Chapter 
referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words “Legislative 
Assemblies and Councils of Ministers for certain Union territories”, the words 
“Legislative Assembly and Council of Ministers for the Union territory of 
Puducherry” shall be substituted. 


3. Throughout the principal Act, except section 58, for the word “Pondicherry” 
wherever it occurs, the word “Puducherry” shall be substituted. 


4. In section 1 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “Union territories”, the words 
“Union territory of Puducherry” shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (2), the provisos shall be omitted. 


5. In Part I of the principal Act, in the heading, for the word “Assemblies”, 
the word “Assembly” shall be substituted. 


6. In section 3 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “Assemblies for Union 
territories and their”, the words “Assembly and its” shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (/), for the words “each Union territory”, the words 
“the Union territory of Puducherry” shall be substituted; 


(c) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) The Legislative Assembly of the Union territory shall consist 
of such number of members, to be chosen by direct election from 
territorial constituencies in the Union territory, as may be determined by 
the Delimitation Commission referred to in section 40A, which shall not 
be less than thirty, in any case.”; 


(व) in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that the number of persons nominated under this 
sub-section shall be increased to five, out of whom two shall be women, 
only after readjustment of constituencies takes effect under the 
applicable law on delimitation.”; 


(e) in sub-section (5), for the Explanation, the following Explanation 
shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expression “population” 
shall have the same meaning as provided in the applicable law on 
delimitation. ’. 


7. In section 3A of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “in such 
manner as Parliament may by law determine’, the words, figures and letter “in the 
manner provided by the applicable law on delimitation and the provisions of 
article 334A shall apply to such reservation” shall be substituted. 


8. Section 3B of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


20 of 1963. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[Part II— 


9. In section 5 of the principal Act, in the marginal heading, for the word 
“Assemblies”, the word “Assembly” shall be substituted. 


10. In section 25 of the principal Act, the third proviso shall be omitted. 


11. In Part III of the principal Act,— 
(a) section 38 shall be omitted; 
(5) in section 40, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the seat allotted under this section shall be subject 
to readjustment of constituencies by the Delimitation Commission 
referred to in section 40A.”; 


(c) after section 40, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“400. The readjustment of Assembly and Parliamentary 
constituencies in the Union territory of Puducherry may be determined 
by the Delimitation Commission under the applicable law on 
delimitation: 


Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in 
the Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing 
Assembly: 


Provided further that until such readjustment takes effect, any 
election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the 
territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment.”; 


(d) sections 41, 42, 43, 43A, 43B, 43C, 43D, 43E and 43F shall be 
omitted. 


12. In section 44 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words “each 
Union territory”, the words “the Union territory of Puducherry” shall be substituted. 


13. Sections 53, 54, 54A and 57 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


14. The Second Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted. 


CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI 
Act, 1991 


15. In the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act), in section 3,— 


1 of 1992. 


(a) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(1) The Legislative Assembly of the Capital shall consist of such 
number of members, to be chosen by direct election from territorial 
constituencies in the Capital, as may be determined by the Delimitation 
Commission referred to in section 38, which shall not be less than 
seventy, in any case.”; 


(b) in sub-section (3), for the Explanation and the provisos, the following 
Explanation shall be substituted, namely: — 


‘Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expression “population” 
shall have the same meaning as provided in the applicable law on 
delimitation.’. 


Amendment of 
section 5. 


Amendment of 
section 25. 
Amendment of 
Part III. 


Delimitation of 
constituencies. 


Amendment of 
section 44. 


Omission of 
sections 53, 54, 
54A and 57. 
Omission of 
Second 
Schedule. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 38. 


Delimitation of 
constituencies. 


Omission of 
section 39. 


Amendment of 
section 10. 


Amendment of 
section 14. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


16. For section 38 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“38. The readjustment of Assembly and Parliamentary constituencies in 
the Capital may be determined by the Delimitation Commission under the 
applicable law on delimitation: 


Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the 
Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly: 


Provided further that until such readjustment takes effect, any election 
to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the territorial 
constituencies existing before such readjustment.”. 


17. Section 39 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENTS TO THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR REORGANISATION ACT, 2019 


18. In the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (hereafter in this 


Chapter referred to as the principal Act), in section 10, the following proviso shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the number of seats allocated under this section shall be 
subject to readjustment of constituencies by the Delimitation Commission 
referred to in section 60.”. 


19. In section 14 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir shall consist of such number of members, to be chosen by 
direct election from territorial constituencies in the Union territory, as 
may be determined by the Delimitation Commission referred to in 
section 60, which shall not be less than one hundred and fourteen, in any 
case.”; 


(b) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), until 
the area of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir under the 
occupation of Pakistan ceases to be so occupied and the people residing 
in that area elect their representatives, twenty-four seats in the 
Legislative Assembly of Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall 
remain vacant and shall not be taken into account for reckoning the total 
membership of the Assembly.”; 


(c) in sub-section (7), for the Explanation, the following Explanation 
shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expression “population” 
shall have the same meaning as provided in the applicable law on 
delimitation.’; 


(d) sub-sections (9) and (/0) shall be omitted. 


34 of 2019. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


20. In section 14A of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “in 
such manner as Parliament may by law determine’, the words, figures and letter “in 
the manner provided by the applicable law on delimitation and the provisions of 
article 334A shall apply to such reservation” shall be substituted. 


21. Section 14B of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


22. In section 15 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that the number of members nominated under this section 
shall be increased to three, only after readjustment of constituencies takes 
effect under the applicable law on delimitation.”. 


23. In section 15A of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that the number of members nominated under this section 
shall be increased to three, only after readjustment of constituencies takes 
effect under the applicable law on delimitation.”. 


24. In Part V of the principal Act,— 
(a) section 59 shall be omitted; 
(b) for section 60, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“60. The readjustment of Assembly and _ Parliamentary 
constituencies in the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir may be 
determined by the Delimitation Commission under the applicable law on 
delimitation: 


Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in 
the Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing 
Assembly: 


Provided further that until such readjustment takes effect, any 
election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the 
territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment.”; 


(c) sections 61, 62, 63 and 64 shall be omitted. 


Amendment of 
section 14A. 


Omission of 
section 14B. 
Amendment of 
section 15. 


Amendment of 
section 15A. 


Amendment of 
Part V. 


Delimitation of 
constituencies. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023 amended 
article 239AA and inserted articles 330A, 332A and 334A in the Constitution to 
provide for reservation of seats for women in the House of the People and the 
Legislative Assemblies, including in the Legislative Assemblies of Union 
territories. The said provisions contemplate that such reservation shall become 
operative after an exercise of delimitation undertaken on the basis of the relevant 
census. 


2. Further, the Constitution (One Hundred and Thirty-first Amendment) 
Bill, 2026 seeks to revise the constitutional framework relating to delimitation, 
allocation of seats and the meaning of “population”, by providing that readjustment 
of constituencies and allocation of seats shall be undertaken by the 
Delimitation Commission on the basis of such census as Parliament may by law 
determine. 


3. The provisions contained in the Government of Union Territories 
Act, 1963, the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 and the 
Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 are presently based on the existing 
constitutional framework relating to population, delimitation and reservation. Under 
the revised constitutional scheme, the expression “population”, the allocation of 
seats and the readjustment of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies are 
proposed to be governed with reference to such census as Parliament may by law 
determine, and such readjustment is to be undertaken by the Delimitation 
Commission. The revised scheme also aligns the operation of reservation of seats 
for women in the Legislative Assemblies of the concerned Union territories with 
article 334A of the Constitution and the delimitation exercise undertaken 
thereunder. In view of these constitutional changes, the aforesaid enactments require 
suitable amendments so as to bring them in conformity with the revised 
constitutional scheme. 


4. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the aforesaid enactments, 
inter alia, to— 


(i) align the provisions relating to determination of population with the 
law relating to delimitation; 


(ii) provide that the total number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies 
and their territorial composition shall be determined by the Delimitation 
Commission in accordance with the law made by Parliament, subject to 
prescribed minimum strength; 


(iii) align the provisions relating to reservation for women with the 
constitutional framework under article 334A and the delimitation law; 


(iv) provide for readjustment of Parliamentary and Assembly 
constituencies by the Delimitation Commission along with appropriate 
transitional safeguards; and 


(v) omit obsolete, redundant or inconsistent provisions relating to earlier 
delimitation arrangements, so as to ensure clarity and coherence in the 
statutory framework. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


5. The proposed amendments are largely consequential and enabling in nature, 
arising from the revised constitutional framework, and are intended to ensure 
consistency and effective implementation of the provisions relating to delimitation, 
representation and reservation in the Legislative Assemblies of Union territories. 
They do not involve any independent policy departure but seek to harmonise the 
existing statutory provisions with the amended constitutional scheme. 


6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The 10th April, 2026. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


BiLt No. 108 oF 2026 


A Bill to provide for the readjustment of the allocation of seats in the House of the People 
to the States and Union territories, the total number of seats in the Legislative 
Assembly of each State and Union territories having a Legislative Assembly, 
the division of each State and each Union territory having a Legislative 
Assembly into territorial constituencies for elections to the House of the 
People and Legislative Assemblies of the States and Union territories and for 
matters connected therewith. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Delimitation Act, 2026. >007 ale and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “article” means an article of the Constitution; 
(b) “associate member” means a member nominated under section 5; 


(c) “Commission” means the Delimitation Commission constituted 
under section 3; 


(d) “Election Commission” means the Election Commission referred to 
in article 324; 


(e) “latest census figures” means the latest census figures published as 
on the date of the constitution of the Commission under section 3; 


(f) “member” means a member of the Commission and includes the 
Chairperson; 


(g) “notification” means notification published in the Official Gazette; 


(h) “population” means the population ascertained at the latest census of 
which the relevant figures have been published as on the date of the 
constitution of the Commission; and 


(i) “State” includes a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly. 


Constitution of 3. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification, 


Delimitation ५ ८ bc 0 &: es neh Cc cous 
00775: constitute a Commission to be called the Delimitation Commission. 


(2) The Commission shall comprise of the following members, namely:— 


(a) one member, who shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of the 
Supreme Court, to be appointed by the Central Government, as the 
Chairperson of the Commission; 


(b) the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner 
nominated by the Chief Election Commissioner, ex officio: 


Provided that after the nomination of an Election Commissioner as a 
member under this clause, no further nomination under this clause shall be 
made except to fill the casual vacancy of such member under section 6; and 


(c) the State Election Commissioner of the State concerned, ex officio. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of clause (2), the State Election Commissioner 
of the State concerned,— 


(i) in respect of the duties of the Commission relating to a State (other 
than the States of Meghalaya and Nagaland), means the State Election 
Commissioner appointed by the Governor of that State under clause (1) of 
article 243K; and 


(ii) in respect of the duties of the Commission relating to the States of 
Meghalaya and Nagaland, means a person nominated by the Governor of that 
State for such purposes. 


(3) The Central Government may, by notification, specify the term of the 
Commission: 


Provided that the Central Government may, on the request of the Commission, 
extend the term of the Commission by such further period as it may consider 
necessary. 


(4) The Election Commission shall act as Delimitation Commission for the 
purpose of delimiting constituencies in the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Jammu and Kashmir falling under the occupation of Pakistan, when the 
area of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir under the occupation of Pakistan 
ceases to be so occupied. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


4. It shall be the duty of the Commission to readjust, on the basis of the latest 
census figures, the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States and 
Union territories, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each 
State and the division of each State and Union territories into territorial 
constituencies for the purpose of elections to the House of the People and to the 
Legislative Assembly: 


Provided that where on such readjustment only one seat is allocated in the 
House of the People to a State or Union territory, the whole of that State or Union 
territory shall form one territorial constituency for the purpose of elections to the 
House of the People from that State or Union territory. 


5. (J) The Commission shall associate with itself for the purpose of assisting 
it in its duties in respect of each State, ten persons, five of whom shall be members 
of the House of the People representing that State and five shall be members of the 
Legislative Assembly of that State: 


Provided that where the number of members of the House of the People 
representing any State is five or less, then, all such members shall be the associate 
members for that State and in the latter case the total number of associate members 
shall be less than ten by such number as by which the total number of members of 
the House of the People representing that State is less than five. 


(2) The persons to be so associated from each State shall be nominated, in the 
case of the members of the House of the People, by the Speaker of that House, and in 
the case of members of a Legislative Assembly, by the Speaker of that Assembly, 
having due regard to the composition of the House or, as the case may be, of the 
Assembly. 


(3) The first nominations to be made under sub-section (2) shall be— 


(a) made by the Speakers of the Legislative Assemblies within one 
month, and by the Speaker of the House of the People within two months, 
from the date of notification issued under sub-section (/) of section 3; and 


(b) communicated to the Chief Election Commissioner, and where the 
nominations are made by the Speaker of a Legislative Assembly, also to the 
Speaker of the House of the People. 


(4) None of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any 
decision of the Commission. 


(5) The Commission shall have power to call upon— 


(a) the Registrar-General and Census Commissioner, India or his 
nominee; or 


(b) the Surveyor General of India or his nominee; or 

(c) any other officer of the Central Government or State Government; or 
(d) any expert in geographical information system; or 

(e) any other person, 


whose expertise and knowledge are considered necessary by the Commission to 
provide assistance to it in addition to the assistance provided by the persons referred 
to in sub-section (/) and the officers and persons so called upon shall be duty bound 
to assist the Commission. 


(6) One of the Secretaries to the Election Commission, to be nominated by the 
Election Commission, shall be the ex officio Secretary of the Commission and shall 
discharge his functions with the assistance of the employees of the Election 
Commission under the supervision of the Chairperson of the Commission. 


Duties of the 
Commission. 


Associate 
members. 


Casual 
vacancies. 


Procedure and 
powers of 
Commission. 


Readjustment of 
number of seats. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


6. If the office of the Chairperson or of a member or of an associate member 
falls vacant owing to his death or resignation, it shall be filled as soon as may be 
practicable by the Central Government or the Speaker concerned under and in 
accordance with the provisions of section 3 or, as the case may be, of section 5. 


7. (1) The Commission shall determine its own procedure and shall, in the 
performance of its functions, have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses; 
(b) requiring the production of any document; and 
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or office. 


(2) The Commission shall have power to require any person to furnish any 
information on such points or matters as in the opinion of the Commission may be 
useful for, or relevant to, any matter under the consideration of the Commission. 


(3) The Commission may authorise any of its members to exercise any of the 
powers conferred on it by clauses (a) to (c) of sub-section (/) and sub-section (2), 
and any order made or act done in exercise of any of those powers by the member 
authorised by the Commission in that behalf shall be deemed to be the order or act, 
as the case may be, of the Commission. 


(4) If there is a difference of opinion among the members, the opinion of the 
majority shall prevail, and acts and orders of the Commission shall be expressed in 
terms of the views of the majority. 


(5) The Commission as well as any group of associate members shall have 
power to act notwithstanding the temporary absence of a member or associate 
member or the existence of a vacancy in the Commission or in that or any other 
group of associate members; and no act or proceeding of the Commission or of any 
group of associate members shall be invalid or called in question on the ground, 
merely of such temporary absence or of the existence of such vacancy. 


(6) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of 
sections 384 and 385 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the 
local limits of the jurisdiction of the Commission shall be the limits of the territory 
of India. 


8. The Commission shall, on the basis of the latest census figures and having 
regard to the provisions of articles 81, 82, 170, sub-clause (6) and sub-clause (bc) 
of clause (2) of article 239AA, articles 330, 330A, 332, 332A and 334A, and also in 
relation to the Union territory of Puducherry, the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
and the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, having regard to the relevant 
provisions of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, the Government of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 and the Jammu and Kashmir 
Reorganisation Act, 2019, respectively, by order, determine,— 


(a) the number of seats in the House of the People to be allocated to each 
State and Union territory and the number of seats, if any, to be reserved for 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes; 


(b) the total number of seats to be assigned to the Legislative Assembly 
of each State and the number of seats, if any, to be reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes; and 


5 of 1908. 


46 of 2023. 


20 of 1963. 
1 of 1992. 
34 of 2019. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


(c) the reservation of as nearly as may be, one-third of the total number 
of seats in the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States 
for women, including women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes: 


Provided that the total number of seats assigned to the Legislative 
Assembly of any State under this section shall be an integral multiple of the 
number of seats in the House of the People allocated to that State: 


Provided further that the seats reserved for women in the House of the 
People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States, including women 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, shall be allotted 
by rotation to different constituencies in a State or a Union territory: 


Provided also that seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be rotated within the constituencies 
reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be. 


9. (1) The Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, distribute the 


seats in the House of the People allocated to each State and Union territory and the 
seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of each State to single-member territorial 
constituencies and delimit them on the basis of the latest census figures, having 
regard to the provisions of the Constitution, the provisions of the Acts specified in 
section 8 and the following provisions, namely:— 


(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically 
compact areas, and in delimiting them regard shall be had to physical features, 
existing boundaries of administrative units, facilities of communication and 
public convenience; 


(b) every Assembly constituency shall be so delimited as to fall wholly 
within one Parliamentary constituency; 


(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes 
shall be distributed in different parts of the State and located, as far as 
practicable, in those areas where the proportion of their population to the total 
is comparatively large; 

(d) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Tribes 
shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the proportion of their 
population to the total is the largest; and 

(e) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the women including 


women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and 
rotation of such seats. 


(2) The Commission shall— 


(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies, together 
with the dissenting proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires 
publication thereof, in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazettes of all 
the States concerned and also in such other manner as it thinks fit; 


(b) specify a date on or after which the proposals shall be further 
considered by it; 


(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been 
received by it before the date so specified, and for the purpose of such 
consideration, hold one or more public sittings at such place or places in each 
State as it thinks fit; and 


(d) thereafter by one or more orders determine— 
(2) the delimitation of Parliamentary constituencies; and 
(ii) the delimitation of Assembly constituencies, 
of each State. 


Delimitation of 
constituencies. 


Publication of 
orders and their 
date of 
operation. 


Power to 
maintain 
delimitation 
orders up-to- 
date. 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


10. (J) The Commission shall cause each of its orders made under section 8 
or section 9 to be published in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazettes of 
the States concerned and simultaneously cause such orders to be published at least 
in two vernacular newspapers and publicise on radio, television and other possible 
media available to the public and after such publication in the Official Gazettes of 
the States concerned, every District Election Officer shall cause to be affixed, the 
Gazette version of such orders relating to the area under his jurisdiction, on a 
conspicuous part of his office for public notice. 


(2) Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such order shall have the 
force of law and shall not be called in question in any court. 


(3) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order shall be laid 
before the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States 
concerned. 


(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), the readjustment of 
representation of the several territorial constituencies in the House of the People or 
in the Legislative Assembly of a State and the delimitation of those constituencies 
provided for in any such order shall apply in relation to every election to the House 
or to the Assembly, as the case may be, held after the publication in the Gazette of 
India of that order and shall so apply in supersession of the provisions relating to 
such representation and delimitation contained in any other law for the time being 
in force or any order or notification issued under such law in so far as such 
representation and delimitation are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. 


(5) Nothing in this section shall affect the representation in the House of the 
People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until the dissolution of the House 
or of the Assembly, as the case may be, existing on the date of publication in the 
Gazette of India of the final order or orders of the Commission relating to the 
delimitation of Parliamentary constituencies or, as the case may be, of the Assembly 
constituencies of that State and any bye-election to fill any vacancy in such House 
or in any such Assembly shall be held on the basis of the provisions of the laws and 
orders superseded by sub-section (4) as if the said provisions had not been 
superseded. 


(6) The Commission shall endeavour to complete and publish each of its 
orders referred to in sub-section (/) in the manner provided in that sub-section, 
within the term specified in the notification issued under sub-section (3) of 
section 3. 


11. (J) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in 
the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the State concerned,— 


(a) correct any printing mistake in any of the orders made by the 
Commission under section 9 or any error arising therein from an inadvertent 
slip or omission; and 


(6) where the boundaries or name of any district or any territorial 
division mentioned in any of the said orders are or is altered, make such 
amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing the orders 
up-to-date, so, however, that the boundaries or areas or extent of any 
constituency shall not be changed by any such notification. 


(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is issued, before the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of the State 
concerned. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


12. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect, notwithstanding Act to have 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, in respect of duties, aa 
powers and functions of the Commission under this Act. 


33 of 2002. 13. The Delimitation Act, 2002 is hereby repealed. Repeal. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The existing allocation of seats of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
is based on the population figures published as per 1971 census and division of 
territorial constituencies is based on the population figures published as per 2001 
census. The growth of population thereafter, across different constituencies in 
various parts of the country as well as within the same State along with migration 
of people from one place to other, especially from rural areas to urban areas, have 
resulted in varying density of population in electoral constituencies. 


2. Articles 82 and 170 of the Constitution provide that the allocation of seats 
in the House of the People to the States and in the Legislative Assemblies, and the 
division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted in such 
manner and on the basis of such census, by such authority (the Delimitation 
Commission), as Parliament may by law determine. 


3. Further, articles 239AA, 330A, 332A and 334A provide for, as nearly as 
may be, one-third reservation of seats for women in the House of the People and the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States, including within the seats reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. These articles make provisions for 
enhancing women’s representation in the House of the People and the Legislative 
Assemblies effectively to enable greater participation of women in policy making 
and governance. 


4. The purpose of the Bill is to constitute the Delimitation Commission to 
undertake the exercise of delimitation, inter alia, to provide reservation of seats for 
women in the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies. 


5. The provisions of the Bill seek to provide for the manner in which such 
exercise of delimitation will be undertaken by the Delimitation Commission, as may 
be constituted from time to time. The Delimitation Commission is empowered with 
the task of carrying out delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies 
and to allocate seats to be reserved for women, including women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, in the House of the People and the 
Legislative Assemblies. The proposed delimitation will apply to every general 
election to the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies held after the 
final orders of the Delimitation Commission are published and to every bye-election 
held thereafter. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL. 
The \1\th April, 2026. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of a Delimitation 
Commission consisting of three members of whom one shall be a person who is or 
has been a Judge of the Supreme Court and two other members being the Chief 
Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner nominated by the Chief 
Election Commissioner and the State Election Commissioner of the concerned 
State, ex officio. The Commission shall also associate with itself for the purpose of 
assisting it in its duties in respect of each State, ten persons, five of whom shall be 
the members of the House of the People representing that State nominated by the 
Speaker of that House and five shall be the members of the Legislative Assembly 
of that State nominated by the Speaker of that Assembly. 


2. The expenditure on account of setting up of the Commission including the 
salary and allowances of the Chairperson and other expenses in connection with the 
working of the Commission will be met from the Consolidated Fund of India and 
will be borne by the Election Commission of India along with other expenses 
incurred for the purpose of delimitation by the Commission. 


3. At this stage, it is not possible to estimate precisely the total expenditure 
likely to be incurred on the proposed Commission. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH, 
Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


Digitally signed 


MGIPMRND—22 GI(S4)—16-04-2026. KsHiTiz Se 
MOHAN bate:2026.04.16 


18:36:25 +05'30' 


