रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल० -(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


Jina 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-22082025-265617 
CG-DL-E-22082025-265617 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 33] नई दिल्‍ली, बृहस्पतिवार, अगस्त 21, 2025/श्रावण 30, 1947 (शक) 
No. 33] | NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 2025/SHRAVANA 30, 1947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 2\st August, 2025/Shravana 30, 1947 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
21st August, 2025 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND 
REGULATION) AMENDMENT ACT, 2025 
No. 28 OF 2025 
[21st August, 2025.] 


An Act further to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1957. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


67 of 1957. 2. In the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 3, after clause (ae), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Insertion of new 
section 6A. 


Inclusion of 
contiguous area 
in the leased 
area or area 
under composite 
licence in case 
of deep-seated 
minerals. 


Amendment of 
section 8A. 


Amendment of 
section 9C. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


‘(af) “mineral exchange” means an electronic trading platform or 
marketplace registered in accordance with the provisions of this Act, where 
buyers and sellers of minerals, its concentrate or its processed forms (including 
metals), transact, trade and enter into contract, including in derivatives;’. 


3. In the principal Act, after section 6, the following section shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


‘6A. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10,— 


(a) a holder of a mining lease of deep-seated mineral, may apply 
for a one-time extension of the existing leased area to include therein a 
contiguous area not exceeding ten per cent. of the existing leased area; 


(0) a holder of a composite licence in respect of deep-seated 
mineral, may apply for a one-time extension of the area under the 
composite licence, to include therein a contiguous area not exceeding 
thirty per cent. of the existing area under the licence. 


(2) Upon receipt of such application, the State Government may extend 
the existing leased area or the area under composite licence, as the case may 
be, to include therein the contiguous area subject to such terms and conditions 
and on payment of such additional amount as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the expression 
“deep-seated minerals” means such minerals which occur at a depth of 
more than two hundred meters from the surface of land with 
poor surface manifestations.’. 


4. In the principal Act, in section 8A, in sub-section (7A),— 


(i) the words “up to fifty per cent. of the total mineral produced ina year” 
shall be omitted; 


(ii) for the first proviso, the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Provided that the State Government may permit sale of dumps 
which has been stacked up to such date as may be specified by the 
Central Government in the leased area on payment of additional amount 
specified in the Sixth Schedule:”. 


5. In the principal Act, in section 9C,— 


(i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“National Mineral Exploration and Development Trust.”; 


(ii) in sub-section (/), for the words “National Mineral Exploration 
Trust”, the words “National Mineral Exploration and Development Trust” 
shall be substituted; 


(iii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) The object of the Trust shall be to use the funds accrued to the 
Trust within India, including the offshore areas, and outside India for the 
purposes of regional and detailed exploration and development of mines 
and minerals in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.” 


(iv) in sub-section (4), for the words “two per cent.”, the words “three 
per cent.” shall be substituted; 


(v) in sub-section (5), for the words “National Mineral Exploration 
Trust”, the words “National Mineral Exploration and Development Trust” 
shall be substituted. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


6. In the principal Act, in section 10B, in sub-section (2), the words “, after 


obtaining the previous approval of the Central Government,” shall be omitted. 


7. In the principal Act, in section 13, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) after clause (A), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ka) terms and conditions and additional amount under 
sub-section (2) of section 6A;”; 


(ii) in clauses (440), (७५८) and (qqd), for the words “National Mineral 
Exploration Trust”, the words “National Mineral Exploration and 
Development Trust” shall be substituted; 


(iii) after clause (xb), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(xc) conditions for inclusion of any mineral other than minor 
mineral in a lease granted in respect of a minor mineral under 
sub-section (5) of section 15B;”. 


8. In the principal Act, after section 15A, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“15B. (1) A holder of a mining lease may apply to the State Government 
for inclusion of any other mineral in his mining lease on the basis of a 
geological report in relation to that lease and the State Government shall 
permit inclusion of such mineral within sixty days of such application, subject 
to the payment of such additional amount on dispatch of the included mineral 
as specified in the Eighth Schedule. 


(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
and for reasons to be recorded in writing, amend the Eighth Schedule so as to 
modify the entries mentioned therein with effect from such date as may be 
specified in the said notification. 


(3) The holder of mining lease shall submit such reports or returns to the 
State Government and any other authority in respect of the included mineral 
as may be specified by the Central Government. 


(4) The provision of this section shall apply for inclusion of any minor 
mineral in a lease granted in respect of a mineral other than minor mineral and 
the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the 
royalty and other payments to be made by the lessee on dispatch of such 
included minor mineral. 


(5) Inclusion of any mineral other than minor mineral in a lease granted 
in respect of a minor mineral shall be made in accordance with the conditions 
as may be prescribed for this purpose by the Central Government and such 
rules may provide for all or any of the matters, namely:— 


(i) the extent of presence of mineral other than minor mineral as 
compared to minor mineral in the lease; 


(ii) termination of the lease in the interest of regulation of mines 
and mineral development and grant ofa fresh lease in the area as a lease 
in respect of mineral other than minor mineral; 


(iii) regulation of such lease as a lease granted for mineral other 
than minor minerals; 


(iv) additional payment as specified in the Eighth Schedule to be 
made upon inclusion of a mineral other than minor mineral. 


(6) Any mineral may be included under this section in a mining lease 
granted in respect of atomic mineral specified in Part B of the First Schedule 
where the grade of atomic mineral is equal to or above the notified threshold 
value with prior approval of the Central Government. 


Amendment of 
section 10B. 


Amendment of 
section 13. 


Insertion of new 
section 158. 


Inclusion of 
other minerals in 
mining lease. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(7) No atomic mineral as specified in Part B of the First Schedule where 
the grade of atomic mineral is equal to or above the notified threshold value 
shall be included in the mining lease granted in respect of minerals other than 
such atomic minerals.”. 


Insertion of new 9. In the principal Act, after section 18A, the following section shall be 
७७2०५ inserted, namely:— 

Development of “18B. (1) The Central Government shall endeavour to promote 
market. 


development of market, including trading of minerals, its concentrate or its 
processed forms (including metals) through mineral exchanges in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint any authority to register and regulate mineral exchanges. 


(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of 
the following matters, namely:— 


(a) registration of mineral exchanges and revocation of such 
registration; 


(b) regulation of all aspects and activities of mineral exchanges and 
market oversight; 


(c) levy of fees and other charges; 


(d) maintenance of a data bank of information on activities relating 
to mineral trading on mineral exchanges; 


(e) prevention of cartelization, insider trading, circular trading, 
market manipulation and any other matter which is detrimental to the 
participants of the mineral exchanges; 


(f) grievance redressal of participants of mineral exchanges; and 
(g) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.”. 
Amendment of 10. In the principal Act, in the Fifth Schedule,— 
Fifth Schedule. 


(i) for serial number 2 and the entries relating thereto, the following 
serial numbers and the entries shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Ds Minerals specified in Part-D of the First Nil 
Schedule 

2A. Minerals specified in Seventh Schedule Equivalent to fifty per 
(other than those specified in Part-D ofthe cent. of the royalty 
First Schedule) payable”; 


(ii) in the Explanation, for the words “National Mineral Exploration 
Trust”, the words “National Mineral Exploration and Development Trust” 
shall be substituted. 
Amendment of 11. In the principal Act, in the Sixth Schedule,— 
Sixth Schedule. 
(7) under the sub-heading (7) for non-auctioned captive mines (other than 
coal and lignite), after serial number 5 and the entries relating thereto, the 
following serial numbers and the entries shall be inserted, namely:— 


“SA. Minerals specified in Part-D of the First Nil’; 
Schedule 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(ii) in the Explanation, under clause (a), for the words “National Mineral 
Exploration Trust”, the words “National Mineral Exploration and 
Development Trust” shall be substituted. 


12. In the principal Act, after the Seventh Schedule, the following Schedule Insertion of new 
shall be inserted, namely:— Schedule. 


“THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 15B(/), (2) and (5)] 


Type of mining lease Additional amount in Additional amount in 
case the included mineral _ case the included 
is a mineral specified in mineral is not a mineral 


Part-D of the First specified in Part-D of the 
Schedule or the Seventh First Schedule or the 
Schedule Seventh Schedule 
(1) (2) (3) 
(7) Auctioned mining Nil. Nil. 


lease (including coal 
and lignite mining lease 
auctioned on revenue 
share basis for sale of 


coal). 
(ii) Non-auctioned Nil. Equivalent to amount 
mining lease. of royalty on the 
i) C i. included mineral. 
(wii) Coal and lignite Nil. Equivalent to amount 
mining lease auctioned of royalty on the 
on per tonne basis or included mineral. 


power tariff basis. 


Explanation.—For the purpose of this Schedule, it is hereby clarified that— 


(i) the additional amount shall be in addition to royalty or payment to 
the District Mineral Foundation and National Mineral Exploration 
and Development Trust or any other statutory payment; 


(ii) in case an additional amount specified in the Fifth Schedule is paid 
by the lessee in respect of a mineral, no additional amount under this 
Schedule shall be payable in respect of such included mineral; 


(iii) in case of auctioned mines,— 

(a) auction premium shall not be payable in respect of the included 
mineral if the included mineral is a mineral specified in Part-D of the 
First Schedule or the Seventh Schedule; 

(b) auction premium shall be payable in respect of the included 
mineral if the included mineral is not a mineral specified in Part-D of 
the First Schedule or the Seventh Schedule.”. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


KSHITIZ 
MGIPMRND—169GI(S4)—22-8-2025. MOHAN 


