रजिस्ट्री Fe Ste Uer—( WA) 04/0007/2003—26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-03082026-275132 
CG-DL-E-03082026-275132 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग ता — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं० 18] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, अगस्त 3, 2026/श्रावण 12, 1948 (शक) 
No. 18] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, AUGUST 3, 2026/SRAVANA 12, 1948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on 3rd August, 2026:— 
जि, No. 144 oF 2026 


A Bill to provide for a comprehensive statutory framework to the Indian Statistical 
Institute, to excel as a globally recognised centre in Statistical Sciences and 
allied fields and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


WHEREAS, the Indian Statistical Institute was declared as an institution of national 
importance by virtue of the Indian Statistical Institute Act, 1959 and is presently a 
society registered under the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961; 


AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to widen the functioning of the Institute and 
align its legal framework with the evolving needs of India’s growing and data-driven 
economy; 


AND WHEREAS, it is necessary to develop an ecosystem of high-quality 
statisticians and data scientists to support evidence-based decision making through 
the use of frontier technologies and to build deeper analytical capacity for the 
government, industry and society; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to provide for the incorporation of the Indian 
Statistical Institute, as a body corporate to strengthen its governance, promote 
academic excellence and research, and enable it to serve the emerging needs in the 
field of statistics and allied disciplines towards Viksit Bharat. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (/) This Act may be called the Indian Statistical Institute Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council” means the Academic Council of the Institute; 


(6) “alumni” means the persons who have been awarded degrees, 
diplomas or certificates by the Institute; 


(c) “Board” means the Board of Governors of the Institute constituted 
under section 14; 


(व) “Centre” means a campus or a centre established by the Institute for 
the purposes of academic, research, training or outreach activities, or any other 
purpose as may be specified by the regulations; 


(e) “Centre-Director” means the Centre-Director of a Centre appointed 
under section 23; 


(f) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board of Governors 
constituted under section 14; 


(g) “Dean” means the Deans of the Institute or the Centres, as the case 
may be, appointed under section 24; 


(A) “Director” means the Director of the Institute appointed under 
section 22; 


(i) “employee” includes all persons employed by the Institute in 
academic, administrative, technical or support capacities; 


(7) “existing Institute” means the Indian Statistical Institute registered 
under the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 and declared as an 
institution of national importance under the Indian Statistical Institute Act, 1959; 


(k) “faculty” means the academic staff of the Institute engaged in 
teaching or research or both and includes Professors, Associate Professors, 
Assistant Professors and such other academic designations as may be specified 
by the regulations; 


(J) “Fund” means the fund of the Institute referred to in section 29; 


(m) “Institute” means the Indian Statistical Institute incorporated under 
section 3; 


(n) “Management Council” means the Management Council established 
at the Centres under section 20; 


(०) “Presiding Officer” means the Presiding Officer of a Management 
Council of a Centre appointed under section 20; 


(p) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


West Bengal 
Act XXVI of 
1961. 

57 of 1959. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(q) “Registrar” means the Registrar of the Institute appointed under 
sub-section (/) of section 25; 


(r) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Board under section 37; 


(s) “Standing Orders” means the Standing Orders made by the Academic 
Council under section 38; 

(tf) “Statistical Sciences” includes the fields of theoretical and applied 
statistics, mathematics, economics, data science, computer science and other 
quantitative sciences including biology, physics and earth sciences; and such 
other allied fields including quantitative social sciences and modern 
technologies, such as cryptology and other related disciplines as may be 
specified by the regulations; 


(४) “Visitor” means the Visitor of the Institute. 
CHAPTER II 
THE INSTITUTE 


3. (J) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the existing Institute 


shall be a body corporate by the same name. 


(2) The Institute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, 


subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


4. On and from the commencement of this Act,— 


(a) any reference to the existing Institute in any contract or other 
instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Institute; 


(6) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the 
existing Institute shall vest in the Institute; 


(c) all rights, debts and liabilities of the existing Institute shall be 
transferred to, and be the rights, debts and liabilities of the Institute; 


(d) every person employed by the existing Institute, immediately before 
the commencement of this Act, shall hold office or service in the Institute, with 
the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and 
conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, 
gratuity, provident fund and other matters, as they would have held had this 
Act not been enacted and shall continue to do so unless and until such 
employment is terminated or such tenure, remuneration and terms and 
conditions of service are duly altered by the regulations: 


Provided that where any alteration so made is not acceptable to such 
employee, such employment may be terminated by the Institute in accordance 
with the terms of the contract with the employee, or, if no provision is made 
therein in this behalf, on payment of a compensation equivalent to three 
months remuneration in the case of permanent employees and one month 
remuneration in the case of other employees: 


Provided further that any reference, in whatever form of words, to the 
Chairman of the Institute, Director, Chief Executive (Administration and 
Finance) or other officers of the existing Institute under any law for the time 
being in force, or any instrument or other document, shall be construed as a 
reference to the Chairperson of the Board, Director, Registrar or other officers, 
as the case may be, of the Institute: 


Provided also that every person employed before the commencement of 
this Act, pending the execution of a contract, shall be deemed to have been 
appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 


Incorporation 
of Institute. 


Effect of 
incorporation of 
Institute. 


Objects of 
Institute. 


Powers and 


functions of 


Institute. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(e) every person pursuing before the commencement of this Act, any 
academic or research course in the existing Institute, shall be deemed to have 
migrated to and registered with the Institute, on such commencement at the same 
level of course in the existing Institute from which such person migrated; and 


(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been 
instituted by or against the existing Institute, immediately before the commencement 
of this Act, shall be continued or instituted by or against the Institute. 


5. The objects of the Institute shall be— 


(a) to ensure that the Institute is a centre of global excellence for study, 
research and training in the Statistical Sciences and allied fields; 


(6) to advance and disseminate knowledge of Statistical Sciences and 
allied fields; 


(c) to foster interdisciplinary research in Statistical Sciences, 
mathematics, economics, computer science and other fields; and 


(d) to enhance collaboration amongst industry, academia and 
government to promote practical application of knowledge for public interest. 


6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the University Grants Commission 


Act, 1956 or in any other law for the time being in force and subject to the provisions 
of this Act, the Institute shall exercise the following powers and perform the 
following functions, namely:— 


(a) to carry out the administration and management of the Institute; 


(6) to provide by the regulations for the admission of students to the 
various courses of study; 


(c) to conduct courses of study, training and research in the Statistical 
Sciences and allied fields, disseminate knowledge thereof and evolve 
innovative pedagogies thereto; 


(d) to set up centres and campuses in India and abroad either on its own 
or in association with partner institutions; 


(e) to grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles 
and to institute and award Chair professorship, fellowships, scholarships, 
prizes and medals, honorary awards and other distinctions; 


(f) to promote start-ups, incubations and entrepreneurial efforts; 


(g) to establish and maintain such infrastructure as may be necessary and 
to invest and deal with any moneys and securities of the Institute not 
immediately required for any of its activities in such manner as may be 
specified by the regulations; 


(A) to determine, specify and receive payment of fees and other charges 
from students and any other person, institution or body corporate for 
instruction and other related services provided by the Institute; 


(z) to acquire, hold and deal with the property belonging to or vested in the 
Institute, with the approval of the Board, and in case of immovable property, under 
prior intimation to the Central Government, for advancing the objects of the 
Institute subject to the condition that such property is not obtained wholly or partly 
from the funds of the Central Government or a State Government: 


Provided that where the land for the Institute has been provided free of 
cost by a State Government or the Central Government, such land shall be 
disposed of only with the prior approval of the Central Government; 


(j) to appoint committees for the disposal of any business of the Institute 
or for tendering advice in any matter pertaining to the Institute; 


3 of 1956. 


30 of 2025. 


5 of 2007. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(k) to receive grants, gifts and contributions and to have custody of the 
funds including internally generated funds of the Institute to meet the capital 
expenditure and expenses incurred thereof; 


(J) to invest any surplus funds not needed for immediate research work 
in accordance with the provisions contained in section 337, sub-section (/) of 
section 342 and section 350 of the Income-tax Act, 2025; 


(m) to create any reserve fund, corpus fund, sinking fund, insurance 
fund, provident fund or any other funds, whether for depreciation or repairs, 
improving, extending or maintaining any of the properties or rights of the 
Institute or for recoupment of wasting assets and benefits of the employees 
and for any other purposes; 


(n) to create partnerships, affiliations and other classes of professional 
or honorary or technical membership or office as the Institute may consider 
necessary; and 


(0) to do all such things and activities incidental to attain the objects of 
the Institute. 


7. (1) The Institute shall be open to all persons irrespective of gender, race, 
creed, caste or class and no test or condition shall be imposed as to religious belief 
or profession in admitting students or appointing members, employees and faculty 
or in any other connection whatsoever. 


(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by the 
Institute which, in the opinion of the Board, involves conditions or obligations 
opposed to the spirit and objects of the Institute. 


(3) The admission to every academic course or programme of study in the Institute 
shall be based on merit assessed through transparent and reasonable criteria mentioned 
in its prospectus, prior to the commencement of the admission process by the Institute: 


Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the Institute 
from making special provisions for the employment or admission of women, 
persons with disabilities or persons belonging to any socially and educationally 
backward classes, in particular, for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. 


(4) The Institute shall be a Central Educational Institution for the purposes of 
the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006. 


8. (/) The Institute shall be a not-for-profit legal entity and no part of the 
surplus, if any, in revenue of the Institute, after meeting all expenditure in regard to 
its operations under this Act, shall be invested for any purpose other than to achieve 
the objects of the Institute. 


(2) The Institute shall strive to raise funds for self-sufficiency and 
sustainability. 


9. All appointments to the faculty and employees of the Institute shall be made 
in such manner as may be specified by the regulations, by— 


(a) the Board, in case of appointment of Assistant Professor or of 
equivalent rank or above, or if the appointment is made on the non-faculty 
staff in any cadre, the maximum of the pay scale which exceeds such amount 
as may be specified by the regulations; 


(b) the Director, in any other case. 


10. The Institute shall group its academic, scientific, administrative and service 
functions into distinct divisions, units or any name deemed fit, for the performance of 
its teaching, research, training, consultancy, outreach and administrative functions. 


11. (/) The Institute may establish new Centres with the prior approval of the 
Central Government, for the purpose of conducting research, teaching, training, 
consultancy and outreach activities in furtherance of the objects of the Institute. 


Institute to be 
open to all. 


Institute to be 
not-for-profit 
legal entity. 


Appointments 
to Institute. 


Divisions of 
Institute. 


Centres of 
Institute. 


Authorities of 
Institute. 


Visitor. 


Board of 
Governors. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) The Board may maintain, modify, merge, relocate or discontinue the 
existing Centres based on academic priorities as may be specified by the regulations. 


(3) Each Centre may, to the extent possible, be autonomous in its functioning 
and overall administration and be financially independent for the purposes of its 
day-to-day administration. 


(4) Each Centre may have its own Management Council, as approved by 
the Board. 


CHAPTER III 
STRUCTURE OF INSTITUTE 
12. The following shall be the authorities of the Institute, namely:— 
(a) Visitor; 
(0) Board of Governors; 
(c) Academic Council; 
(d) Management Council; 
(e) Director; 
(f) other authorities appointed under this Act. 
13. (/) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the Institute. 


(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and the 
progress of the Institute and to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report 
thereon in such manner as the Visitor may direct. 


(3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take action and issue such 
directions as may be considered necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with 
in the report and the Institute shall be bound to comply with such directions. 


14. (1) The Board of Governors shall be the principal policy making executive 
body of the Institute. 
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely: — 

(a) Chairperson, from amongst eminent persons in the field of academia, 
industry, education, public policy, Statistical Sciences and allied sciences, or 
other fields to be nominated by the Visitor on the recommendation of the 
Central Government; 

(6) a nominee of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government 
having administrative control of the Institute, not below the level of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India; 

(c) Joint/Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser of the Ministry or 
Department of the Central Government having administrative control of 
the Institute; 

(d) four eminent persons in the field of Statistical Sciences and allied fields, 
to be nominated by the Chairperson in such manner as may be prescribed: 

Provided that such persons shall not be employees of the Institute and 
one of such persons shall be a woman; 


(e) four representatives of the Institute, namely:— 

(i) Director, ex officio; 

(ii) a Centre-Director, ex officio, to be nominated by the 
Chairperson in such manner on rotation basis and for such term as may 
be specified by the regulations; and 

(iii) two members of the Academic Council to be nominated by the 
Board in such manner as may be specified by the regulations. 


(3) The Registrar shall be the Secretary of the Board. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


15. (/) The Board shall meet at such place and time and observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meeting as may be specified 
by the regulations: 


Provided that for specific matters, the Board shall have the power to call any 
person as a special invitee for discussion on the relevant agenda. 


(2) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the Board 
and at the convocations of the Institute. 


(3) The Chairperson shall ensure that the decisions taken by the Board are 
implemented. 


(4) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other 
functions as may be assigned under this Act, the rules and regulations made 
thereunder. 


16. (/) The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the Board shall 
be three years from the date of their nomination: 


Provided that a member of the Board may be nominated for a second term, but 
shall not hold office for more than two terms. 


(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as such 
member holds the office by virtue of which that person is a member of the Board. 


(3) Amember of the Board, other than an ex officio member, who fails to attend 
three consecutive meetings of the Board without permission of the Chairperson, 
shall cease to be a member. 


(4) A casual vacancy of a member shall be filled up in such manner as may be 
specified by the regulations. 


(5) The term of office of a member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall 
continue for the remainder of the term of the member in whose place such 
nomination has been so made. 


(6) The Chairperson and members of the Board shall be entitled to such 
allowances as may be specified by the regulations. 


17. (J) The Board shall be responsible for the general superintendence, 
direction and control of the affairs of the Institute and shall have the power to frame, 
amend or rescind the regulations governing the affairs of the Institute to achieve 
its objects. 


(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (/), the Board shall have 
the following powers, namely:— 


(a) to take decisions on questions of policy relating to the administration 
and working of the Institute; 


(6) to examine and approve the annual budget estimates of the Institute; 


(c) to examine and approve the plan for development of the Institute and 
to identify sources of finance for implementation of the plan; 


(d) to establish departments, faculties or schools of studies and initiate 
programmes or courses of study at the Institute, taking into account the 
recommendation of the Management Councils regarding the programmes or 
courses of study at the Centres; 


(e) to set up Centres of studies in Statistical Science and allied fields in 
India under intimation to the Central Government; 


Meetings of 
Board. 


Term of office, 
vacancies 
among, and 
allowances 
payable to, 
members of 
Board. 


Powers and 
functions of 
Board. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(f) to establish, modify, merge, relocate, or discontinue the existing 
branches, centres of excellence and outlying units based on academic 
priorities and available resources in such manner as may be specified by the 
regulations; 


(g) to grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles 
and to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, prizes and medals as 
recommended by the Academic Council; 


(A) to confer honorary degrees, awards and other distinctions in such 
manner as may be specified by the regulations; 


(i) to create academic, administrative, technical and other posts with the 
prior approval of the Central Government and to make appointments thereto; 


(j) to specify by the regulations, the qualification, classification, terms 
of office and method of appointment of academic, administrative, technical 
and other posts; 


(k) to specify by the regulations, the number, emoluments and to define 
the duties and conditions of services of academic, administrative, technical 
and other posts; 


(J) to specify by the regulations, the constitution of pension, insurance 
and provident funds for the benefit of academic, administrative, technical and 
other posts; 


(m) to set up Centres of studies in Statistical Sciences and allied fields 
outside India in accordance with guidelines laid down by the Central 
Government from time to time and the laws in force in such foreign country; 


(n) to determine the fees to be charged for courses of study and 
examinations in the Institute as may be specified by the regulations; 


(०) to institute fellowships, scholarships, medals, prizes and conduct 
exhibitions, as may be specified by the regulations; 


(p) to create infrastructure and maintain buildings as may be specified 
by the regulations; 


(q) to specify by the regulations, the conditions of residence of students, 
levy of fees for residence in the halls and hostels and of other charges; 


(r) to specify by the regulations, the manner of authentication of the 
orders and decisions of the Board; 


(s) to specify by the regulations, the quorum for meetings of the Board, 
the Academic Council or any committee and the procedures to be followed in 
the conduct of their business; 


(f) to administer the finance of the Institute; 


(u) to specify by the regulations, the reorganisation, naming, renaming, 
merging, or discontinuation of any division or the creation of a new division 
in accordance with the academic and strategic needs of the Institute; and 


(v) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may 
be conferred or imposed upon it by this Act. 


(3) The Board shall be the final decision making body of the Institute in respect 
of academic, administrative, personnel, financial and developmental matters. 


(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board may, by notification, 
delegate such of its powers and functions to the Director as it may deem fit. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(5) The Board shall, within a period of three years from the date of 
incorporation of the Institute, and thereafter at least once every five years, evaluate 
and review the performance of the Institute, including its faculty, on the parameters 
of long term strategy and rolling plans and such other parameters as the Board may 
decide and report of such review shall be placed in the public domain. 


(6) The report of the evaluation and review under sub-section (5) shall be 
submitted by the Board to the Central Government along with an action taken report 
thereon. 


(7) The Board shall, in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions 
under this Act, be accountable to the Central Government. 


18. (1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
Institute. 


(2) The Academic Council shall consist of the following persons, namely:— 


(a) Director of the Institute, who shall be the chairperson of the 
Academic Council; 


(b) the Centre-Directors—members, ex officio; 


(c) all full time Professors and such number of other full time faculty as 
may be determined by the Board—members, ex officio; 


(व) Dean of academic affairs—Member-Secretary. 


(3) The meeting of the Academic Council shall be held at least once a year and 
periodical meetings may be held at the Centres of the Institute with members of 
that Centre. 


19. (1) The Academic Council shall perform the following functions, 
namely:— 


(a) to specify the organisation and modification of courses; 


(6) to specify the eligibility criteria and procedure for admission of 
students; 


(c) to specify the examination and evaluation systems; and 
(d) to promote interdisciplinary studies and research in the Institute. 


(2) The Academic Council shall make recommendations to the Board 
regarding— 
(a) the introduction and discontinuation of courses and programmes of 
study; 


(6) the award of degrees and diplomas for the courses and programmes 
of study; 


(c) the collaboration between the Institute and external organisations: 


Provided that for the collaboration between a Centre and an external 
organisation, the Management Council of that Centre shall have the power to make 
recommendations to the Board. 


20. (1) The Board may establish a Management Council at each Centre. 


(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Management Councils shall be 
responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of 
the Centres and shall exercise the powers under this Act, the rules and the 
regulations made thereunder. 


Academic 
Council. 


Powers and 
functions of 
Academic 
Council. 


Management 
Council. 


Finance 
Committee. 


Director. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(3) Each Management Council shall consist of the following persons, 
namely:— 


(a) Presiding Officer, from amongst eminent persons in the field of 
academia, industry, education, public policy, Statistical Sciences and allied 
fields to be appointed by the Board in such manner as may be specified by the 
regulations; 


(6) Director—member, ex officio; 
(c) Centre-Director—member, ex officio; 
(d) Dean of Centre—member, ex officio; 


(2) one member of the Academic Council to be nominated by the 
Board—member. 


(4) The Deputy Registrar of the Centre shall be the Secretary of the 
Management Council. 


(5) The Presiding Officer shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the 
Council. 


(6) The term of office, vacancies among and allowances payable to the 
Chairperson and members of the Board shall mutatis mutandis apply to the 
Presiding Officer and members of the Management Council. 


21. (1) The Board may constitute Finance Committee of the Institute. 


(2) The Finance Committee shall examine the accounts, scrutinise proposals 
for expenditure and financial estimates of the Institute and prepare a report for the 
approval of the Board and further submission to the Central Government for 
consideration of grants under section 29. 


(3) The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be 
such as may be specified by the regulations. 


22. (1) The Director shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Institute and 
shall be responsible for implementation of the decisions of the Board and Academic 
Council and for day-to-day administration of the Institute. 


(2) The Director shall be appointed by the Board, with the prior approval of 
the Visitor, on such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Director shall exercise the powers and perform such functions as may 
be assigned under this Act, the rules and the regulations made thereunder. 


(4) The Director shall, except on account of resignation or removal, hold office 
for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office. 


(5) The Director may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the 
Chairperson of the Board, resign his office at any time. 


(6) The Board may, with prior approval of the Visitor, remove the Director 
from office in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(7) Where, in the opinion of the Director, any situation is so emergent that an 
immediate decision needs to be taken in the interest of the Institute, the Director 
may issue such orders as may be necessary, recording the grounds for his opinion: 


Provided that such orders shall be submitted for ratification by the Board in 
its meeting immediately following the issue of such orders by the Director. 


(8) Where the post of Director falls vacant on account of any reason, the Board 
may appoint an acting Director in such manner as may be specified by the 
regulations. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


23. (1) Each Centre shall be headed by a Centre-Director, who shall be 
appointed by the Board in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Centre-Director shall be responsible to the Management Council for 
all scientific, academic, administrative and financial matters concerning the Centre. 


(3) The Centre-Director shall be responsible for ensuring the effective 
functioning and day-to-day administration of the Centre. 


(4) The Centre-Director shall exercise the powers and perform the functions 
as may be assigned under this Act or regulations made thereunder or by the 
Management Council of that Centre. 


(5) The Centre-Director shall submit an annual performance report of that 
Centre to the concerned Management Council within the prescribed timeline and 
forward a copy of the report to the Director for the purpose of the annual 
performance report: 


Provided that the Management Council shall forward the annual performance 
report of that Centre along with its recommendations to the Board. 


(6) The Board may remove a Centre-Director from office in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(7) The Centre-Director shall, except on account of resignation or removal, 
hold office for a term of five years from the date of assumption of office. 


24. (1) The Deans of the Institute or the Centres shall be responsible to the 
Director or the Centre-Directors for the organisation of academics, research, 
student affairs and such other functions of the Institute or the Centres, as the case 
may be. 


(2) The Deans of the Institute and the Centres shall be appointed by the 
Board in such manner, for such tenure and portfolio as may be specified by the 
regulations. 


25. (1) The Registrar of the Institute shall be appointed by the Board in such 
manner and on such terms and conditions as may be specified by the regulations. 


(2) The Registrar shall be the custodian of records, the common seal, the funds 
of the Institute and such other property of the Institute as the Board may commit to 
his charge and shall be responsible to the Director for the proper discharge of his 
functions. 


(3) The Director shall appoint such number of Deputy Registrars for the 
Institute and the Centres, in such manner and on such terms and conditions as may 
be specified by the regulations. 


26. The Board may constitute committees for the Institute and the Centres, by 
whatever name called, specifying the composition, duties and functions, in such 
manner as may be specified by the regulations. 


CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 


27. For the purpose of enabling the Institute to discharge its functions 
efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute such sums of money 
in such manner as it may think fit. 


28. The Institute shall have the authority to generate revenue through such 
means as may be specified by the regulations. 


Centre- 
Directors. 


Deans. 


Registrar and 
Deputy 
Registrars. 


Committees. 


Grants by 
Central 
Government. 


Power of 
Institute to 
generate 
revenue. 


Fund. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


29. (1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited— 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government; 
(6) all fees and other charges received by the Institute; 
(c) all moneys received by the Institute under section 27; and 


(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any 
other source. 


(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or 
invested with approval from the Central Government in such manner as may be 
specified by the regulations. 


(3) The Institute shall create a corpus fund for long-term sustainability of the 
Institute, to which shall be credited such percentage of the net income of the 
Institute and donations made specifically towards such corpus fund as the Central 
Government may in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 2025, 
notify: 


Provided that the Board may also create endowment funds for specific 
purposes to which donations may be specifically made. 


(4) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute 
including expenditure incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its 
duties under this Act, and for such other purposes as may be specified by 
the regulations. 


30. (J) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts including income and 
expenditure statements, internal audit report and statement audited by internal 
auditor specifying investments and other relevant records and prepare annual 
statement of accounts including the balance sheet in such form as may be specified 
by notification by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 


(2) Where the statement of income and expenditure and the balance sheet of 
the Institute do not comply with the accounting standards, the Institute shall disclose 
in its statement of income and expenditure and balance sheet, the following, 
namely:— 


(a) the deviation from the accounting standards; 
(b) the reasons for such deviation; and 
(c) the financial effect, if any, arising out of such deviation. 


(3) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India and any expenditure incurred by the audit team in 
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute. 


(4) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed 
by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the 
same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of the 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers 
and to inspect the offices of the Institute. 


(5) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf 
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central 
Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House 
of Parliament in accordance with such procedure as may be laid down by the 
Central Government. 


30 of 2025. 


56 of 1971. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


31. The Institute shall maintain books of account with respect to— 


(a) all sums of money received and expended by it and the matters in 
respect of which receipt and expenditure take place; 


(5) the assets and liabilities of the Institute; 
(c) the properties, movable and immovable, of the Institute. 


32. (1) The Board shall, prior to the end of each financial year, and without 
prejudice to the provisions contained in the Comptroller and Auditor-General’s 
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 or any other law for the time 
being in force, appoint such auditors including internal auditor on such remuneration 
as it thinks appropriate, to scrutinise the balance sheet and the statement of income 
and expenditure of the Institute. 


(2) The Board shall constitute an audit committee to provide expert advice on 
effectiveness of the internal control system, risk management and audit report to 
the Board. 


(3) The auditor appointed under sub-section (/) or any person employed by 
him shall not have any direct or indirect interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise, in 
any matter concerning or related to the administration or functions of the Institute. 


33. (1) The statement of accounts, including the balance sheet and the 
statement of income and expenditure, the auditor’s report and the annual financial 
report by the Director and other documents required to be annexed with such 
statement shall be brought before the Board, as soon as may be, after the conclusion 
of each financial year. 


(2) A copy of the statement of accounts referred to in sub-section (/) shall be 
sent to each member of the Board not less than twenty-one days before the date of 
the meeting. 


(3) The statement of accounts referred to in sub-section (/) shall, on its 
approval by the Board, be published on the official website of the Institute. 


34. (/) The annual financial report annexed to the statement of accounts shall 
be submitted to the Central Government within such timelines as may be prescribed. 


(2) The annual financial report shall include, namely:— 
(a) the financial status and administrative affairs of the Institute; 


(b) the amounts, if any, proposed to be transferred to surplus reserves, as 
indicated in the balance sheet of the Institute; 


(c) instances, if any, identified in the auditor’s report concerning 
understatement or overstatement of surplus income over expenditure or 
shortfall of expenditure over income, along with explanations for such 
discrepancies; 


(d) details of appointments of officers and faculty, specifically limited to 
their financial implications. 


(3) The annual financial report shall include a statement, listing five officers, 
faculty or other employees of the Institute who received the highest remuneration, 
inclusive of allowances and any other payments made during the financial year. 


(4) The statement referred to in sub-section (3), shall explicitly indicate, 
whether any listed employee is a relative of any member of the Board or the 
Academic Council, and if so, the name of such member and other particulars as may 
be determined by the Board. 


(5) The Director shall provide comprehensive clarification regarding any 
reservation, qualification or adverse remark made in the auditor’s report. 


Books of 
account. 


Appointment of 
auditors. 


Board to 
consider 
statement of 
accounts. 


Annual 
financial report. 


Annual 
performance 
report. 


Performance 
review. 


Power to make 
regulations. 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


CHAPTER V 
ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT 
35. (1) The Director shall submit an annual performance report of the Institute 


to the Board on such parameters and within such timelines as may be specified by 
the regulations. 


(2) The Director shall also include explanations and responses to any adverse 
findings or recommendations made in periodic reviews, if any, conducted by the 
Visitor, the Central Government or the Board in the previous financial year. 


(3) The Director shall forward a copy of the annual performance report to the 
Central Government within such timelines as may be prescribed. 


36. (/) The Board shall evaluate and review the performance of the Institute 
including faculty. 


(2) The review shall be conducted on the parameters of medium-term and 
long-term strategy and rolling plans of the Institute and such other parameters as the 
Board may decide. 


(3) The review shall be conducted within a period of three years from the date 
of incorporation of the Institute and thereafter at least once every five years. 


(4) The review shall be conducted by an independent agency or group of 
experts appointed by the Board. 


(5) The qualifications, experience and the manner of selection of the 
independent agency or group of experts shall be such as may be specified by the 
regulations. 


(6) The Board shall prepare the review report and submit it to the 
Central Government along with an action-taken report and publish the same on 
its website. 


CHAPTER VI 
REGULATIONS AND STANDING ORDERS 


37. (1) The Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 


(a) the other purposes under clause (व) of section 2; 
(6) such other academic designations under clause (A) of section 2; 


(c) the allied fields and related disciplines of Statistical Sciences 
under clause (t) of section 2; 


(d) the admission of students to the various courses of study 
under clause (b) of section 6; 


(e) the infrastructure and investments under clause (g) of section 6; 


(f) the manner of appointment of the faculty and employees of the 
Institute under section 9; 


(g) the maximum of the pay-scale which exceeds such amount to be paid 
to a non-faculty staff in any cadre under clause (a) of section 9; 


(A) maintenance, modification, merger, relocation or discontinuation of 
any existing Centres under sub-section (2) of section 11; 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


(i) the manner of nomination of a Centre-Director as a member of the 
Board under sub-clause (ii) of clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 14; 


(j) the manner of nomination of two members of the Academic Council 
to the Board under sub-clause (iii) of clause (e) of sub-section (2) of 
section 14; 


(k) the meetings of the Board and rules of procedure in relation to the 
transaction of business under sub-section (/) of section 15; 


(0) the manner of filling up the casual vacancy of a member of the Board 
under sub-section (4) of section 16; 


(m) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and members of the 
Board under sub-section (6) of section 16; 


(n) the establishment, modification, merger, relocation or 
discontinuation of existing branches, centres of excellence and outlying units 
under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 17; 


(०) the conferment of honorary degrees, awards and other distinctions 
under clause (४) of sub-section (2) of section 17; 


(p) the qualification, classification, terms of office and method of 
appointment of the staff under clause (7) of sub-section (2) of section 17; 


(q) the number, emoluments, duties and conditions of service of the staff 
under clause (k) of sub-section (2) of section 17; 


(r) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the 
benefit of the staff under clause (/) of sub-section (2) of section 17; 


(s) the fees to be charged for courses of study and examinations in the 
Institute under clause (7) of sub-section (2) of section 17; 


(¢) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, medals, prizes and 
conducting of exhibitions under clause (0) of sub-section (2) of section 17; 


(u) the creation of infrastructure and maintenance of buildings under 
clause (p) of sub-section (2) of section 17; 


(v) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and levying of 
fees for residence in the halls and hostels and of other charges under 
clause (q) of sub-section (2) of section 17; 


(w) the manner of authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board 
under clause (r) of sub-section (2) of section 17; 


(x) the quorum for meetings of the Board, the Academic Council or any 
committee and the procedures to be followed in the conduct of their business 
under clause (s) of sub-section (2) of section 17; 


(v) the reorganisation, naming, renaming, merging, or discontinuation of 
any division or the creation of a new division in accordance with the academic 
and strategic needs of the Institute under clause (४) of sub-section (2) of 
section 17; 


(z) the manner of appointment of the Presiding Officer of the 
Management Council under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 20; 


(za) the constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
under sub-section (3) of section 21; 


(zb) the manner for appointment of an acting Director under 
sub-section (8) of section 22; 


Standing 
Orders. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(zc) the manner of appointment, tenure and portfolio of Deans by the 
Board under sub-section (2) of section 24; 


(zd) the manner of appointment and terms and conditions of service of 
the Registrar under sub-section (/) of section 25; 


(ze) the manner of appointment and terms and conditions of service of 
the Deputy Registrars under sub-section (3) of section 25; 


(zf) the manner of constitution, composition, duties and functions of 
committees under section 26; 


(zg) the means of generating revenue under section 28; 


(zh) the manner of investment of the moneys credited to the Fund under 
sub-section (2) of section 29; 


(zi) the other purpose of expenditure of the Fund under sub-section (4) 
of section 29; 


(21) the parameters of assessment and timelines for submission of annual 
performance report of the Institute to the Board under sub-section (/) of 
section 35; 


(zk) the qualifications, experience and the manner of selection of the 
independent agency or group of experts under sub-section (5) of section 36; 


(20 the manner of functioning of committees constituted under the 
existing Institute and mandatory review thereof under clause (e) of 
sub-section (/) of section 46; and 


(zm) any other matter which is to be or in respect of which provision is 
to be made by the Board. 


(3) The first regulations of the Institute shall be made by the Board with the 


previous approval of the Central Government. 


38. (1) The Academic Council may, by notification, issue Standing Orders not 


inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, the rules and regulations made 
thereunder. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 


power, such Standing Orders may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:— 


(a) the admission of students to the Institute; 


(5) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of 
the Institute; 


(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree 
or diploma courses and to the examinations of the Institute, and shall be 
eligible for degrees and diplomas; 


(d) the conditions of award of fellowships, scholarships, medals, prizes 
and conduct of exhibitions; 


(e) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining 
bodies, examiners and moderators; 


(f) the conduct of examinations; 
(g) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; and 


(A) any other matter which is to be or may be provided for by the 
Standing Orders under this Act. 


22 of 2005. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


(3) The Standing Orders made by the Academic Council shall have effect from 
such date as it may direct and shall be submitted to the Board for its consideration 
in the next meeting. 


(4) The Board may by resolution modify or cancel any Standing Order and 
such Standing Order shall stand modified or cancelled accordingly from the date of 
such resolution. 


CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


39. No act of the Institute or the Board or the Academic Council or any other 
body constituted under this Act, shall be invalid merely by reason of— 


(a) any vacancy or defect in the constitution of a body; or 


(6) any irregularity in the procedure of a body not affecting the merits of 
the case; or 


(c) any defect in the selection, nomination or appointment of a person 
acting as a member of a body. 


40. The Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other 
information with respect to its policies or activities as the Central Government may, 
for the purpose of reporting to the Parliament or for the making of policy, from time 
to time, require. 


41. The provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005 shall apply to the 
Institute, as if, it were a public authority defined in clause (h) of section 2 of 
that Act. 


42. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:— 


(a) the manner of nomination of eminent persons to the Board under 
clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 14; 


(b) the appointment, terms and conditions of service of Director under 
sub-section (2) of section 22; 


(c) the manner of removal of the Director under sub-section (6) of 
section 22; 


(d) the manner of appointment of Centre-Directors under sub-section (/) 
of section 23; 


(e) the timeline for Centre-Director to submit the annual performance 
report of the Centre to the Management Council under sub-section (5) of 
section 23; 


(f) the manner of removal of Centre-Directors under sub-section (6) of 
section 23; 


(g) the timeline for submission of the annual financial report under 
sub-section (/) of section 34; 


(A) the timeline for forwarding of copy of the annual performance report 
to the Central Government under sub-section (3) of section 35; and 


Acts and 
proceedings not 
to be 
invalidated by 
vacancies, etc. 


Returns and 
information to 
be provided to 
Central 
Government. 


Institute to be 
public authority 
under Right to 
Information 
Act. 


Power to make 
rules. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Rules and first 
regulations to 
be laid before 
Parliament. 


Power of 
Central 
Government to 


give directions. 


Transitional 
provisions. 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(i) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect of 
which provision is to be made by the Central Government. 


43. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of the period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 


44. Every rule and first regulations made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation shall not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 


45. The Central Government may from time to time give such directions to the 
Institute as may appear to be necessary for the efficient administration of this Act 
and the Institute shall comply with such directions. 


46. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,— 


(a) the Council of the existing Institute functioning as such immediately 
before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Board until 
the Board is constituted under this Act: 


Provided that upon the constitution of the Board under this Act, the 
members of the Council holding office before such constitution shall forthwith 
cease to hold office; 


(6) the Academic Council of the existing Institute functioning as such 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the 
Academic Council constituted under this Act until the Academic Council is 
constituted under this Act: 


Provided that upon the constitution of the Academic Council under this 
Act, the members of the Academic Council holding office before such 
constitution shall forthwith cease to hold office; 


(c) until the first regulations are made under this Act, the regulations and 
bye-laws of the existing Institute which are in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall continue to apply in so far as they are not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act; 


(d) until the Director, Dean of Studies, and Centre-Directors are 
appointed under this Act, the Director, Dean of Studies, and Centre-Directors 
of the existing Institute who are in office immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, shall continue to hold office with the same 
tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and 
conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, 
gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have had this Act had 
not been enacted: 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


Provided that upon the appointment of the Director, Dean of Studies, and 
Centre-Directors under this Act, the Director, Dean of Studies, and 
Centre-Directors holding office before such appointment shall forthwith cease 
to hold office; 


(e) the committees constituted under the existing Institute shall continue 
to function in such manner as may be specified by the regulations, but shall be 
subject to mandatory review by the Board and may be continued, discontinued 
or reconstituted on such terms and conditions as the Board deems fit. 


(2) The Central Government may, without prejudice to the provisions of this 
Act, if it considers necessary and expedient, by notification, take such measures as 
may be necessary for the transition under this Act. 
57 of 1959. 47. (1) The Indian Statistical Institute Act, 1959, is hereby repealed. cea 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act referred to in sub-section (J), it shall 
not affect,— 


(a) the provision of the said Act set out in the Schedule; or 


(6) anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the said 
Act shall, in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act as if the said provisions were in force 
when such thing was done or such action was taken and shall continue in force 
accordingly until superseded by anything done or any action taken under 
this Act. 


(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to 
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses 
10 of 1897. Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of repeal. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 47) 
PROVISION OF THE INDIAN STATISTICAL INSTITUTE ACT, 1959 (57 of 1959), 
CONTINUED IN FORCE 


3. Declaration of the Indian Statistical Institute as an institution of national 
importance.— Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Indian Statistical 
Institute are such as to make it an institution of national importance, it is hereby 
declared that the Indian Statistical Institute is an institution of national importance. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Indian Statistical Institute (ISI) was founded on the 17th December, 1931 
and was registered as a society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 on the 
28th April, 1932. The Institute, presently registered under the West Bengal Societies 
Registration Act, 1961, has rendered pioneering service to the nation in the fields of 
statistics, mathematics, quantitative economics and computer science, and 
commands international recognition as a centre of research, teaching and training in 
the statistical sciences. 


2. The Indian Statistical Institute Act, 1959 declared the Institute to be an 
institution of national importance and empowered it to grant degrees and diplomas 
in statistics. The said Act was amended in the year 1995 to empower the Institute to 
grant degrees and diplomas in statistics, mathematics, quantitative economics, 
computer science and such other subjects related to statistics as may be determined 
by the Institute from time to time. 


3. Under sub-section (/) of section 9 of the Indian Statistical Institute 
Act, 1959, the Central Government constitutes committees, from time to time, to 
review, inspect and evaluate the work done by the Institute. The Fourth Review 
Committee of the Institute, constituted by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation under the chairmanship of Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, in its report 
submitted in July, 2021, observed that the Institute can rise to its true potential and 
effect a turnaround, if it can bring in certain fundamental changes, some of which 
are not just incremental, but truly radical in its structure, systems and processes 
backed up by much higher aspirational levels, from top leadership, down to every 
worker. The Committee recommended that the ISI must reimagine, reinvent and 
reposition itself to regain its leadership position and remain relevant in changing 
times and as ISI reaches its centenary year in 2031, it should aim to create a new 
ISI@100 vision, transitioning from the current good to the very best, one of the 
foremost institutes globally. 


4. The Indian Statistical Institute Act, 1959 has limited provisions in respect of the 
governance, administration, finance, accountability and functioning of the Institute and 
is not adequate to enable the Institute to respond to the requirements of an evolving 
academic and research environment. It is, therefore, considered necessary to repeal the 
said Act and to enact a comprehensive legislation providing for the incorporation of the 
Indian Statistical Institute, an institution of national importance, to excel as a globally 
recognised centre in Statistical Sciences and allied fields. 


5. The legal reform will enable an ecosystem to train a new generation of 
high-quality data scientists and statisticians, bridging the massive talent gap currently 
facing India’s tech and financial sectors. By modernising its governance, ISI can 
collaborate dynamically with industries to solve real-world analytical problems, 
driving innovation in sectors like fintech, agriculture, healthcare and logistics. 


6. The nation has now embarked on a historic journey toward Viksit Bharat 
vision and statistical and institutional infrastructure should evolve to contribute to 
this vision. The reforms serve as a strategic catalyst to transform ISI into a futuristic, 
world-class institution that will anchor India’s journey toward becoming a global 
knowledge superpower. It is expedient not only for the institutional strengthening 
of ISI, but also for the broader national objective of building a future-ready 
ecosystem of data, research, innovation, and skilled human resources in support of 
Viksit Bharat. 


7. The Indian Statistical Institute Bill, 2026, inter alia, provides for the 
following, namely:— 


(a) to incorporate the Indian Statistical Institute as a body corporate and 
to continue in force the declaration of the Institute as an institution of national 
importance made by the Indian Statistical Institute Act, 1959; 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(5) to vest in and transfer to the Institute, the properties, rights, debts and 
liabilities of the existing Institute and to protect the interests of the employees 
of, and the students pursuing academic or research courses in, the existing 
Institute; 


(c) to set out the objects of the Institute, including to ensure that the 
Institute is a centre of global excellence for study, research and training in the 
Statistical Sciences and allied fields; 


(d) to empower the Institute to conduct courses of study, training and 
research in the Statistical Sciences and allied fields, to grant degrees, diplomas 
and other academic distinctions or titles and to set up centres and campuses in 
India and abroad; 


(e) to provide that the Institute shall be open to all persons, that 
admission to every academic course or programme of study shall be based on 
merit and that the Institute shall be a Central Educational Institution for the 
purposes of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) 
Act, 2006; 


(f) to provide that the Institute shall be a not-for-profit legal entity; 


(g) to provide that the President of India shall be the Visitor of the 
Institute; 


(A) to provide for a compact Board of Governors as the principal policy 
making executive body of the Institute, accountable to the Central 
Government and for an Academic Council as the principal academic body of 
the Institute; 


(i) to provide for the establishment of Management Councils at the 
Centres of the Institute and for the constitution of a Finance Committee; 


() to provide for the appointment of the Director as the Chief Executive 
Officer of the Institute and for the appointment of Centre-Directors, Deans, 
the Registrar and Deputy Registrars; 


(k) to enable the Central Government, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, to pay to the Institute such sums of money as 
it may think fit, to require the Institute to maintain a Fund and create a corpus 
fund for its long-term sustainability and to empower the Institute to generate 
revenue; 


(J) to provide for the audit of the accounts of the Institute by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and for the audited accounts, 
together with the audit report thereon, to be laid before each House of 
Parliament; 


(m) to provide for the submission of an annual financial report and an 
annual performance report and for the periodic evaluation and review of the 
performance of the Institute, including its faculty, by an independent agency 
or group of experts; 


(n) to empower the Board of Governors to make regulations, the 
Academic Council to issue Standing Orders and the Central Government to 
make rules and to provide for the laying of every rule and the first regulations 
before each House of Parliament; 


(०) to provide that the provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005 
shall apply to the Institute; and 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


(p) to repeal the Indian Statistical Institute Act, 1959, while saving the 


provision of the said Act declaring the Indian Statistical Institute to be an 
institution of national importance. 


8. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions of the Bill. 


9. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; 


The 24th July, 2026. 


RAO INDERJIT SINGH. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


Notes on clauses 


Clause 1—This clause relates to short title and commencement of the 
proposed legislation. 


Clause 2.—This clause contains the definitions of the various expressions 
used in the proposed legislation. 


Clause 3.—This clause provides for incorporation of the Indian Statistical 
Institute under the proposed Bill. 


Clause 4.—This clause provides for the effect of incorporation of the Institute. 


Clause 5.—This clause seeks to set out the objects of the Institute, namely, to 
ensure that the Institute is a centre of global excellence for study, research and 
training in the Statistical Sciences and allied fields; to advance and disseminate 
knowledge of Statistical Sciences and allied fields; to foster interdisciplinary 
research in Statistical Sciences, mathematics, economics, computer science and 
other fields; and to enhance collaboration amongst industry, academia and 
government to promote practical application of knowledge for public interest. 


Clause 6.—This clause seeks to enumerate the powers and functions of the 
Institute, notwithstanding anything contained in the University Grants Commission 
Act, 1956 or in any other law for the time being in force. These, inter alia, include 
the powers to provide by the regulations for the admission of students to the various 
courses of study; to conduct courses of study, training and research in the Statistical 
Sciences and allied fields; to set up centres and campuses in India and abroad; to 
grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles and to institute and 
award Chair professorships, fellowships, scholarships, prizes and medals; to 
promote start-ups, incubations and entrepreneurial efforts; to determine, specify and 
receive payment of fees and other charges; to acquire, hold and deal with property; 
to appoint committees; to receive grants, gifts and contributions; to invest surplus 
funds; to create reserve, corpus, sinking, insurance, provident and other funds; and 
to create partnerships and affiliations. 


Clause 7.—This clause seeks to provide that the Institute shall be open to all 
persons irrespective of gender, race, creed, caste or class and that no test or condition 
shall be imposed as to religious belief or profession. It further provides that 
admission to every academic course or programme of study shall be based on merit 
assessed through transparent and reasonable criteria, without prejudice to special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities or 
persons belonging to socially and educationally backward classes, in particular, the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and that the Institute shall be a Central 
Educational Institution for the purposes of the Central Educational Institutions 
(Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006. 


Clause 8.—This clause seeks to provide that the Institute shall be a not-for-profit 
legal entity and that no part of the surplus, if any, in revenue of the Institute shall be 
invested for any purpose other than to achieve the objects of the Institute, and that the 
Institute shall strive to raise funds for self-sufficiency and sustainability. 


Clause 9.—This clause seeks to provide for the manner of appointments to the 
faculty and employees of the Institute. 


Clause 10.—This clause seeks to provide that the Institute shall group its 
academic, scientific, administrative and service functions into distinct divisions or 
units for the performance of its teaching, research, training, consultancy, outreach 
and administrative functions. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


Clause 11.—This clause seeks to enable the Institute to establish new Centres, 
with the prior approval of the Central Government, for the purpose of conducting 
research, teaching, training, consultancy and outreach activities, and to empower the 
Board to maintain, modify, merge, relocate or discontinue the existing Centres based 
on academic priorities. It further provides that each Centre may, to the extent 
possible, be autonomous in its functioning and overall administration and may have 
its own Management Council, as approved by the Board. 


Clause 12.—This clause seeks to enumerate the authorities of the Institute, 
namely, the Visitor, the Board of Governors, the Academic Council, the 
Management Council, the Director and other authorities appointed under the 
proposed legislation. 


Clause 13.—This clause seeks to provide that the President of India shall be 
the Visitor of the Institute and it further provides for power of the Visitor in relation 
to the Institute. 


Clause 14.—This clause seeks to provide that the Board of Governors shall be 
the principal policy making executive body of the Institute and to provide for its 
composition and the manner of the appointment of the Chairperson. 


Clause 15.—This clause seeks to provide for the meetings of the Board and to 
provide that the Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the Board 
and at the convocations of the Institute. 


Clause 16.—This clause seeks to provide for the term of office of, vacancies 
among and allowances payable to, the Chairperson and members of the Board. 


Clause 17.—This clause seeks to provide that the Board shall be responsible 
for the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Institute, 
shall have the power to frame, amend or rescind the regulations governing the affairs 
of the Institute and shall be the final decision making body of the Institute in respect 
of academic, administrative, personnel, financial and developmental matters. The 
clause further enumerates the powers of the Board. 


Clause 18.—This clause seeks to provide that the Academic Council shall be 
the principal academic body of the Institute and to provide for its composition, with 
the Director of the Institute as its chairperson, the Centre-Directors and all full time 
Professors and such number of other full time faculty as may be determined by the 
Board as ex officio members and the Dean of academic affairs as Member-Secretary 
and the meeting of the Academic Council shall be held at least once a year. 


Clause 19.—This clause seeks to enumerate the powers and functions of the 
Academic Council, namely, to specify the organisation and modification of courses, 
the eligibility criteria and procedure for admission of students and the examination 
and evaluation systems, and to promote interdisciplinary studies and research in the 
Institute and it further provides that the Academic Council shall make 
recommendations to the Board regarding the introduction and discontinuation of 
courses and programmes of study, the award of degrees and diplomas and the 
collaboration between the Institute and external organisations. 


Clause 20.—This clause seeks to empower the Board to establish a 
Management Council at each Centre, which shall be responsible for the general 
superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Centre, and to provide 
for its composition, comprising the Presiding Officer, to be appointed by the Board; 
the Director, the Centre-Director and the Dean of the Centre as ex officio members; 
and one member of the Academic Council to be nominated by the Board, the Deputy 
Registrar of the Centre shall be the Secretary of the Management Council and the 
provisions relating to the term of office of, vacancies among and allowances payable 
to, the Chairperson and members of the Board shall apply mutatis mutandis to the 
Presiding Officer and members of the Management Council. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Clause 21—This clause seeks to empower the Board to constitute a Finance 
Committee of the Institute, which shall examine the accounts, scrutinise proposals for 
expenditure and financial estimates of the Institute and prepare a report for the approval of 
the Board and further submission to the Central Government for consideration of grants. 


Clause 22.—This clause seeks to provide that the Director shall be the Chief 
Executive Officer of the Institute and shall be responsible for the implementation of the 
decisions of the Board and the Academic Council and for the day-to-day administration 
of the Institute. The Director shall be appointed by the Board, with the prior approval of 
the Visitor, and shall hold office for a term of five years. The clause further provides for 
the resignation of the Director and for his removal by the Board with the prior approval 
of the Visitor, empowers the Director to issue orders in emergent situations subject to 
ratification by the Board and provides for the appointment of an acting Director. 


Clause 23.—This clause seeks to provide that each Centre shall be headed by 
a Centre-Director, to be appointed by the Board, who shall be responsible to the 
Management Council for all scientific, academic, administrative and financial 
matters concerning the Centre and shall be responsible for ensuring its effective 
functioning and day-to-day administration. The Centre-Director shall submit an 
annual performance report of the Centre to the concerned Management Council, 
which shall forward the same along with its recommendations to the Board. The 
Centre-Director shall hold office for a term of five years, and the clause also 
provides for the removal of a Centre-Director by the Board. 


Clause 24.—This clause seeks to provide that the Deans of the Institute or the 
Centres shall be responsible to the Director or the Centre-Directors, as the case may 
be, for the organisation of academics, research, student affairs and such other 
functions of the Institute or the Centre, and shall be appointed by the Board in such 
manner, for such tenure and portfolio as may be specified by the regulations. 


Clause 25.—This clause seeks to provide for the appointment of the Registrar 
of the Institute by the Board and for the appointment of Deputy Registrars for the 
Institute and the Centres by the Director. The Registrar shall be the custodian of 
records, the common seal, the funds of the Institute and such other property of the 
Institute as the Board may commit to his charge, and shall be responsible to the 
Director for the proper discharge of his functions. 


Clause 26.—This clause seeks to empower the Board to constitute committees 
for the Institute and the Centres, specifying their composition, duties and functions. 


Clause 27.—This clause seeks to provide that, for the purpose of enabling the 
Institute to discharge its functions efficiently, the Central Government may, after 
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute such 
sums of money in such manner as it may think fit. 


Clause 28.—This clause seeks to provide that the Institute shall have the authority 
to generate revenue through such means as may be specified by the regulations. 


Clause 29.—This clause seeks to provide that the Institute shall maintain a 
Fund, to which shall be credited all moneys provided by the Central Government, 
all fees and other charges received by the Institute and all moneys received by the 
Institute in any other manner or from any other source. 


Clause 30—This clause seeks to provide that the Institute shall maintain 
proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of 
accounts, including the balance sheet, in such form as may be specified by 
notification by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. It further provides that the accounts of the Institute shall 
be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, who shall have the 
same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as in connection 
with the audit of the Government accounts, and that the accounts as certified, 
together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central 
Government, which shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


Clause 31.—This clause seeks to require the Institute to maintain books of 
account with respect to all sums of money received and expended by it, the assets 
and liabilities of the Institute and its properties, movable and immovable. 


Clause 32.—This clause seeks to empower the Board to appoint auditors, 
including an internal auditor, to scrutinise the balance sheet and the statement of 
income and expenditure of the Institute and to constitute an audit committee to 
provide expert advice on the effectiveness of the internal control system, risk 
management and audit report. 


Clause 33.—This clause seeks to provide that the statement of accounts, 
including the balance sheet and the statement of income and expenditure, the 
auditor’s report and the annual financial report by the Director shall be brought 
before the Board after the conclusion of each financial year. 


Clause 34.—This clause seeks to provide that the annual financial report shall 
be submitted to the Central Government within such timelines as may be prescribed 
and to specify the contents of such report. 


Clause 35.—This clause seeks to provide that the Director shall submit an 
annual performance report of the Institute to the Board on such parameters and 
within such timelines as may be specified by the regulations, including explanations 
and responses to any adverse findings or recommendations made in periodic reviews 
conducted by the Visitor, the Central Government or the Board, and shall forward a 
copy of the report to the Central Government within such timelines as may be 
prescribed. 


Clause 36.—This clause seeks to provide for the evaluation and review of the 
performance of the Institute, including its faculty, by an independent agency or 
group of experts appointed by the Board, within a period of three years from the 
date of incorporation of the Institute and thereafter at least once every five years. 
The Board shall prepare the review report and submit it to the Central Government 
along with an action-taken report and publish the same on its website. 


Clause 37.—This clause seeks to empower the Board to make regulations, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the provisions of the 
proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder, and enumerates the matters in 
respect of which such regulations may be made. It further provides that the first 
regulations of the Institute shall be made by the Board with the previous approval 
of the Central Government. 


Clause 38.—This clause seeks to empower the Academic Council to issue, by 
notification, Standing Orders consistent with the provisions of the proposed 
legislation and the rules and regulations made thereunder and enumerates the 
matters in respect of which such Standing Orders may be issued. The Standing 
Orders shall be submitted to the Board for its consideration and the Board may, by 
resolution, modify or cancel any Standing Order. 


Clause 39.—This clause seeks to provide that no act of the Institute or the 
Board or the Academic Council or any other body constituted under the proposed 
legislation shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or defect in the 
constitution of a body, any irregularity in the procedure of a body not affecting the 
merits of the case or any defect in the selection, nomination or appointment of a 
person acting as a member of a body. 


Clause 40.—This clause seeks to require the Institute to furnish to the Central 
Government such returns or other information with respect to its policies or 
activities as the Central Government may, for the purpose of reporting to the 
Parliament or for the making of policy, from time to time, require. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Clause 41.—This clause seeks to provide that the provisions of the Right to 
Information Act, 2005 shall apply to the Institute, as if it were a public authority 
defined in clause (४) of section 2 of that Act. 


Clause 42.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make 
rules, by notification in the Official Gazette, for carrying out the provisions of the 
proposed legislation and enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may 
be made. 


Clause 43.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government, by order 
published in the Official Gazette, to make such provisions consistent with the 
provisions of the proposed legislation as may appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing any difficulty arising in giving effect to its provisions. No 
such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years from the date 
of commencement of the proposed legislation and every such order shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament. 


Clause 44.—This clause seeks to provide for the laying of every rule and the 
first regulations made under the proposed legislation, as soon as may be after they 
are made, before each House of Parliament. 


Clause 45.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to give 
such directions to the Institute as may appear to be necessary for the efficient 
administration of the proposed legislation, with which the Institute shall comply. 


Clause 46.—This clause seeks to make transitional provisions, whereunder 
the Council and the Academic Council of the existing Institute shall be deemed to 
be the Board and the Academic Council, respectively, until they are constituted 
under the proposed legislation; the regulations and bye-laws of the existing Institute 
shall continue to apply until the first regulations are made, in so far as they are not 
inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation; the Director, Dean of 
Studies and Centre-Directors of the existing Institute shall continue to hold office 
until the Director, Deans and Centre-Directors are appointed under the proposed 
legislation; and the committees constituted under the existing Institute shall continue 
to function subject to mandatory review by the Board. It further empowers the 
Central Government to take, by notification, such measures as may be necessary for 
the transition. 


Clause 47——This clause seeks to repeal the Indian Statistical Institute 
Act, 1959 and to provide for savings. The repeal shall not affect the provision of the 
said Act set out in the Schedule to the Bill, namely, section 3 of the said Act declaring 
the Indian Statistical Institute to be an institution of national importance, which is 
continued in force, or anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the 
said Act, which shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of the 
proposed legislation, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding 
provisions thereof. The mention of particular matters shall not be held to prejudice 
or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with 
regard to the effect of repeal. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 27 of the Bill provides that, for the purpose of enabling the Institute to 
discharge its functions efficiently, the Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute such 
sums of money in such manner as it may think fit. Clause 29 of the Bill provides 
that the Institute shall maintain a Fund, to which shall be credited, inter alia, all 
moneys provided by the Central Government. 


2. The Bill seeks to incorporate the existing Indian Statistical Institute, which 
is already in receipt of grants from the Central Government under the Indian 
Statistical Institute Act, 1959. The expenditure of the Institute would continue to be 
met out of the budgetary provisions already being made by the Central Government 
for the existing Institute. 


3. The Bill, if enacted, would not involve any additional expenditure, whether 
recurring or non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Sub-clause (/) of clause 37 of the Bill empowers the Board of Governors to 
make regulations, by notification in the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder. Sub-clause (2) 
of the said clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such regulations may 
be made. These matters, inter alia, include—(a) the other purposes under clause (d) 
of section 2; (b) such other academic designations under clause (A) of section 2; 
(2) the allied fields and related disciplines of Statistical Sciences under clause (7) of 
section 2; (d) the admission of students to the various courses of study under 
clause (b) of section 6; (e) the infrastructure and investments under clause (g) of 
section 6; (0 the manner of appointment of the faculty and employees of the Institute 
under section 9; (g) the maximum of the pay-scale which exceeds such amount to 
be paid to a non-faculty staff in any cadre under clause (a) of section 9; 
(A) maintenance, modification, merger, relocation or discontinuation of any existing 
Centres under sub-section (2) of section 11; 6) the manner of nomination of a 
Centre-Director as a member of the Board under sub-clause (ii) of clause (e) of 
sub-section (2) of section 14; (7) the manner of nomination of two members of the 
Academic Council to the Board under sub-clause (iii) of clause (e) of 
sub-section (2) of section 14; (4) the meetings of the Board and rules of procedure 
in relation to the transaction of business under sub-section (/) of section 15; (/) the 
manner of filling up the casual vacancy of a member of the Board under 
sub-section (4) of section 16; (m) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and 
members of the Board under sub-section (6) of section 16; (४) the establishment, 
modification, merger, relocation or discontinuation of existing branches, centres of 
excellence and outlying units under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 17; (0) 
the conferment of honorary degrees, awards and other distinctions under clause (/) 
of sub-section (2) of section 17; (p) the qualification, classification, terms of office 
and method of appointment of the staff under clause () of sub-section (2) of 
section 17; (4) the number, emoluments, duties and conditions of service of the staff 
under clause (4) of sub-section (2) of section 17; (7) the constitution of pension, 
insurance and provident funds for the benefit of the staff under clause (/) of 
sub-section (2) of section 17; (s) the fees to be charged for courses of study and 
examinations in the Institute under clause (४) of sub-section (2) of section 17; (0) the 
institution of fellowships, scholarships, medals, prizes and conducting of 
exhibitions under clause (0) of sub-section (2) of section 17; (४) the creation of 
infrastructure and maintenance of buildings under clause (p) of sub-section (2) of 
section 17; (v) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and levying 
of fees for residence in the halls and hostels and of other charges under clause (q) 
of sub-section (2) of section 17; (w) the manner of authentication of the orders and 
decisions of the Board under clause (r) of sub-section (2) of section 17; (x) the 
quorum for meetings of the Board, the Academic Council or any committee and the 
procedures to be followed in the conduct of their business under clause (s) of 
sub-section (2) of section 17; (2 the reorganisation, naming, renaming, merging, or 
discontinuation of any division or the creation of a new division in accordance with 
the academic and strategic needs of the Institute under clause (४) of sub-section (2) 
of section 17; (z) the manner of appointment of the Presiding Officer of the 
Management Council under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 20; (za) the 
constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee under sub-section (3) 
of section 21; (zb) the manner for appointment of an acting Director under 
sub-section (8) of section 22; (zc) the manner of appointment, tenure and portfolio 
of Deans by the Board under sub-section (2) of section 24; (zd) the manner of 
appointment and terms and conditions of service of the Registrar under 
sub-section (/) of section 25; (ze) the manner of appointment and terms and 
conditions of service of the Deputy Registrars under sub-section (3) of section 25; 
(zf) the manner of constitution, composition, duties and functions of committees 
under section 26; (zg) the means of generating revenue under section 28; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31 


(zh) the manner of investment of the moneys credited to the Fund under sub-section 
(2) of section 29; (zi) the other purpose of expenditure of the Fund under sub-section 
(4) of section 29; (2) the parameters of assessment and timelines for submission of 
annual performance report of the Institute to the Board under sub-section (/) of 
section 35; (zk) the qualifications, experience and the manner of selection of the 
independent agency or group of experts under sub-section (5) of section 36; and 
(20 the manner of functioning of committees constituted under the existing Institute 
and mandatory review thereof under clause (e) of sub-section (/) of section 46. 
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the first regulations of the Institute 
shall be made by the Board with the previous approval of the Central Government. 


2. Clause 42 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, for carrying out the provisions of the proposed 
legislation, providing for (0) the manner of nomination of eminent persons to the 
Board under clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 14; (ii) the appointment and 
terms and conditions of service of the Director under sub-section (2) of section 22 
and the manner of removal of the Director under sub-section (6) of section 22; (iii) 
the manner of appointment of Centre-Directors under sub-section (/) of section 23, 
the timeline for a Centre-Director to submit the annual performance report of the 
Centre to the Management Council under sub-section (5) of section 23 and the 
manner of removal of Centre-Directors under sub-section (6) of section 23; (iv) the 
timeline for submission of the annual financial report under sub-section (/) of 
section 34; and (v) the timeline for forwarding of a copy of the annual performance 
report to the Central Government under sub-section (3) of section 35. 


3. Clause 44 of the Bill provides for every rule and the first regulations made 
under the proposed legislation to be laid, as soon as may be after they are made, 
before each House of Parliament. 


4. The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made are 
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for 
them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 


July 29,2026 _ _ 
Sravana 7, 1948 (Saka) 


52, THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 
LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
The Indian Statistical Institute Bill, 2026 
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha] 
S. No. Page No. Line No. For Read 
1. 10 23 “section 29” “section 27” 
2. 14 45 “(h) maintenance,” “(h) the maintenance,” 
3 17 30 “the appointment terms” “the terms” 
NEW DELHI; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


33 


Britt No. 147 oF 2026 


A Bill to provide for law relating to evidence with respect to bankers’ books and to align 


it with contemporary digital banking practices and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


1. () This Act may be called the Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. (/) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “bank” and “banker” mean— 


(i) any company or corporation carrying on the business of 
banking; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


34 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(ii) any entity or class of entities operating in financial sector, to 
whose books the provisions of this Act shall have been extended as 
hereinafter provided; 


(iii) any post office savings bank or money order office; 


(6) “bankers’ books” include ledgers, day-books, cash-books, account 
books and all other records used in the ordinary course of business of the bank, 
whether kept in written or physical form or stored in any form of data storage 
mechanisms such as electronic or digital form, or otherwise, either onsite or 
at any offsite or virtual or cloud location, including a back-up or disaster 
recovery site, or both; 


(c) “certified copy”, in relation to any entry or information contained in 
the bankers’ book, shall mean the following, namely:— 


(i) where the bankers’ book is maintained in written or physical 
form, a copy of any entry or information in such books together with a 
certificate referred to in sub-section (/) of section 3; and 


(ii) where the bankers’ book is maintained in any other mode of 
data storage mechanisms, such as, electronic or digital form or 
otherwise, a copy of any entry or information in such bankers’ book, 
which is printed on paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or 
magnetic media or semi-conductor memory, or otherwise stored, 
recorded or copied in any electronic or digital form, together with the 
certificate in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of 
section 3; 


(d) “company” means any company as defined in clause (20) of 
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 and includes a foreign company within 
the meaning of clause (42) of the said section; 


(e) “corporation” means any body corporate established by or under any 
law for the time being in force in India and includes the Reserve Bank of India, 
the State Bank of India or any corresponding new bank constituted under the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 
and the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1980; 


(f) “legal proceeding” means— 
(i) any proceeding or inquiry in which evidence is or may be taken; 
(ii) an arbitration; and 


(iii) any investigation or inquiry under the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, or under any other law for the time being in 
force for the collection of evidence, conducted by a police officer, or by 
any other person (not being a Magistrate) authorised in this behalf by a 
Magistrate or by any law for the time being in force; 


(g) “notification” means a notification published in the Gazette of India 
and the expression “notify” with its grammatical variation and cognate 
expressions shall be construed accordingly; and 


(A) “trial” means any hearing before the Court at which evidence 
is taken. 


(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the 


Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, the Information Technology Act, 2000, the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and the Bharatiya Sakshya 
Adhiniyam, 2023, shall have the same meanings as assigned to them in the 
said Acts. 


18 of 2013. 


5 of 1970. 


40 of 1980. 


46 of 2023. 


26 of 1996. 
21 of 2000. 
46 of 2023. 
47 of 2023. 


21 of 2000. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


3. (1) Every copy of any entry or information of the bankers’ books, 
maintained in written or physical form, as referred to in sub-clause (7) of clause (c) 
of sub-section (/) of section 2, shall be accompanied by a certificate stating the 
following, namely:— 


(a) that the said copy is a true and correct copy of such entry or 
information; 


(6) that such entry or information is contained in one of the ordinary 
books of the bank and was made in the usual and ordinary course of business 
of the bank; 


(c) that such books are still in the custody of the bank, but where the 
book from which such copy was prepared was destroyed, it was destroyed in 
the usual course of business of the bank after the date on which the copy had 
been so prepared; 


(d) that such copy itself ensures its accuracy, if that copy was obtained 
by mechanical or other process; and 


(e) such other conditions as may be notified by the Central Government, 
in such form as specified in the First Schedule. 


(2) Every copy of any entry or information of the bankers’ books, maintained 
in any mode of data storage mechanisms, such as, electronic or digital form or 
otherwise, as referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (c) of sub-section (/) of 
section 2, shall be accompanied by a certificate stating the following, namely:— 


(a) the particulars of the computer system or device involved in the 
production of the said copy from bankers’ books as may be appropriate for the 
purpose of showing that the said copy was produced by a computer system or 
device referred to in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (2) of section 7; and 


(6) specifying any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in 
section 7 relate, 


in such form as specified in the Second Schedule. 


(3) Every certificate referred to in sub-sections (/) and (2) shall bear the date 
of its issue, be signed or authenticated, either manually or by means of digital or 
electronic signature in accordance with the provisions of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000, by the branch head or the office head or any other officer of 
the bank duly authorised by the bank in this behalf, and shall state therein the full 
name and official designation of the officer so signing or authenticating: 


Provided that for the purposes of this section it shall be sufficient for a matter 
to be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person stating it in the 
certificates specified in the respective Schedule. 


4. The Central Government may, if it considers necessary or expedient so to 
do, from time to time, by notification, extend the application of the provisions of 
this Act to the books of any entity or class of entities operating in the financial sector, 
subject to such conditions, exceptions or modifications as may be specified in the 
notification, and the Central Government may, in like manner, rescind, vary or 
modify any such notification. 


5. Subject to the provisions of this Act, a certified copy of any entry in a 
banker’s book shall in all legal proceedings be received as prima facie evidence of 
the existence of such entry and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters, 
transactions and accounts therein recorded in every case where, and to the same 
extent as, the original entry itself is now admissible by law, but not further or 
otherwise. 


Conditions for a 
certified copy. 


Power to extend 
provisions of 
Act. 


Mode of proof 
of entries in 
bankers’ books. 


Admissibility of 
electronic or 
digital records. 


Conditions for 
admissibility of 
records 
maintained in 
electronic or 
digital form. 


36 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


6. Notwithstanding of anything contained in any other law for the time being 


in force, the admissibility of an electronic or digital record of a banker’s book in 
evidence, shall not be denied on the ground that it is an electronic or digital record 
and such record shall, subject to the conditions specified in section 7, be admissible, 
valid and legally enforceable, as other evidence. 


7. (1) The conditions to be satisfied, in relation to the information or record of 


banker’s book maintained in electronic or digital form, for its admissibility, validity 
and enforceability as evidence, shall be following, namely:— 


(a) the copy of the record was produced by a computer system or 
communication device during the period over which such computer system or 
communication device was used regularly to create, store, or process 
information for the purposes of any activity regularly carried on over that 
period by the person having lawful control over the use of the computer system 
or communication device; 


(6) during the said period, information of the kind contained in such copy 
of the record or, of the kind from which the information so contained is 
derived, was regularly fed into the computer system or communication device 
in the ordinary course of the said activities; 


(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer system 
or communication device was operating properly, or, if not, then in respect of 
any period in which it was not operating properly or was out of operation 
during that part of the period, was not such as to affect the said record or the 
accuracy of its contents; 


(d) the information contained in such copy of the record reproduces, or 
was derived from, such information fed into the computer system or 
communication device in the ordinary course of the said activities; 


(e) the said copy is a true copy of such entry or information and was 
prepared from all the relevant records, and it correctly represents, or is 
appropriately derived from, such records; 


(f) the data entry or any other operation had been performed only by 
authorised persons after taking adequate safeguards and no unauthorised 
alteration or change of the data is observed or detected during the relevant 
time; 


(g) adequate safeguards were taken to transfer the data relating to such 
entry or the information accurately from the computer system or 
communication device to an identifiable removable media, including but not 
limited to optical or magnetic media, semiconductor memory, discs or 
otherwise, in any electronic or digital form, and all steps for safe storage and 
custody of such removable device were taken; 


(A) no tampering with the system or other event which may be essential 
for establishing the integrity and accuracy of the system is observed or 
detected; 


(i) the network, devices and the data contained therein were secure and 
equipped to meet the challenge of cyber risks or threats; and 


(7) such other conditions as may be notified by the Central Government. 


(2) Where over any period, the function of creating, storing or processing entry 


or information for the purposes of any activity regularly carried on over that period 
as mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (/) was regularly performed by means of 
one or more computer systems or communication devices, whether— 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


(a) in standalone mode; or 
(5) on a computer system; or 
(c) on a computer network; or 


(d) on a computer resource enabling information creation or providing 
information processing and storage; or 


(e) through an intermediary, 


all such computer system or communication device used for that purpose during that 
period shall be treated for the purposes of this section as constituting a single 
computer system or communication device and the references in this Act to a 
computer system or communication device shall be construed accordingly. 


8. (1) No officer of a bank shall, in any legal proceeding to which the bank is 
not a party, be compelled to produce any banker’s book, the contents of which may 
be proved under this Act, or to appear as a witness to prove the matters, transactions 
and accounts recorded therein, unless by order of the Court made for special cause, 
to be recorded in writing. 


(2) For the purposes of sub-section (/), the expression “special cause” means 
the following, namely:— 


(a) where accuracy or genuineness of the entry or information in the 
bankers’ book is doubtful; or 


(b) where any event has occurred, which suggest that the regularity or 
ordinary nature of record keeping in the bank is interrupted; or 


(c) where the bank does not comply with any order made under 
section 9. 


9. (J) On an application by any party to a legal proceeding, the Court may 
order that such party be at liberty to inspect and take copies of any entries in a 
banker’s book for any of the purposes of such proceeding, or may order the bank to 
prepare and produce, within such period as may be specified in such order, the 
certified copies of all such entries, accompanied by a further certificate that no other 
entries are to be found in the books of the bank relevant to the matters in issue in 
such proceeding, and such further certificate shall be dated and signed or 
authenticated in the manner specified in sub-section (3) of section 3. 


(2) An order under this section or section 8 may be made either with or without 
summoning the bank and shall be served on the bank three clear days (exclusive of 
bank holidays) before the same is to be complied with, unless the Court otherwise 
directs. 


(3) The bank may, at any time before the expiry of the period provided for 
compliance of any order in sub-section (2), either offer to produce their books at the 
trial or give notice of their intention to show cause against such order and thereupon 
the same shall not be enforced without being heard before making any further order. 


10. (1) The costs of any application to the Court under or for the purposes of 
this Act and the costs of anything done or to be done under an order of the Court 
made under or for the purposes of this Act shall be in the discretion of the Court, 
which may further order that such costs or any part thereof be paid by the party to 
the bank, or by the bank to any party where such party had incurred expenditure in 
consequence of any fault or improper delay on the part of the bank. 


(2) Any order made under this section for the payment of costs to or by a bank, 
may be enforced as if the bank were a party to the proceeding. 


Case in which 
officer of bank 
not compellable 
to produce 
books. 


Inspection of 
books by order 
of Court. 


Costs. 


Order of Court 
to be construed 
as order made by 
specified officer. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
amend 
Schedules. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Laying before 
Parliament. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(3) Any order under this section awarding costs may, on an application to any 
Civil Court designated in the order, shall be executed by such Court as if the order 
were a decree for money passed by itself. 


(4) Nothing contained in sub-section (3) shall be construed to derogate from 
any power, which the Court making the order may possess for the enforcement of 
its directions with respect to the payment of costs. 


11. (/) Where the provisions of section 8, 9 or 10 are applied for conduct of 
any investigation or inquiry referred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (f) of 
sub-section (/) of section 2, the order of Court referred to in the said sections shall 
be construed as referring to an order made by an officer not below the rank of a 
Superintendent of Police or such other officer as may be specified in this behalf by 
the appropriate Government. 


(2) In sub-section (/), the expression “appropriate Government” means the 
Government by which the police officer or any other person conducting the 
investigation or inquiry is employed. 


12. The Central Government may, by notification, modify the certificates 
specified in the Schedules from time to time, as may be necessary, to give effect to 
the provisions of this Act. 


13. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 


14. (J) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


15. Every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is issued, before each House of Parliament. 


16. (/) The Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891 is hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the enactment referred to in sub-section (/), 
such repeal shall not affect— 


(a) the previous operation of the enactment so repealed and orders or 
anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or 


(6) any right, privilege, obligation or liability, acquired, accrued or 
incurred under the enactment so repealed; or 


(c) any investigation, inquiry, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of 
any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or 
punishment; or 


(d) the previous operation of any certificate in respect of any entry or 
information in a banker’s book, or notification or order so issued, amended, 
repealed, superseded or rescinded or anything duly done or suffered under the 
enactment so repealed; or 


(e) any proceeding including that relating to an appeal, review or 
reference, instituted before, on, or after the date of commencement of this Act 
under the repealed enactment and such proceeding shall be continued under 
the said enactment as if this Act had not come into force and the said enactment 
had not been repealed; or 


18 of 1891. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


(f) any reference to the repealed enactment in any other legislation, rule, 
order, or any other legal instrument shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act, be construed as a reference to this Act or its 
corresponding provisions; or 


(g) revive anything not in force or existing at the time of such repeal. 


(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of 


section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply with regard to the effect of 
repeal. 


10 of 1897. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 3(/)] 
CERTIFICATE 


(To be filled by the Branch Head or Office Head or such other officer of the 
bank duly authorised by the bank in this behalf) 


I, (Name), Son/daughter/spouse of 
residing/employed at (Branch/Office Address) 
do hereby solemnly affirm and sincerely state and submit to the best of the 
knowledge and belief as follows:— 


(a) that the copy of the entry or information is a true and correct copy of 
such entry or information; 


(0) that such entry or information is contained in one of the ordinary 
books of the bank and was made in the usual and ordinary course of business 
of the bank; 


(c) that such books are still in the custody of the bank, but where the 
book from which such copy was prepared was destroyed, it was destroyed in 
the usual course of business of the bank after the date on which the copy had 
been so prepared; and 


(d) that such copy itself ensures its accuracy, if that copy was obtained 
by mechanical or other process. 


Date (DD/MM/YYYY): (Full name and signature) 


Place: Official Designation 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 41 


THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 3(2)] 
CERTIFICATE 


(To be filled by the Branch Head or Office Head or such other officer of the 


bank duly authorised by the bank in this behalf) 
I, (Name), Son/daughter/spouse of 
residing/employed at (Branch/Office Address) do 


hereby solemnly affirm and sincerely state and submit to the best of the knowledge 
and belief as follows:— 


(a) the copy of the entry or information is produced from the computer 
system or communication device (hereinafter referred to as “the system’’) 
being described as (brief 
particulars of the system be provided (see section 3(2)(a)); 


(5) the said copy of the record was produced by the system during the 
period over which the said system was regularly used to create, store, or 
process information for the purpose of any activities regularly carried on over 
that period by the person having lawful control over its use; 


(c) during the said period, information of the kind contained in such copy 
of the record or of the kind from which the information so contained is derived 
was regularly fed into the system in the ordinary course of the said activities; 


(d) throughout the material part of the said period, the system was 
operating properly or, if not, then in respect of any period in which it was not 
operating properly or was out of operation during that part of the period, was 
not such as to affect the record or the accuracy of its contents; 


(e) the information contained in such copy of the record reproduces or is 
derived from such information fed into the system in the ordinary course of 
the said activities; 


(f) the said copy is a true copy of such entry or information and is 
prepared from all the relevant records, and correctly represents or 
appropriately derived from such record; 


(g) data entry or any other operations had been performed only by 
authorised persons and no unauthorised alteration or change of the data is 
observed or detected during the relevant time; 


(A) adequate safeguards were taken to transfer the data relating to such 
entry or the information accurately from the computer system or 
communication device to an identifiable removable media, including but not 
limited to optical or magnetic media, semiconductor memory, discs or 
otherwise, in any electronic or digital form, and all steps for safe storage and 
custody of such removable device were taken; 


(i) no tampering with the system or other event which may vouch for the 
integrity and accuracy of the system, were observed or detected; and 


(j) the network, devices, and the data contained therein are secure and 
equipped to meet the challenge of cyber risks or threats. 


Date (DD/MM/YYYY): (Full name and signature) 


Place 


: Official Designation 


42 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891 was enacted to facilitate the use of 


certified copies of bank records as evidence in legal proceedings without requiring 
production of the original records. The Act was enacted at a time when banking 
records were predominantly maintained in physical form. With the advancement of 
technology and growth of digital banking, bank records are increasingly created, 
stored and maintained using contemporary technology. It has, therefore, become 
necessary to modernise and strengthen the existing legal framework to meet the 
requirements of the present banking system. 


2. Accordingly, it is proposed to repeal the Bankers’ Books Evidence 


Act, 1891 and introduce the Bankers’ Books Evidence Bill, 2026, which, inter alia, 
provides for the following:— 


(a) to expand the scope of the definition of “bankers’ books” to include 
all forms of records maintained by banks, whether in physical, electronic, 
digital, virtual, cloud-based or in any other form, thereby providing a 
comprehensive, technology-neutral and future-ready legal framework; 


(5) to provide for standardised certificate formats and authentication by 
manual or digital or electronic signature; 


(c) to expressly recognise admissibility of electronic bank records and 
permit their production in either physical or electronic form; 


(d) to empower the Central Government to extend applicability of the 
proposed legislation to any entity or class of entities operating in the financial 
sector subject to certain conditions; and 


(e) to define the expression “special cause”, for which a Court may, by 
order in writing, compel an officer of the bank to produce any bankers’ books 
or to appear as witness to prove matters, transactions or accounts, in any legal 
proceeding where the bank is not a party. 


3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 
The 28th July, 2026. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The provisions of the Bill do not involve any expenditure of recurring or 
non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is issued, before each House of Parliament. 


2. The matters in respect of which notification may be issued are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practical to provide for 
them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of 
a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH, 
Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


GORAKHA 


MGIPMRND—488GI(S4)—03-08-2026. NATH 


YADAVA 


