रजिस्ट्री सं ० डी ० एल ० – ( एन ) 04 / 0007 / 2003–23 REGISTERED NO . DL— ( N ) 04/0007/2003 – 23 


HAMAL 

भारत का राजपत्र 
र 
The Gazette of India 


सं 71 
No. 7 ] 


सी . जी . डी . एल . अ . 06042023-244981 
CG - DL - E - 06042023-244981 


असाधारण 

EXTRAORDINARY 


भाग II 

PART II 


खण्ड 2 

Section 2 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


नई दिल्ली , बुधवार , अप्रैल 5 , 2023 / चैत्र 15 , 1945 ( शक ) 

NEW DELHI , WEDNESDAY , APRIL 5 , 2023 / CHAITRA 15 , 1945 ( SAKA ) 


इस भाग में भिन्न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके । 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation . 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 5th April 2023 : – 
BILL No. 81 OF 2023 


A Bill to amend the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act , 2005 . 

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy - fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows : 


1. ( 1 ) This Act may be called the Coastal Aquaculture Authority ( Amendment ) Short title and 
Act , 2023 . 

commencement . 


( 2 ) Save as otherwise provided , it shall come into force on such date as the 
Central Government may , by notification in the Official Gazette , appoint ; and different 
dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act . 


Amendment 

of section 2 . 


2 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[ PART II 


2. In section 2 of the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act , 2005 , ( hereinafter referred 24 of 2005 . 
to as the principal Act ) , in sub - section ( 1 ) , — 

( i ) for clause ( a ) , the following clauses shall be substituted , namely : 

' ( a ) " aquaculture input " means any material used as an input in coastal 
aquaculture for the maintenance of quality of water and soil and for the 
growth and better health of organisms reared , or other aquatic life available , 
therein and includes seed , fertilizer , feed , growth supplement , probiotic , 
environment remediator and disinfectant ; 


( aa ) " aqua mapping " means geospatial coastal area distribution 
maps depicting areas potential and suitable for coastal aquaculture ; 


( ab ) " aqua zonation " means the zones of spatial planning for different 
species or methods of coastal aquaculture notified by a State Government 
or the Authority for sustainable coastal aquaculture ; 


( ac ) " Authority " means the Coastal Aquaculture Authority established 
under sub - section ( 1 ) of section 4 ; 


( ad ) " biosecured facility " means a coastal aquaculture unit carrying 
on coastal aquaculture activity adopting such biosecurity measures for 
ensuring freedom from disease causing pathogens as may be specified in 
the guidelines issued for such activity ; 


( ae ) " biosecurity " means any measure or strategy or integrated 
approach adopted to analyse , manage and prevent the risk of introduction 
or spread of harmful organisms , including viruses and bacteria , within the 
coastal aquaculture unit and to minimise the risk of transmission of infectious 
diseases ; 


( af ) " Brood Stock Multiplication Centre " means a coastal aquaculture 
unit carrying on such coastal aquaculture activity which receives such post 
larvae or juvenile which are specific pathogen free or specific pathogen 
tolerant or specific pathogen resistant or such other post larvae or juvenile 
from a Nucleus Breeding Centre and rears it under strict biosecurity and 
close disease surveillance to ensure freedom from disease ; ' ; 

( ii ) for clause ( c ) , the following clauses shall be substituted , namely : 

' ( c ) " coastal aquaculture " or " coastal aquaculture activity " means 
rearing and cultivation of any life stages of fish , including crustacean , 
mollusc , finfish , seaweed or any other aquatic life under controlled 
conditions , either indoor or outdoor , in cement cisterns , ponds , pens , cages , 
rafts , enclosures or otherwise in saline or brackish water in coastal areas , 
including activities such as production of brood stock , seed , grow out , but 
does not include fresh water aquaculture ; 


( ca ) " coastal aquaculture unit " means any facility that is engaged in 
coastal aquaculture or any allied activity connected therewith and includes 
Nucleus Breeding Centre , Brood Stock Multiplication Centre , hatchery and 
farm ; ' ; 


( iii ) for clause ( d ) , the following clauses shall be substituted , namely : — 

' ( d ) " coastal area " means the area declared as the Coastal Regulation 
Zone in the Coastal Regulation Zone notification issued by the Central 
Government under the Environment ( Protection ) Act , 1986 and includes 29 of 1986 . 
such other area as the Central Government may , by notification in the Official 
Gazette , specify ; 


SEC . 21 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


3 


( da ) " coastal environment " means the area of land and water in the 
coastal area , including complete system of living organisms and physical 
surroundings therein ; 


( db ) " farm " means a coastal aquaculture unit where culturing of fish , 
including crustacean , mollusc , finfish , seaweed or any other aquatic life is 
done under controlled conditions in ponds , pens , cages , rafts , enclosures 
or otherwise , in saline or brackish water in coastal areas and includes nursery 
rearing , but does not include fresh water aquaculture ; 


( de ) " hatchery " means a coastal aquaculture unit carrying on coastal 
aquaculture activity of breeding and seed production of fish , including 
crustacean , mollusc , finfish , seaweed or any other aquatic life , in saline or 
brackish water and includes rearing of nauplii and live feed , but does not 
include fresh water aquaculture ; ' ; 


( iv ) after clause ( e ) , the following clauses shall be inserted , namely : 

' ( ea ) " Nucleus Breeding Centre " means a coastal aquaculture unit 
carrying on biosecured coastal aquaculture activity which has an established 
freedom from disease causing pathogens for the purpose of producing 
domesticated specific pathogen free , specific pathogen tolerant and specific 
pathogen resistant stocks ; 


( eb ) " operator " means any person or firm that is engaged in the 
operation of the coastal aquaculture activity ; 


( ec ) " owner " , in relation to any coastal aquaculture unit , includes— 
( i ) his legal heirs or agent ; and 


( ii ) an operator , a mortgagee , lessee , including sub - lessee or 
any other person in actual possession of such coastal aquaculture 
unit ; 


( ed ) " pharmacologically active substance or antimicrobial agent " 
means a naturally occurring , semi - synthetic or synthetic substance that , at 
in vivo concentration , exhibits antimicrobial activity of killing or inhibiting 
the growth of microorganisms ; ' ; 

( v ) after clause ( g ) , the following clauses shall be inserted , namely : 

' ( h ) " specific pathogen free " or " specific pathogen resistant " or 
" specific pathogen tolerant " means free of , resistant to , or tolerant to , such 
pathogens as may be listed by the World Organisation for Animal Health or 
any other pathogen notified by the Central Government , which is specific 
for candidate species used in the coastal aquaculture ; 

( i ) " State " includes Union territory . ' . 


3. In section 4 of the principal Act , in sub - section ( 3 ) , — 

( i ) in clause ( c ) , for the words " Department of Ocean Development " , the 
words " Ministry of Earth Sciences " shall be substituted ; 


( ii ) in clause ( d ) , for the words " Ministry of Environment and Forests " , the 
words " Ministry of Environment , Forest and Climate Change " shall be substituted ; 


( iii ) in clause ( e ) , for the words " Ministry of Agriculture " , the words 
" Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare " shall be substituted ; 


( iv ) in clause ( f ) , for the words " Ministry of Commerce " , the words " Ministry 
of Commerce and Industry " shall be substituted ; 

( v ) after clause ( f ) , the following clause shall be inserted , namely : 


Amendment 
of section 4 . 


Amendment 
of section 7 . 


Insertion of 
new section 
7A . 


Committees 
of Authority . 


Insertion of 
new section 
9A . 


Member 
Secretary of 
Authority . 


4 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[ PART II 


" ( fa ) one member to represent the Ministry of Fisheries , Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying of the Central Government ; " . 


4. In section 7 of the principal Act , for sub - section ( 2 ) , the following sub - section shall 
be substituted , namely : 


" ( 2 ) If the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority , any 
other member of the Authority nominated by the Chairperson in this behalf , and 
in the absence of both Chairperson and nominated member , any other member 
chosen by the members present from amongst themselves , shall preside over the 
meeting . " . 

5. After section 7 of the principal Act , the following section shall be inserted , namely : 


" 7A . ( 1 ) Subject to any rules made in this behalf , the Authority may from 
time to time constitute such committees as may be necessary for the efficient 
discharge of its functions . 


( 2 ) Every committee shall consist of such number of persons and perform such 
functions and be subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed . " . 

6. After section 9 of the principal Act , the following section shall be inserted , 
namely : 


" 9A . ( 1 ) The Central Government may appoint an officer of such rank , as it 
considers fit , to be a Member - Secretary of the Authority , in such manner and 
subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed . 


( 2 ) The Member - Secretary shall function as the Chief Executive Officer of 
the Authority who shall be responsible for 

( a ) the day - to - day administration of the Authority ; 

( b ) drawing up of proposal for the Authority's work programmes in 
consultation with the Authority ; 


( c ) implementing the work programmes and the decisions adopted by 
the Authority ; 


( d ) ensuring that the tasks of the Authority are carried out in accordance 
with the requirements of users , in particular with regard to the adequacy of 
the services provided and the time taken ; 


( e ) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and 
the execution of the budget of the Authority ; 


( f ) coordinating with the Central Government and with the committees 
of the Authority ; and 


( g ) legally representing the Authority in all matters . 

( 3 ) Every year , the Member - Secretary shall submit to the Authority for 
approval , 


( a ) a general report covering all the activities of the Authority in the 
previous year ; 


( b ) the programmes of work ; 

( c ) the annual accounts for the previous year ; and 

( d ) the budget for the coming year . 


SEC . 2 ] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


5 


( 4 ) The Member - Secretary shall , after the approval of the Authority , forward 
the general report and the programmes to the Central Government and shall have 
the general report published . 


( 5 ) The Member - Secretary shall have administrative control over the officers 
and other employees of the Authority . 


( 6 ) The Member - Secretary shall approve all financial expenditure of the 
Authority and send a report on the Authority's activities to the Central Government . " . 
7. In section 11 of the principal Act , 

( A ) in sub - section ( 1 ) , 


( i ) in clause ( a ) , for the words " aquaculture farms " , the words " coastal 
aquaculture units " shall be substituted ; 


( ii ) in clauses ( b ) and ( c ) , for the word " farms " , the word " units " shall 
be substituted ; 


( iii ) for clause ( d ) , the following clause shall be substituted , namely : 
" ( d ) to order removal or demolition of any coastal aquaculture 
unit which is causing pollution after hearing the occupier of such 
unit ; " ; 


( iv ) after clause ( d ) , the following clauses shall be inserted , namely : 
" ( da ) to regulate or prohibit the number , species and method of 
any coastal aquaculture in such area , as may be prescribed , through 
planning and execution of such programmes , including aqua zonation 
and aqua mapping for environmentally sustainable coastal aquaculture , 
as may be notified by the Central Government ; 


( db ) to fix or adopt standards , certify , monitor , regulate or prohibit 
coastal aquaculture inputs , including probiotics , therapeutants and 
such other inputs used in coastal aquaculture , as may be prescribed , 
for the prevention , control and abatement of detriment to the coastal 
aquaculture or coastal environment ; 


( de ) to fix or adopt standards , certify , monitor and regulate the 
coastal aquaculture units , including coastal aquaculture activities 
carried out in such units with biosecurity and close disease surveillance 
to ensure freedom from disease , in such manner as may be prescribed ; 


( dd ) to fix or adopt the standards for emission or discharge of 
effluents from coastal aquaculture unit : 


Provided that different standards for emission or discharge may 
be fixed for different coastal aquaculture unit having regard to the 
quality or composition of the emission or discharge of effluents from 
such sources ; 


( de ) to collect and disseminate information in respect of matters 
relating to coastal aquaculture ; " ; 


( B ) in sub - section ( 2 ) , for the word " farm " , at both the places where it occurs , 
the word " unit " shall be substituted . 


8. In section 12 of the principal Act , — 

( a ) for the words " land , pond , pen or enclosure " , wherever they occur , the 
word " unit " shall be substituted ; 


Amendment 
of section 11 . 


Amendment 

of section 12 . 


Insetion of 

new section 
12A . 


Prohibition of 
certain 

materials . 


Amendment 
of section 13 . 


6 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[ PART II 


( b ) after the proviso , the following provisos shall be inserted , namely : 

" Provided further that the requirement of notice under the first proviso 
may be waived by the Authority , in such cases and for such reasons to be 
recorded in writing , as it deems fit : 


Provided also that the owner shall be liable to pay the cost of demolition 
and cost of damage to the environment , if any , assessed in such manner as 
may be prescribed . " . 


9. After section 12 of the principal Act , the following section shall be inserted , 
namely : 


" 12A . The Authority may , by an order , prohibit the use , in any coastal 
aquaculture activity of 


( a ) such pharmacologically active substance , antimicrobial agent 
or other material which may cause harm to human health as may be 
prescribed ; or 


( b ) aquaculture inputs containing such substance , agent or material 
as may be specified under clause ( a ) . " . 

10. In section 13 of the principal Act , 

( i ) in sub - section ( 1 ) , for the word " farm " , the word " unit " shall be 
substituted ; 


( ii ) in sub - section ( 3 ) , the following proviso shall be inserted , namely : 

" Provided that the Authority may issue a certificate of registration for 
carrying out coastal aquaculture on the land allotted or assigned by the 
Government subject to such procedure and for such period , as may be 
prescribed , but not exceeding the period specified under clause ( a ) or 
clause ( b ) , as the case may be . " ; 


( iii ) in sub - sections ( 4 ) , ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) , for the word " farm " , wherever it occurs , 
the words " coastal aquaculture unit " shall be substituted ; 


( iv ) for sub - section ( 7 ) , the following sub - section shall be substituted , 
namely : 


" ( 7 ) In the case of a farm comprising more than two hectares of water 
spread area and any other coastal aquaculture unit , no application for 
registration to commence any activity connected with coastal aquaculture 
shall be considered under sub - section ( 5 ) unless the Authority , after making 
such inquiry as it thinks fit , is satisfied that registration of such coastal 
aquaculture unit shall not be detrimental to the coastal environment . " ; 

( v ) in sub - section ( 8 ) , with effect from the 16th December , 2005 , 

( A ) for clauses ( a ) and ( b ) , the following clauses shall be substituted , 
namely : 


" ( a ) no coastal aquaculture shall be carried on in the ecologically 
sensitive areas or the geo - morphological features ; 


29 of 1986 . 


SEC . 21 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


7 


( b ) no coastal aquaculture , except hatchery , Nucleus Breeding 
Centre and Brood Stock Multiplication Centre shall be carried on in 
the No Development Zone in the case of sea , and in the buffer zone in 
the case of creeks , rivers and backwaters ; 


( c ) no coastal aquaculture , except sea weed culture , pen culture , 
raft culture and cage culture activities shall be carried on in creek , 
rivers and backwaters within the Coastal Regulation Zone : " ; 


( B ) for the Explanation , the following Explanation shall be 
substituted , namely : 


' Explanation . For the purposes of this sub - section , 

( i ) " High Tide Line " means the line on the land up to 
which the highest water line reaches during the spring tide ; 


( ii ) the expressions " ecologically sensitive areas " , 
" geo - morphological features " , " No Development Zone " , " buffer 
zone " and " Coastal Regulation Zone " shall have the same 
meanings as defined in the Coastal Regulation Zone notification 
issued under the Environment ( Protection ) Act , 1986. ' ; 


( vi ) in sub - section ( 9 ) , for the word " farm " , wherever it occurs , the word 
" unit " shall be substituted ; 

( vii ) in sub - section ( 10 ) , 

( a ) for the word " farm " , the words " coastal aquaculture unit " shall be 
substituted ; 


( b ) the following proviso shall be inserted , namely : 

" Provided that the Authority may condone the delay in making 
application for renewal , subject to payment of such fee for renewal of 
registration , as may be prescribed . " ; 


( viii ) in sub - section ( 11 ) , for the word " farm " , at both the places where it 
occurs , the words " coastal aquaculture unit " shall be substituted ; 

( ix ) after sub - section ( 11 ) , the following sub - sections shall be inserted , 
namely : 


" ( 12 ) The Authority may vary , amend or modify the certificate of 
registration issued under this section , in such manner as may be prescribed . 


( 13 ) In the event of the certificate of registration issued under this 
Act being defaced or mutilated or lost , the Authority may grant a duplicate 
certificate , on payment of such fee and in such manner , as may be 
prescribed . " . 


11. After section 13 of the principal Act , the following section shall be inserted , Insetion of 
namely : 

new section 
13A . 


of officers . 

" 13A . ( 1 ) The Authority may , by order , authorise any officer of the Authority Authorisation 
or the State Government or the Central Government , not below the rank of Assistant 
Director of Fisheries in a District to function as authorised officer to exercise 
such powers , to discharge such duties and perform such functions , as may be 
specified in that order . 


Substitution of 
new sections 
14 and 14A 
for section 14 . 


Penalty for 
carrying on 
coastal 
aquaculture in 
contravention 
of provisions 
of Act . 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[ PART II 


( 2 ) The Central Government may , by notification , authorise any officer of 
the Authority or the State Government or the Central Government , not below the 
rank of Under Secretary to the Government of India , to function as an adjudicating 
officer , to adjudicate the penalties imposed under this Act . 


( 3 ) The Central Government may , by notification , authorise any officer of 
the Authority or the State Government or the Central Government , not below the 
rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of India , to function as the Appellate 
Authority , who may affirm , vary or set aside the order passed by the adjudicating 
officer . 


( 4 ) The adjudicating officer or the Appellate Authority , shall , for the purposes 
of discharging functions under this Act , have the same powers as are vested in a 
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure , 1908 while trying a suit , in respect 5 of 1908 . 
of the following matters , namely : 

( a ) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses ; 

( b ) requiring the discovery and production of documents ; 

( c ) requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record 
or document from any office ; 


( d ) receiving evidence on affidavits ; 


( e ) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents . 

( 5 ) The adjudicating officer or the Appellate Authority shall be deemed to 
be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure , 1973. " . 


12. For section 14 of the principal Act , the following sections shall be substituted , 
namely : 


" 14. Where any person carries on coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal 
aquaculture or causes the coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal aquaculture 
to be carried on in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rules 
or regulations made thereunder or any guidelines or notifications issued thereunder , 
an officer authorised under section 13A shall take all or any of the following 
actions , namely : 


( a ) suspension or stoppage of any activity in a coastal aquaculture 
unit for such period and in such manner as may be prescribed ; 

( b ) imposition of penalty as specified in the Table below ; 

( c ) removal or demolition of any structure ; 

( d ) destruction of the standing crop therein ; 

( e ) suspension or cancellation of registration for such period and in 

such manner as may be prescribed . 


2 of 1974 . 


SEC . 21 


$ 1 . 

No. 


( 1 ) 

1 . 


2 . 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Coastal 
Aquaculture / use 

of prohibited 

materials 


Farm 


( 2 ) 


Hatchery , Brood 
Stock 
Multiplication 
Centre , Nucleus 

Breeding Centre 
or such other 
coastal 
aquaculture unit 


Offences 


Non 


TABLE 


( 3 ) 


registration . 


Non 
compliance 
with the 
provisions 
of the Act , 
rules , 
regulations , 
guidelines 
and 


registration . 


notifications , area . 

other than 

non 


Non 
compliance 
with the 
provisions 
of the Act , 

rules , 
regulations , 
guidelines 

and 


First time 
offence 


notifications , 

other than 

non 


( 4 ) 

Rupees 

ten 
thousand 
per 
hectare ( or 
fraction of 
a hectare ) 
of water 
spread 

area . 


registration . 


Rupees 
five 
thousand 
per 
hectare ( or 
fraction of 
a hectare ) 
of water 
spread 


Non 

registration . fifty 


Rupees 


thousand . 


Rupees 
twenty 
five 
thousand . 


Penalty 

Second 
time 
offence 


( 5 ) 

Rupees 
fiteen 
thousand 
per 

hectare ( or 
fraction of 
a hectare ) 
of water 
spread 

area . 


Rupees 

seventy 

five 

thousand . 


Rupees 
fifty 
thousand . 


Third time 
and 
subsequent 
offences 

( 6 ) 


Rupees 
twenty 
five 
thousand 
per 
hectare ( or 
fraction of 
a hectare ) 
of water 
spread 

area . 


Rupees 

ten 

thousand 
per 

per 

hectare ( or hectare ( or 

fraction of 

fraction of 

a hectare ) 
of water 
spread 

area . 


Rupees 

fiteen 

thousand 


a hectare ) 

of water 


9 


spread 

area . 


Rupees 
one lakh . 


Rupees 
one lakh . 


Appeal . 


Insertion of 
new section 
22A . 


Arrears of cost 
and penalty 
recoverable as 
arrears of land 

revenue . 


Amendment 
of section 24 . 


10 


( 1 ) 

3 . 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


( 2 ) 

Use of materials 
prohibited under 
section 12A 


( 3 ) 

( 4 ) 

Contravention Rupees 
of the fifty 
provisions of thousand . 

clause ( a ) or 

clause ( b ) of 

section 12A . 


( 5 ) 

Rupees 

seventy 

five 

thousand . 


[ PART II 


( 6 ) 

Rupees 

one lakh . 


14A . ( 1 ) Any person aggrieved by an order of the adjudicating officer may 
within thirty days from the date on which the order is made , prefer an appeal to 
the Appellate Authority : 


Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain any appeal preferred 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days , but before the expiry of ninety 
days from the date aforesaid , if it satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time . 


( 2 ) No appeal under this section shall be entertained by the Appellate 
Authority unless the appellant has at the time of filing the appeal deposited the 
amount of penalty payable under the order appealed against : 


Provided that on an application made by the appellant in this behalf , the 
Appellate Authority may , if it is of the opinion that the deposit to be made under 
this sub - section shall cause undue hardship to the appellant , by order in writing , 
dispense with such deposit , either unconditionally or subject to such condition , 
as it may deem fit to impose . 


( 3 ) On the receipt of an appeal under sub - section ( 1 ) , the Appellate Authority 
may , after holding such enquiry as it deems fit , and after giving the parties 
concerned reasonable opportunity of being heard , confirm , modify or set aside 
the order appealed against , and— 


( a ) if the sum deposited by way of penalty under sub - section ( 2 ) 
exceeds the penalty directed to be paid by the Appellate Authority , such 
excess amount shall be refunded to the appellant ; or 


( b ) if the Appellate Authority sets aside the order imposing penalty , 
the whole of the sum deposited by the way of penalty shall be refunded to 
the appellant . 

( 4 ) The decision of the Appellate Authority under this section shall be 
final . " . 

13. After section 22 of the principal Act , the following section shall be inserted , 
namely : 


" 22A . Any cost which is due and not paid as provided for by or under this Act 
and any sum directed to be recovered by way of penalty under section 14 shall be 
recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue . " . 


14. In section 24 of the principal Act , in sub - section ( 2 ) , — 

( i ) after clause ( b ) , the following clauses shall be inserted , namely : 

" ( ba ) the manner of constitution of committees under sub - section ( 1 ) of 
section 7A ; 


( bb ) the number of persons in the committees , their functions , and the 
terms and conditions of the committees under sub - section ( 2 ) of section 7A ; 


29 of 1986 . 


SEC . 21 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


11 


( bc ) the manner of appointment and the terms and conditions for 
appointment of Member - Secretary under sub - section ( 1 ) of section 9A ; 


( bd ) the area in which the Authority may regulate or prohibit the 
number , species and method of any coastal aquaculture under clause ( da ) 
of sub - section ( 1 ) of section 11 ; 


( be ) the other inputs used in coastal aquaculture under clause ( db ) of 
sub - section ( 1 ) of section 11 ; 


( bf ) the manner of certification , monitoring and regulation of the coastal 
aquaculture units and the manner of carrying out coastal aquaculture 
activities with biosecurity and close disease surveillance to ensure freedom 
from disease in coastal aquaculture units under clause ( dc ) of sub - section ( 1 ) 
of section 11 ; " ; 


( ii ) in clause ( e ) , for the words " land , pond , pen or enclosure under that 
section " , the word " unit " shall be substituted ; 


( iii ) after clause ( f ) , the following clauses shall be inserted , namely : 

" ( fa ) the manner of assessing the cost of damage to the environment 
under the third proviso to section 12 ; 


( fb ) prohibition of such other material which may cause harm to human 
health under clause ( a ) of section 12A ; 


( fc ) the procedure and period under the proviso to sub - section ( 3 ) of 
section 13 ; " ; 


( iv ) in clause ( j ) , after the word and figures " section 13 " , the words " and the 
fee for renewal of registration under the proviso thereof " shall be inserted ; 

( v ) after clause ( j ) , the following clauses shall be inserted , namely : 

" ( ja ) the manner of varying , amending and modifying the certificate of 
registration under sub - section ( 12 ) of section 13 ; 


( jb ) the fee for grant of duplicate certificate and the manner of granting 
it under sub - section ( 13 ) of section 13 ; 


( jc ) the period and manner of suspension or stoppage of activity in a 
coastal aquaculture unit under clause ( a ) of section 14 ; 


( jd ) the period and manner for suspension or cancellation of 
registration under clause ( e ) of section 14 ; " . 


15. In section 25 of the principal Act , in sub - section ( 2 ) , in clause ( d ) , for the word Amendment 
" farms " , the word " units " shall be substituted . 

of section 25 . 

16. In section 27 of the principal Act , 

( a ) for sub - section ( 1 ) , the following sub - section shall be substituted , namely : — 

' ( 1 ) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( v ) of sub - section ( 2 ) 
of section 3 of the Environment ( Protection ) Act , 1986 or clause ( d ) of 
sub - rule ( 3 ) of rule 5 of the Environment ( Protection ) Rules , 1986 , in the Coastal 
Regulation Zone Notification or the Island Coastal Regulation Zone Notification 
issued by the Government of India in the Ministry of Environment , Forest and 
Climate Change , in exercise of the powers conferred under the said Environment 
( Protection ) Act , in the paragraph dealing with prohibited activities , after the last 
sub - paragraph , the following proviso shall be inserted and shall always be deemed 
to have been inserted with effect from the 19th day of February , 1991 , namely : — 
" Provided that nothing contained in this paragraph shall apply to 
coastal aquaculture . " . " ; 


Amendment 

of section 27 . 


Insertion of 
new section 
28 . 


Validation of 
certain 
provisions and 
amendments 
retrospectively . 


12 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[ PART II 


( b ) in sub - section ( 2 ) , the word " farm's " shall be omitted . 

17. After section 27 of the principal Act , the following section shall be inserted , 
namely : 


" 28. ( 1 ) Where a coastal aquaculture and activities connected therewith has 
been granted registration under this Act , then , notwithstanding anything contained in 
clause ( v ) of sub - section ( 2 ) of section 3 of the Environment ( Protection ) Act , 1986 , or 29 of 1986 . 
clause ( d ) of sub - rule ( 3 ) of rule 5 of the Environment ( Protection ) Rules , 1986 or in any 
other law for the time being in force : 

such registration granted under this Act shall prevail and remain valid ; 

( ii ) such coastal aquaculture and activities connected therewith shall be a 
permitted activity under the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification or the Island 
Coastal Regulation Zone Notification issued under the Environment ( Protection ) 
Act , 1986 ; 


( iii ) all registrations granted for coastal aquaculture and activities 
connected there with under this Act shall be valid permissions under the 
applicable rules , regulations and notifications notified under the Environment 
( Protection ) Act , 1986 from time to time . 


( 2 ) The provisions of sub - section ( 1 ) , and the provisions of sub - section ( 8 ) of 
section 13 as amended retrospectively with effect from the 16th December , 2005 by the 
Coastal Aquaculture Authority ( Amendment ) Act , 2023 , shall have and shall be deemed 
always to have effect for all purposes as if they had been in force at all material times , 
and accordingly , 


( i ) notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment , decree or order 
of any court , tribunal or other authority , any action taken or anything done or 
purported to have been taken or done in accordance with the said provisions 
shall be deemed to be , and always to have been , for all purposes , as validly and 
effectively taken or done as if the said provisions had been in force at all material 
times ; 


( ii ) no suit or other proceeding shall be instituted , maintained or continued 
in any court for any action taken or anything done or omitted to be done in 
accordance with the said provisions ; and 


( iii ) no enforcement shall be made by any court of any decree or order or 
direction relating to removal or closure of any coastal aquaculture activitiy or 
demolition of any structure connected therewith or relating to any action taken 
or done or omitted to be done in accordance with the said provisions as if the 
provisions of sub - section ( 1 ) , and the amendments made in sub - section ( 8 ) of 
section 13 had been in force at all material times . " . 


29 of 1986 . 


29 of 1986 . 


SEC . 2 ] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


13 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act , 2005 was enacted to provide for the 
establishment of a Coastal Aquaculture Authority for regulating the activities connected 
with coastal aquaculture in the coastal areas . 


2. The mandate of the Act is to protect coastal environment , while promoting orderly 
growth of coastal aquaculture farming in coastal areas . It also facilitates the continued 
operation of coastal aquaculture within Coastal Regulatory Zone area and beyond , subject 
to restrictions imposed by the Authority . Today , the coastal aquaculture is one of the major 
success stories of lakhs of hardworking small farmers and educated youth working on 
average land size of 2 to 4 hectares with the policy support of the Government . The shrimp 
production has increased from about 75000 tons in 2008-09 to around 10 lakh tons in 
2021-22 . The seafood exports have grown at an average annual growth rate of 15 % and 
stood at a record Rs . 57,586 crore in 2021-22 with brackish water shrimp constituting the 
lion's share thereof , amounting to Rs.42,706 crore . 

3. The Coastal Aquaculture Authority ( Amendment ) Bill , 2023 , inter alia , seeks to 

( a ) reiterate and clarify that while coastal aquaculture and activities connected 
therewith are permitted activities within the Coastal Regulatory Zone under the Coastal 
Regulatory Zone notifications , it shall continue to be regulated by the Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority Act and no other Acts ; 


( b ) decriminalise the offences under the Act for promoting ease of doing business 
and to finetune the operational procedures of Coastal Aquaculture Authority to make 
it more responsive to the needs of the stakeholders ; 


( c ) promote newer forms of environment friendly coastal aquaculture such as 
cage culture , seaweed culture , bi - valve culture , marine ornamental fish culture and 
pearl oyster culture which has the potential for creating additional employment 
opportunities on a large scale for coastal fisher communities especially fisherwomen ; 


( d ) usher in global best practices in this sector , including mapping and zonation 
of aquaculture areas , quality assurance and safe aquaculture products ; 


( e ) encourage establishment of facilities in areas having direct access to seawater 
to produce genetically improved and disease free broodstocks and seed for use in 
coastal aquaculture ; 


( f ) prevent the use of antibiotics and pharmacologically active substances which 
are harmful for human health in coastal aquaculture ; 


( g ) promote production , productivity and exports , traceability and increased 
competitiveness and entrepreneurship leading to sustained increase in incomes , 
employment and economic activity in rural areas along the coast in an environmentally 
sustainable manner . 

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives . 


NEW DELHI ; 

The 29th March , 2023 . 


PARSHOTTAM RUPALA . 


14 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[ PART II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 

The provisions of the Bill do not involve any expenditure of recurring or non - recurring 
nature from the Consolidated Fund of India . 


SEC . 2 ] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


15 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 

Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to amend sub - section ( 2 ) of section 24 of the principal Act . 
The said clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules inter alia on 
matters relating to the manner of constitution of committees ; the number of persons in the 
committees , their functions and the terms and conditions of the committees ; the manner of 
appointment and the terms and conditions for appointment of Member - Secretary ; the area 
in which the Authority may regulate or prohibit the number , species and method of any 
coastal aquaculture ; the other inputs used in coastal aquaculture ; the manner of certification , 
monitoring and regulation of the coastal aquaculture units and the manner of carrying out 
coastal aquaculture activities with biosecurity and close disease surveillance to ensure 
freedom from disease in coastal aquaculture units ; the manner of assessing the cost of 
damage to the environment ; the prohibition of such other material which may cause harm to 
human health ; the procedure and period for issuing registration to carry out coastal 
aquaculture on the land allotted or assigned by the Government ; the fee for renewal of 
registration ; the manner of varying , amending and modifying the certificate of registration ; 
the fee for grant of duplicate certificate and the manner of granting it ; the period and 
manner of suspension or stoppage of activity in a coastal aquaculture unit ; and the period 
and manner for suspension or cancellation of registration . 


2. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made are generally matters of 
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill . 
The delegation of legislative power is , therefore , of a normal character . 


MGIPMRND - 05GI - 06-04-2023 . 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary General . 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER , GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS , MINTO ROAD , NEW DELHI - 110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS , DELHI - 110054 . 


Kshitiz Mohan 


Digitally signed by 
Kshitiz Mohan 
Date : 2023.04.06 
18 : 08 : 33 + 0530 


