रजिस्ट्री सं” Ste एल---(एन)04/0007/2003---23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


The Gazette of Gudia 


Ooh. -ST. Wet.-37.-0082023-247989 
CG-DL-E-0082023-247989 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा --- खण्ड | 
PART II — Section I 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 9] नई दिल्‍ली, बुधवार, अगस्त 9, 2023/ श्रावण 8, 945 (शक) 
No. 9] | NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 9, 2023/SRAVANA 8, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 9th August, 2023/Sravana 8, 945 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
9th August, 2023 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) 
AMENDMENT ACT, 2023 


No. 6 oF 2023 
[9th August, 2023.] 
An Act further to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 957. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) — Short title and 
Amendment Act, 2023. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 
of section 3. 


Amendment 
of section 4. 


Amendment 


of section 4A. 


Amendment 
of section 5. 


Amendment 
of section 6. 


Substitution 
of Chapter 
heading of 

Chapter III. 


2. THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part पी. 


2. In section 3 of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 957 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 3,— 


(i) after clause (aa), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(aaa) "exploration licence" means a licence granted for undertaking 
reconnaissance operations or prospecting operations or both in respect of 
minerals specified in the Seventh Schedule;’; 


(ii) in clause (ae), after the words "composite licence", the words ", exploration 
licence" shall be inserted; 


(iii) for clause (ha), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


(ha) "reconnaissance operations" means any operations undertaken for 
preliminary prospecting of a mineral through regional, aerial, geophysical or 
geochemical surveys and geological mapping, and include pitting, trenching, 
drilling and sub-surface excavation;’. 


3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the words "prospecting 
licence", the words "or of a exploration licence" shall be inserted. 


4. In section 4A of the principal Act,— 


(i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"Termination of prospecting licences, exploration licences or mining 
leases."; 


(ii) in sub-section (/), for the words "prospecting licence", at both the places 
where they occur, the words "prospecting licence or exploration licence" shall be 
substituted; 


(iii) in sub-section (3), after the words "prospecting licence", the words "or 
exploration licence" shall be inserted. 


5. In section 5 of the principal Act, for the marginal heading, the following marginal 
heading shall be substituted, namely:— 


"Restrictions on the grant of mineral concession.". 
6. In section 6 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"Maximum area for which mineral concession may be granted."; 
(b) in sub-section (/),— 
(i) after clause (aa), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ab) one or more exploration licences covering a total area of more 
than five thousand square kilometres: 


Provided that the area granted under a single exploration licence 
shall not exceed one thousand square kilometres;"; 


(ii) in clause (c), for the words "reconnaissance permit, mining lease or 
prospecting licence", the words "mineral concession" shall be substituted. 


7. In Chapter III of the principal Act, for Chapter heading, the following Chapter 
heading shall be substituted, namely:— 


"PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING MINERAL CONCESSION IN RESPECT OF LAND IN WHICH THE 
MINERALS VEST IN THE GOVERNMENT". 


67 of 957. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


8. In section 0 of the principal Act,— Amendment 
of section l0. 


(i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"Application for mineral concession."; 


(ii) in sub-section (4), in clause (a), for the words, figures and letters "sections 
l0B, l, lA or the rules made under section llB", the words, figures and letters 
"sections |OB, IOBA, Ill, [!A, lB or |ID" shall be substituted. 


9. After section l0B of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, Insertion of 


namely:— i rami 
"LOBA. (Z) The provisions of this section shall not apply to— Grant of 

है exploration 

(a) the areas covered under section 7A; licence for 


minerals 
specified in 
(c) the minerals specified in Part B of the First Schedule where the grade of Seventh 


(b) the minerals specified in Part A of the First Schedule; 


atomic mineral is equal to or greater than such threshold value as may be notified ae 
by the Central Government from time to time; auction. 


(d) any land in respect of which the minerals do not vest in the Government. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections L0B and I], an exploration 
licence may be granted in any area by the State Government for the purpose of 
undertaking reconnaissance or prospecting operations or both in respect of any mineral 
specified in the Seventh Schedule. 


(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, amend the Seventh Schedule so as to modify the 
entries therein with effect from such date as may be specified in the said notification. 


(4) The State Government shall, after obtaining the previous approval of the 
Central Government, and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government, notify the areas in which exploration licence shall be granted, subject to 
such terms and conditions as may be specified in the notification. 


(5) The Central Government may require the State Government to notify the area 
for grant of exploration licence within such period as may be fixed in consultation with 
the State Government, and in case the State Government does not notify the area 
within such period, the Central Government may, after the expiry of the period so fixed, 
notify the area for grant of exploration licence. 


(6) The State Government shall, for the purpose of granting exploration licence 
through auction by method of competitive bidding, including e-auction, select an 
applicant who fulfils the eligibility conditions as specified in this Act and grant 
exploration licence to such applicant. 


(7) Where— 


(a) the State Government has not successfully completed auction for the 
grant of exploration licence; or 


(b) after completion of auction, the exploration licence or letter of intent for 
grant of exploration licence has been terminated or lapsed for any reason 
whatsoever, 


the Central Government may require the State Government to conduct and complete 
the auction or re-auction process, as the case may be, within such period as may be 
fixed in consultation with the State Government, and in cases where such auction or 
re-auction process is not completed within such period, the Central Government may, 
after the expiry of the period so fixed, conduct auction for the grant of exploration 
licence for such area: 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I]— 


Provided that upon successful completion of the auction, the Central Government 
shall intimate the details of the preferred bidder in the auction to the State Government 
and the State Government shall grant exploration licence for such area to such preferred 
bidder in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(8) The holder of exploration licence shall be entitled to a share of applicable 
amount quoted in the auction of mining leases payable by the lessee to the State 
Government in respect of the area granted in mining lease pursuant to the prospecting 
operations undertaken by the holder of such exploration licence: 


Provided that the share in applicable amount payable to the holder of exploration 
licence by the lessee of such area shall be allowed only in respect of the minerals 
specified in the Seventh Schedule. 


(9) The Central Government shall by rules provide for the manner of conducting 
auction for grant of exploration licence, including its terms and conditions, the bidding 
parameters for selection, share payable to the holder of exploration licence from out of 
the applicable amount quoted in auction of mining leases payable by the lessee of 
such area, the period for such payment and such other conditions as may be necessary. 


(0) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7,— 


(a) the exploration licence shall be granted for a period of five years from 
the date of execution of the exploration licence; 


(9) if, after three years from the date of execution of exploration licence, 
but before the date of its expiry, the holder of the exploration licence makes an 
application for the extension of the period of that licence, the State Government 
may, on being satisfied that within the period of five years, it shall not be possible 
for the holder of such licence to complete the reconnaissance or prospecting 
operations for reasons beyond his control, extend the said period to a further 
period not exceeding two years. 


(4) After three years from the date of execution of the exploration licence, the 
holder of such licence may retain an area not exceeding twenty-five per cent. of the 
total area covered under that licence for the purpose of continuing reconnaissance or 
prospecting operations and shall surrender the remaining area after submitting a report 
to the State Government stating the reasons for retention of the area proposed to be 
retained by him and the boundaries of that area. 


(/2) The holder of the exploration licence shall, within three months of the 
completion of the operations for which licence has been granted, or of the date of 
expiry of the exploration licence, whichever is earlier, submit a geological report to the 
State Government explaining the result of the reconnaissance and prospecting 
operations, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(/3) If the holder of the exploration licence fails to complete the reconnaissance 
and prospecting operations before expiry of the exploration licence, or fails to submit 
the geological report within the period specified in sub-section (/2), the State 
Government may take such action as it deems fit, including imposition of penalty. 


(/4) Within six months from the date of receipt of the geological report from the 
holder of the exploration licence, the Central Government or the State Government 
shall initiate the auction process for grant of one or more separate mining leases under 
section l0B or section Il or section llD, as the case may be, in respect of the area 
where existence of mineral content is established and shall select the preferred bidder 
for grant of such mining leases within one year from the date of receipt of the geological 
report: 


Provided that in case the preferred bidder is not selected within the period so 
specified, the State Government shall pay to the person who was the holder of exploration 
licence such amount, and in such manner, as may be prescribed.". 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


0. After section lC, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 


"LID. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government 
shall, for the purpose of granting mining lease or composite licence in any area in 
respect of any mineral specified in the Part D of the First Schedule, select, through 
auction by method of competitive bidding, including e-auction, a preferred bidder who 
fulfils the eligibility conditions as specified in section 5, on such terms and conditions, 
and in such manner, as may be prescribed. 


(2) Upon successful completion of the auction, the Central Government shall 
intimate the details of the preferred bidder in the auction to the State Government and 
the State Government shall grant mining lease or composite licence for such area, to 
such preferred bidder, in such manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(3) The royalty, dead rent, applicable amount quoted in the auction and any 
other statutory payment in relation to the mining lease or composite licence auctioned 
by the Central Government shall accrue to the State Government or concerned 
authorities, as the case may be, as if the auction has been conducted by the State 
Government.". 


II. In section |2 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"Registers of mineral concession."; 
(b) in sub-section (/),— 
(i) in clause (e), the word "and" shall be omitted; 
(ii) after clause (f), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(g) a register of applications for exploration licences; and 
(A) a register of exploration licences,". 
2. In section |2A of the principal Act,— 


(i) after the words "composite licence", wherever they occur, the words "or 
exploration licence" shall be inserted; 


(ii) in sub-section (4), in the proviso, for the words "or of a composite licence", 
the words "or composite licence" shall be substituted. 


3. In Chapter IV of the principal Act, for Chapter heading, the following Chapter 
heading shall be substituted, namely:— 


"RULES FOR REGULATING THE GRANT OF MINERAL CONCESSIONS". 
4. In section |3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) clause (ac) shall be omitted; 


(ii) in clause (448), for the words, figures and letters "mining lease or composite 
licence under section l0B, Il, LlA, lIB", the words, figures and letters "mineral 
concession under section !0B, OBA, Il, llA, lB, lD" shall be substituted; 


(iii) after clause (v), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(va) the manner of notifying the areas for grant of exploration licence 
under sub-section (4) of section LOBA; 


(vb) the manner of granting exploration licence to the preferred bidder 
under the proviso to sub-section (7) of section LOBA; 


Insertion of 
new section 
lID. 


Central 
Government 
to conduct 
auction for 
grant of 
mining lease 
or composite 
licence in 
respect of 
minerals 
specified in 
Part D of 
First 
Schedule. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Amendment 
of section 
2A. 


Substitution 
of Chapter 
heading of 
Chapter IV. 


Amendment 
of section |3. 


Amendment 
of section 
I7A. 


Amendment 
of section 
I8A. 


Amendment 


of section 9. 


Amendment 


of section 2]. 


Amendment 
of section 
24A. 


Amendment 
of First 
Schedule. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part पी... 


(vc) the manner of conducting auction for grant of exploration licence, the 
terms and conditions thereof, the bidding parameters for selection, the share 
payable to the holder, the period for payment and other conditions under 
sub-section (9) of section LOBA; 


(vd) the manner of submitting geological report under sub-section (/2) of 
section LOBA; 


(ve) the amount to be paid and the manner of payment under the proviso 
to sub-section (/4) of section lOBA;"; 


(iv) after clause (x), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(xa) the terms and conditions and the manner of selecting a preferred 
bidder under sub-section (/) of section D; 


(xb) the manner of granting a mining lease or composite licence to a 
preferred bidder under sub-section (2) of section !lD;". 


5. In section |7A of the principal Act, in sub-sections (/), (JA) and (2), after the words 
"prospecting licence", the words "or exploration licence" shall be inserted. 


6. In section I8A of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the words "prospecting 
licence", at both the places where they occur, the words "or exploration licence" shall be 
inserted. 


7. In section 9 of the principal Act, for the marginal heading, the following marginal 
heading shall be substituted, namely:— 


"Mineral concession to be void if in contravention of Act.". 
8. In section 2] of the principal Act, in the Explanation, after the words "composite 
licence", the words ", exploration licence" shall be inserted. 
9. In section 24A of the principal Act, for the marginal heading, the following marginal 
heading shall be substituted, namely:— 
"Rights and liabilities of a holder of mineral concession.". 
20. In the principal Act, in the First Schedule,— 
(i) after the figures and letter “!C’, the figures and letter “lD” shall be inserted; 


(ii) for Part B, the following Part shall be substituted, namely:— 


"PART B 
Atomic minerals 
. Minerals of the "rare earths" group containing Uranium and Thorium. 
2. Phosphorites and other phosphatic ores containing Uranium. 
3. Pitchblende and other Uranium ores. 
4. Uraniferous allanite, monazite and other thorium minerals. 


5. Uranium bearing tailings left over from ores after extraction of copper 
and gold, ilmenite and other titanium ores. 


6. Beach sand minerals, that is, economic heavy minerals found in the teri 
or beach sands, which include ilmenite, rutile, leucoxene, garnet, 
monazite, zircon and sillimanite."; 


Sec. है| 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(iii) after Part C, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:— 


— 


— — — — 
wo NY - © 


Sm KN Dm # (० bw 


"PART D 


Critical and Strategic Minerals 


. Beryl and other beryllium bearing minerals. 
. Cadmium bearing minerals. 

. Cobalt bearing minerals. 

. Gallium bearing minerals. 


. Glauconite. 


Graphite. 


. Indium bearing minerals. 

. Lithium bearing minerals. 

. Molybdenum bearing minerals. 

. Nickel bearing minerals. 

. Niobium bearing minerals. 

. Phosphate (without uranium). 

. Platinum group of elements bearing minerals. 


44. 


Potash. 


. Minerals of the "rare earths" group not containing Uranium and Thorium. 
. Rhenium bearing minerals. 

. Selenium bearing minerals. 

. Tantalum bearing minerals. 

. Tellurium bearing minerals. 

. Tin bearing minerals. 

. Titanium bearing minerals and ores (ilmenite, rutile and leucoxene). 

. Tungsten bearing minerals. 

. Vanadium bearing minerals. 


24. 


Zirconium bearing minerals and ores including zircon.". 


2. In the principal Act, after Sixth Schedule, the following shall be inserted, namely: — 


"THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
[ See sections 3 (aaa), |OBA(2) and l0BA(3)] 


Minerals 


l. Apatite. 


2. Beryl and other beryllium bearing minerals. 


3. Cadmium bearing minerals. 


4. Cobalt bearing minerals. 


5. Copper bearing minerals. 


Insertion of 
new Seventh 
Schedule. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part पी. 


6. Diamond. 

7. Gold. 

8. Graphite. 

9. Indium bearing minerals. 

0. Lead bearing minerals. 

ll. Lithium bearing minerals. 

2. Molybdenum bearing minerals. 

3. Niobium bearing minerals. 

4. Nickel bearing minerals. 

5. Potash. 

6. Platinum group of elements bearing minerals. 
7. Minerals of 'rare earths' group. 

8. Rhenium bearing minerals. 

9. Rock Phosphate. 

20. Selenium. 

2. Silver. 

22. Tantalum bearing minerals. 

23. Tellurium bearing minerals. 

24. Tin bearing minerals. 

25. Titanium bearing minerals and ores (ilmenite, rutile and leucoxene). 
26. Tungsten bearing minerals. 

27. Vanadium bearing minerals. 

28. Zinc bearing minerals. 

29. Zirconium bearing minerals and ores including zircon.". 


DR. REETA VASISHTA, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


CORRIGENDA 
THE BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2023 
No. L0 or 2023 


In the BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2023 (0 OF 2023), as 
published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II Section, l, dated the 3rd August, 2023, 
Issue No. 3,— 


(i) in page 2, line 4l, for ‘‘refferred”, read ‘‘referred”’; 
(i) in page 4, line I7, for ““Biodivesity”, read ““Biodiversity”’; 
(ii) in page 5, line 6, for ““Pachayati’’, read “‘Panchayati”’; 


(iv) inpage 8, line 3, for ‘““Commitee’’, read “‘Committee”’; 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(v) in page 8, line 22, for “‘affiairs”, read “‘affairs”’; 
(vi) in page 8, line 3, for “sustainble’’, read ‘‘sustainable”’; 
(vil) in page 8, line 39, for “‘princiapal”, read “principal”; 
(viii) in page , line 25, for ‘“‘as prescribed”’, read “‘as may be prescribed”’; 
(ix) in page 2, line l0, for “‘veriety”, read “‘variety”’; 
(x) in page I2, line l7, for “‘veriety”, read “‘variety”’; 
(0) in page 2, line 20, for “‘veriety”, read “‘variety”’; 
(xii) in page 2, line 26, for “‘substiututed”, read “‘substituted’’; 
(xiii) in page I3, line |, for “prinicpal”’, read “‘principal”’; 
(xiv) in page I3, line Ll, for “princiapl’’, read “principal”; 
(xv) in page I3, line 34, for “‘penalities”, read “penalties”; 


(xvi) in page |4, line 3, for ‘‘accordance the”, read “‘accordance with the’’. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-0054. 


Kshitiz हि 
Dat: 20230840 
Mohan Giscasosa0 


MGIPMRND—273GI(S3)—09-08-2023. 


