रजिस्ट्री We Slo एल"---(एन)04/0007/2003---26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


प्यारत 
The Gazette of Gudia 


GO oM. -ZT. Wet. -37.-3032026-27438 
CG-DL-E-3032026-27438 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग I[— खण्ड | 
PART II — Section | 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


संग 8] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, मार्च 30, 2026/ चैत्र 9, 948 (शक) 
No. 8] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, MARCH 30, 2026/CHAITRA 9, 948 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 30th March, 2026/Chaitra 9, 948 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
30th March, 2026 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE TRANSGENDER PERSONS (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS) 
AMENDMENT ACT, 2026 
(No. 3 or 2026) 
[30th March, 2026] 


An Act to amend the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 209. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (!) This Act may be called the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Short title and 
Amendment Act, 2026. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


40 of 209. 2. In section 2 of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 20l9 Amendment 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),— of section:2. 


(z) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely::— 


Amendment 
of section 4. 
Amendment of 
section 6. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


‘(a) “appropriate Government” means— 


(i) in relation to the Central Government or any 
establishment wholly or substantially financed by _ that 
Government, the Central Government; 


(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment 
wholly or substantially financed by that Government, or any local 
authority within a State, the State Government; 


(iii) in relation to a Union territory or any establishment 
wholly or substantially financed by the Central Government in 
that Union territory, the Administrator thereof appointed under 
article 239 of the Constitution or such authority as may be 
specified by the Central Government;’; 


(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(aa) “authority” means a medical board, headed by a Chief Medical 
Officer or a Deputy Chief Medical Officer, as may be appointed by the 
Central Government, State Government or Union _ territory 
Administration;’; 


(iii) clause (2) shall be omitted; 
(iv) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(k) “transgender person” means— 


(i) a person having such socio-cultural identities as kinner, 
hijra, aravani and jogta, or eunuch, or a person with intersex 
variations specified below or a person who, at birth, has a 
congenital variation in one or more of the following sex 
characteristics as compared to male or female development:— 


(a) primary sexual characteristics; 
(8) external genitalia; 

(c) chromosomal patterns; 

(d) gonadal development; 


(e) endogenous hormone production or response, or 
such other medical conditions; or 


(ii) any person or child who has been, by force, allurement, 
inducement, deceit or undue influence, either with or without 
consent, compelled to assume, adopt, or outwardly present a 
transgender identity, by mutilation, emasculation, castration, 
amputation, or any surgical, chemical, or hormonal procedure or 
otherwise: 


Provided that it shall not include, nor shall ever have been so 
included, persons with different sexual orientations and self-perceived 
sexual identities. ’. 


3. In section 4 of the principal Act, sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
4. In section 6 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “District Magistrate”, the words 
“District Magistrate, after examining the recommendation of the authority 
and, if he considers either necessary or desirable, after taking the assistance of 
other medical experts” shall be substituted; 


SEC. ] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(6) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“ (4) The person who has been issued a certificate of identity under 
sub-section (/) and is so declared as a transgender person within the 
definition under this Act shall be entitled to change the first name in the 
birth certificate and all other official documents relating to the identity 
of such person.”. 


5. In section 7 of the principal Act,— Amendment of 
section 7. 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “such person may”, the words “such 
person shall” shall be substituted; 


(6) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(I[A) The medical institution in which the person who has 
undergone surgery to change gender, either as male or female, shall 
furnish the details of such person to the concerned District Magistrate 
and the authority in such form and manner as may be prescribed.” 


(c) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) A person referred to in sub-section (/) shall also make an 
application to the District Magistrate who shall, on receipt of an application 
along with the certificate issued by the Medical Superintendent or Chief 
Medical Officer, and on being satisfied with the correctness of such 
certificate, issue a certificate indicating change in gender in such form and 
manner and within such time, as may be prescribed.”; 


(d) sub-section (3) and the proviso shall be omitted. 


6. In section l6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (f), the Amendment of 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:— section 6. 
“(f) representatives of the State Governments and Union territories 
Administration, by rotation, one each from North, South, East, West and 
North-East regions, not below the rank of Director in the concerned Ministry 
or Department, to be nominated by the Central Government, Members, 
ex Officio; 
7. For section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitution of 
substituted, namely:— new section for 
section I8. 
“|8. Whoever,— Offences and 
penalties. 


(a) compels or entices a transgender person to indulge in the act of 
forced or bonded labour other than any compulsory service for public 
purposes imposed by Government, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 
which may extend to two years and with fine; 


(6) denies a transgender person the right of passage to a public 
place or obstructs such person from using or having access to a public 
place to which other members have access to or a right to use, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to two years and with fine; 


(c) forces or causes a transgender person to leave household, 
village or other place of residence, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 
which may extend to two years and with fine; 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(व) harms or injures or endangers the life, safety, health or 
well-being, whether mental or physical, of a transgender person or tends 
to do acts including causing physical abuse, sexual abuse, verbal and 
emotional abuse and economic abuse, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 
which may extend to two years and with fine; 


(e) kidnaps or abducts any adult person and causes— 


(i) grievous hurt to such person, whether by mutilation, 
emasculation, castration, amputation, or any surgical, chemical, or 
hormonal procedure; or 


(ii) permanent or severe injury to the body or bodily 
functions of such person, 


with the intent of, or in the course of, compelling such person to assume, 
adopt, or outwardly present a transgender identity against the will or 
consent of such person, whether by force, allurement, deceit, undue 
influence or otherwise, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend 
to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not 
be less than two lakh rupees; 


(f) kidnaps or abducts any child and causes— 


(i) grievous hurt to such child, whether by mutilation, 
emasculation, castration, amputation, or any surgical, chemical, or 
hormonal procedure; or 


(ii) permanent or severe injury to the body or bodily 
functions of such child, 


with the intent of, or in the course of, compelling such child to assume, 
adopt, or outwardly present a transgender identity, whether by force, 
allurement, deceit, undue influence or otherwise, shall be punishable 
with rigorous imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which 
shall not be less than five lakh rupees; 


(g) by force, threat, coercion, allurement, deception, inducement, 
or undue influence— 


(0) compels any person, whether or not such person is a 
transgender person, to dress, present, or conduct themselves 
outwardly as a transgender person against the will of such person; and 


(ii) employs, uses, or causes such person to engage in 
begging, solicitation, servitude, or any other form of forced or 
bonded labour while so presenting, 


shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than five years but which may extend to ten years, and shall 
also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees; and 


(A) by force, threat, coercion, allurement, deception, inducement, 
undue influence or otherwise— 


(i) compels any child, whether or not such child is a 
transgender person, to dress, present, or conduct themselves 
outwardly as a transgender person; and 


(ii) employs, uses, or causes such child to engage in begging, 
solicitation, servitude, or any other form of forced or bonded 
labour while so presenting, 


SEC. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than ten years but which may extend to fourteen years, and shall 
also be liable to fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees.”. 


8. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— Amendment of 
हि है section 22. 
(a) in clause (2), after the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (/)”, 


the words, brackets, figure and letter “and the form and manner of details to 
be furnished by the medical institution under sub-section (/A),” shall be 
inserted; 


(b) in clause (d), the word “revised” shall be omitted. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-0054. 


MOHAN 
MGIPMRND—699GI—30-03-2026. 


