रजिस्ट्री सं" Ste Teie—(TA)04/0007/2003—23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


The Gazette of Gudia 


GSH. -Sl. Wet. -37.-2082023-248044 
CG-DL-E-2082023-248044 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग त-- ars 
PART II — Section i 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


we 23] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, अगस्त I, 2023/ श्रावण 20, 945 (शक) 
No. 23] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, AUGUST 44, 2023/SRAVANA 20, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the ith August, 2023/Sravana 20, 945 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
iith August, 2023 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS (AMENDMENT) 
ACT, 2023 


No. 20 oF 2023 
[ith August, 2023.] 


An Act further to amend the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 969. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (4) This Act may be called the Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Short title and 
Act, 2023. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


8 of 969. 2. Throughout the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 969 (hereinafter referred Construction 
to as the principal Act), for the word “Registrar-General”, wherever it occurs, the words °F references 


४ G हे : f certai 
“Registrar General of India” shall be substituted. one 
expressions by 


certain other 
expressions. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Amendment 3. In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
f section 2. 
Mees (i) clause (4) shall be re-numbered as clause (ab) thereof, and before clause (ab) 


as so re-numbered, the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(a) “Aadhaar number” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in 
clause (a) of section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other 
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 206; 8 of 206. 


(aa) “adoption” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (2) 
of section 2 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 205;’; 2 of 206. 


(ii) clause (b) shall be re-numbered as clause (ba) thereof, and before clause (ba) 
as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(b) “database” means the organised collection of data, generally stored 
and accessed in electronic form from a computer network;’. 


Amendment 4. Insection 3 of the principal Act,— 


f section 3. a है है . G sod 
ear (i) in the marginal heading, for the words “Registrar-General, India”, the words 


“Registrar General of India” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in sub-section (l), for the words “Registrar-General, India”, the words 
“Registrar General of India” shall be substituted; 


(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words “and submit”, the words “and the database 
of registered births and deaths and submit” shall be substituted; 


(iv) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(4) The Registrar General of India shall maintain the database of 
registered births and deaths at the National level and it shall be obligatory upon 
the Chief Registrars and the Registrars to share the data of registered births and 
deaths to such database. 


(5) Subject to the proviso to sub-section (7) of section 7 and with the 
prior approval of the Central Government, the database of registered births and 
deaths maintained under sub-section (4) may, on request, be made available to 
the authorities dealing with the preparation or maintenance of database relating 
to— 

(a) population register; 

(b) electoral rolls; 

(c) Aadhaar number; 

(d) ration card; 

(e) passport; 

(f) driving licence; 

(g) property registration; and 

(h) such other databases at the National level as may be notified, 


and the authority shall inform the action taken, within such period as may be 
notified from time to time, to the Central Government: 


Provided that the preparation or maintenance of database relating to 
electoral rolls in clause (b) shall be without prejudice to the provisions of the 
Representation of the People Act, 950.”. 43 of 950. 


Amendment 5. In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections 
of section 4... shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(5) The Chief Registrar shall take steps to register births or deaths and maintain 
a unified database of registered births and deaths at the State level by using the 
portal as approved by the Registrar General of India and it shall be obligatory upon 
the Registrars to share the data of registered births and deaths to such database. 


Sec. L] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(6) Subject to the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 7 and with the prior 
approval of the State Government, the database of registered births and deaths 
maintained under sub-section (5) at the State level may, on request, be made available 
to the authority dealing with other databases at the State level and the authority shall 
inform action taken, within such period as may be notified from time to time, to the 
State Government: 


Provided that the preparation or maintenance of database relating to electoral 
rolls shall be without prejudice to the provisions of the Representation of the People 
43 of 950. Act, 950.”. 
6. In section 7 of the principal Act,— Amendment 
of section 7. 


(i) in sub-section (2),— 


(a) after the words “enter in the register maintained”, the words 
“, electronically or otherwise,” shall be inserted; 


(b) after the word and figure “section 9”, the words “in respect of births 
and deaths which has taken place in his jurisdiction” shall be inserted; 


(ii) in sub-section (5),— 


(a) for the words “appoint Sub-Registrars and”, the words “appoint 
Sub-Registrars and, in the event of any disaster or epidemic, appoint Special 
Sub-Registrars” shall be substituted; 


(b) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 
‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expressions,— 


(i) “disaster” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in 


53 of 2005. clause (d) of section 2 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005; 
(ii) “epidemic” means the epidemic referred to in the Epidemic 
3 of 897. Diseases Act, 897.’. 
7. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (l),— Amendment 


of section 8. 
(i) in the opening portion,— 


(a) for the words “orally or in writing”, the words “orally or in writing 
with signature” shall be substituted; 


(b) after the words “several particulars”, the words “including the Aadhaar 
number of parents and the informant, if available, in case of birth,” shall be 
inserted; 


(ii) in clause (a), the word “male” shall be omitted; 
(iii) after clause (a), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(aa) in respect of non-institutional adoption, the adoptive parents; 


(ab) in respect of birth of a child to a single parent or unwed mother from 
her womb, the parent; 


(ac) in respect of birth of a child through surrogacy, the biological parent;”; 
(iv) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(da) in respect of a child who is taken on adoption from the Specialised 
Adoption Agency, the person in-charge of the Specialised Adoption Agency. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “Specialised 
Adoption Agency” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (57) 
2 of 206. of section 2 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 205; 


Amendment 
of section 0. 


Amendment 
of section ]. 


Substitution 
of new 

section for 
section 2. 


Certificate of 
registration 
of births or 
deaths. 


Amendment 
of section 3. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(db) in respect of an orphan or abandoned child or surrendered child in 
any child care institution, the person in-charge or caretaker of the child care 
institution. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expressions 
“abandoned child” or “child care institution” or “orphan” or “surrendered 
child” shall have the same meanings as respectively assigned to them in 
clauses (), (2), (42) and (60) of section 2 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, 205; 


(dc) in respect of birth of a child through surrogacy in a surrogacy clinic, 
the person in-charge of the surrogacy clinic. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this clause, the expressions 
“surrogacy” and “surrogacy clinic” shall have the same meanings as 
respectively assigned to them in clauses (zd) and (ze) of sub-section () of 
section 2 of the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 202;’. 


8. In section 0 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (2) and (3), the following 


sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(2) Where death occurs in any medical institution providing specialised 
treatment or general treatment, every such institution, irrespective of ownership, 
shall, free of charge, provide a certificate of the cause of death, including the history 
of illness, if any, signed by the medical practitioner who attended that person during 
his recent illness to the Registrar in such form as may be prescribed and provide a 
copy of such certificate to the nearest relative. 


(3) In the event of death of any person occurring in any place other than 
medical institution, and such person was, during his recent illness, attended to by a 
medical practitioner, such medical practitioner shall, after the death of that person, 
free of charge, forthwith issue, a certificate of the cause of death, including the 
history of illness, if any, to the person required under this Act to give information 
concerning the death in such form as may be prescribed, and the person, on receipt of 
the certificate, shall deliver the same to the Registrar at the time of giving information of 
the death as required under this Act.”. 


9. In section I! of the principal Act, for the words “place of abode, and, if he cannot 


write”, the words “place of abode and put his signature thereto, and, if he cannot write” 
shall be substituted. 


40. For section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


“2. The Registrar shall, as soon as the registration of a birth or death has been 
completed, but not later than seven days, give, free of charge, electronically or 
otherwise under his signature, to the person who gives information under section 8 or 
section 9, a certificate extracted from the register relating to such birth or death in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed.”. 


il. In section 3 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (2) and (3), the following 


sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(2) Any birth or death of which delayed information is given to the Registrar 
after thirty days but within one year of its occurrence, shall be registered only with 
the written permission of the District Registrar or such other authority, on payment of 
such fee and on production of self-attested document in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(3) Any birth or death of which delayed information is given to the Registrar 
after one year of its occurrence, shall be registered only on an order made by a 


2 of 20I6. 


47 of 202. 


2 of 974. 


Sec. L] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate or by an Executive Magistrate 
authorised by the District Magistrate, having jurisdiction over the area where the 
birth or death has taken place, after verifying the correctness of the birth or death and 
on payment of such fee as may be prescribed. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “Executive 
Magistrate” means the Executive Magistrate appointed under sub-section (4) of 
section 20 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973.’. 


i2. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (), after the words “register of 
births and deaths”, the words “, electronically or otherwise,” shall be inserted. 


3. In section 7 of the principal Act,— 


(i) in sub-section (), for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(b) obtain, electronically or otherwise, a certificate of birth or death from 
such register and issued in such form and manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that no certificate relating to any death, issued to any person, shall disclose 
the particulars regarding the cause of death as entered in the register.”; 


(ii) in sub-section (2), for the word “extracts” occurring at both the places, the 
word “certificates” shall be substituted; 


(iii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, the certificate referred to in sub-section (2) or section 2, shall be 
used to prove the date and place of birth of a person who is born on or after the 
date of commencement of the Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) 
Act, 2023, for the purposes of— 


(a) admission to an educational institution; 
(b) issuance of a driving licence; 

(c) preparation of a voter list; 

(d) registration of a marriage; 


(e) appointment to a post in the Central Government or State 
Government or a local body or public sector undertaking or in any 
statutory or autonomous body under the Central Government or State 
Government; 


(f) issuance of a passport; 
(g) issuance of an Aadhaar number; and 


(h) any other purpose as may be determined by the Central 
Government.”. 


4. In section 8 of the principal Act, for the words “by the District Registrar”, the 
words “in general or special order by the Chief Registrar” shall be substituted. 


5. In section 23 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (2),— 


(i) in the opening portion, for the words “Any person”, the words, brackets, 
figure and letter “Any person, except the person specified in sub-section (A),” 
shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (c), after the words “thumb mark”, the words “or signature, 
as the case may be,” shall be inserted; 


Amendment 
of section 6. 


Amendment 
of section 7. 


Amendment 
of section 8. 


Amendment 
of section 23. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(iii) in the long line, for the words “fifty rupees”, the words “two hundred 
and fifty rupees” shall be substituted; 


(b) after sub-section (), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“ (3) Whoever, being a person specified in clauses (9), (c), (d), (da), (db), 
(dc) and (९) of sub-section () of section 8,— 
(a) fails without reasonable cause to give any information which it 
is his duty to give; or 


(b) gives or causes to be given, for the purpose of being inserted in 
any register of births and deaths, any information which he knows or 
believes to be false regarding any of the particulars required to be known 
and registered; or 


(c) refuses to write his name, description and place of abode or to 
put his thumb mark or signature in the register as required under section , 


shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees in 
respect of each birth or death.”; 
(c) in sub-section (2),— 

(i) after the words “in his jurisdiction”, the words and figures “or to give 
a certificate to the informant under section 2” shall be inserted; 


(ii) for the words “fifty rupees”, the words “two hundred and fifty rupees” 
shall be substituted; 


(d) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(3) Any person who neglects or refuses to provide or issue a certificate 
as required under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 0 or any person 
neglects or refuses to deliver such certificate to the Registrar, shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.”; 


(e) in sub-section (4),— 


(i) for the words “Any Person”, the words, brackets, figure and letter 
“Any person except the person specified in sub-section (IA)” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) for the words “ten rupees”, the words “two hundred and fifty rupees” 
shall be substituted; 


(f) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(4A) Any person specified in sub-section (IA), who, without reasonable 
cause, contravenes any provision of this Act for the contravention of which no 
penalty is provided for in this section, shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees in respect of each birth or death.”; 


(g) in sub-section (5), for the words and figures “Code of Criminal 


Procedure, 898”, the words and figures “Code of Criminal Procedure, 973” shall be 5 of 898. 
substituted. 2 of 974. 
Amendment 6. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the portion beginning 


of section 24... with the words “proceedings under this Act” and ending with the words “fifty rupees”, the 
following shall be substituted, namely:— 


“proceedings under this Act,— 


(a) accept from the person, except the person specified in sub-section (7A) 
of section 23, who has committed or is reasonably suspected of having 
committed an offence under this Act, by way of composition of such offence a 
sum of money not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees; 


Sec. L] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY vi 


(9) accept from the person specified in sub-section (A) of section 23, 
who has committed or is reasonably suspected of having committed an offence 
under this Act, by way of composition of such offence a sum of money not 
exceeding one thousand rupees in respect of each birth or death.”. 


i7. After section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“254A. () Any person aggrieved by any action or order of,— 
(i) the Registrar, may prefer an appeal to the District Registrar; or 


(ii) the District Registrar, may prefer an appeal to the Chief Registrar, 


within a period of thirty days from the date of such action or receipt of such order, as 
the case may be, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The District Registrar or the Chief Registrar, as the case may be, shall decide 
the appeal referred to in sub-section () within a period of ninety days from the date 
of preferring of such appeal.”. 


8. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) for clauses (d), (e) and (f), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(d) the form of certificate of the cause of death under sub-sections (2) 
and (3) of section 0; 


(e) the form and manner in which the certificate of birth or death may be 
given under section 2; 


(f) the authority which may grant permission for registration of a birth or 
death and the form and manner of production of self-attested document under 
sub-section (2) of section 3;”; 


(ii) after clause (g), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ga) the form and manner in which the certificate of birth or death may be 
obtained under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 7; 


(gb) the form and manner of preferring an appeal under sub-section (7) of 
section 25A;”; 


(iii) in clause (i), for the word “extracts”, the word “certificates” shall be 
substituted. 


DR. REETA VASISHTA, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


Insertion of new 
section 25A. 


Appeal. 


Amendment 
of section 30. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-i0002 


AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-0054. 


MGIPMRND—286GI(S3)—-08-2023. 


Kshitiz  stysiones 


by Kshitiz Mohan 


Date: 2023098. 
Mohan caress 0530" 


