रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. 0. L.-33004/99 


Vika = राजपत्र 
Che Gazette of india 


Or. sh. -S7. Wet. -37.-78092025-266242 
CG-DL-E-8092025-266242 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 


भाग W—avs ३----उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं. 405] नई दिल्ली, बृहस्पतिवार, सितम्बर i8, 2025/भाद्र 27, 947 
No. 405] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER I8, 2025/BHADRA 27, 947 


गृह मंत्रालय 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्‍ली, 48 सितम्बर, 2025 
का.आ. 4222(3).--केंद्रीय सरकार ने, विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिनियम, ॥967 
(967 का 37) (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात Sat अधिनियम कहा गया है) की धारा 3 की उपधारा (॥) द्वारा प्रदत्त 
शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग ॥, खंड 3, 
उपखंड (ii), तारीख 77 मार्च, 2024 में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 7774(3), तारीख ॥4 मार्च, 2025 
(जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिसूचना कहा गया है) द्वारा जम्मू और कश्मीर इत्तिहादुल मुस्लिमीन (जेके आईएम) 
को विधिविरुद्ध संगम के रूप में घोषित किया था; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने, उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा () के साथ पठित धारा 5 की STURT 
(॥) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग II, 


694 GI/2025 (i) 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


खंड 3, उपखंड (i), तारीख 3 अप्रैल, 2025 में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 4577(30), तारीख 3 अप्रैल, 
2025 द्वारा विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिकरण कहा गया है) का 
गठन किया था, जिसमें दिल्ली उच्च न्यायालय के न्यायाधीश, न्यायमूर्ति सचिन दत्ता थे; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने Gad अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (॥) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग 
करते हुए, उक्त अधिसूचना को न्यायनिर्णयन के प्रयोजन के लिए कि कया जम्मू और कश्मीर इत्तिहादुल मुस्लिमीन 
(जेकेआईएम) को विधिविरुद्ध संगम के रूप में घोषित किए जाने का पर्याप्त कारण था या नहीं, तारीख 8 अप्रैल, 
2025 को Sad अधिकरण को निर्दिष्ट किया गया था; 

और, उक्त अधिकरण ने, Sat अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (3) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग 
करते हुए, Sad अधिसूचना में की गई घोषणा की पुष्टि करते हुए तारीख 3 सितंबर, 2025 को एक आदेश पारित 
किया था। 

अत:, अब, केंद्रीय सरकार sad अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (4) के अनुसरण में, उक्त अधिकरण 
के आदेश को प्रकाशित करती है, अर्थात्‌:- 


---: अधिकरण का आदेश अंग्रेजी भाग में छपा है :--- 


(न्यायमूर्ति सचिन दत्ता) 
विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण”" 


[फा. सं. 4077/72/2025-04.ag.-VA. Uy, aH] 


राजीव कुमार, संयुक्त सचिव 


[भाग ---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 8th September, 2025 


S.O. 4222(E).— Whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by 
sub-section (l) of section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 967 (37 of 967) 
(hereinafter referred to as the said Act), declared the Jammu and Kashmir Ittihadul Muslimeen 
(JKIM) as an unlawful association, vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry 
of Home Affairs, number S.O. 4(E), dated the " March, 2025 (hereinafter referred to as 
the said notification) published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub- 
section (ii), dated the l March, 2025; 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub- 
section (l) of section 5 read with sub-section (l) of section 4 of the said Act constituted the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the said Tribunal) 
consisting of Justice Sachin Datta, Judge, High Court of Delhi vide notification of the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, number S.O. 577(B), dated the 3™ April, 
2025, published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (ii), dated 
the 3 April, 2025; 

And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub- 
section (l) of section 4 of the said Act referred the said notification to the said Tribunal on 8" 
April, 2025 for the purpose of adjudicating whether or not there was sufficient cause for 


declaring the Jammu and Kashmir Ittihadul Muslimeen (JKIM) as an unlawful association; 


And, whereas, the said Tribunal in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of 
section 4 of the said Act, passed an order on 34 September, 2025, confirming the declaration 


made in the said notification. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Now, therefore, in pursuance of sub-section (4) of section 4 of the said Act, the 


Central Government hereby publishes the order of the said Tribunal, namely: - 


«“ UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL, 
NEW DELHI 


Date of Decision: 0377 September, 2025 


IN THE MATTER OF: 
Gazette Notification No. 5.0. l4(E) dated " March, 2025 declaring the Jammu 


and Kashmir Ittihadul Muslimeen (JKIM) as unlawful association under the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 967. 


AND IN THE MATTER OF: 


Reference under Section 4() of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, !967 made 
to this Tribunal by the Government of India through Ministry of Home Affairs vide 
Gazette Notification No. 5.0. 577 (8) dated 374 April, 2025. 


Present: Ms. Aishwarya Bhati (ASG) along with Ms. Poornima Singh, Ms.Shreya 
Jain, Mr. Ketan Paul, Mr. Sharath N. Nambiar, Mr. Shantnu Sharma, 
Mr. Aakarsh Mishra and Mr. Arkaj Kumar, Advocates for Union of 
India. 


Mr. Parth Awasthi, Advocate, Advocate for Union Territory of Jammu & 
Kashmir along with Mr. Suhaib Ashraf, Chief Prosecuting Officer, J&K. 


Mr. Ibrahim Hussain Wani and Ms. Divya Tripathi, Advocates for JKIM. 


Dr. Sumedh Kumar Sethi, Registrar (DHJS) Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Tribunal. 


Ms. Samridhi Vats, Ms. Sanjana Lal and Ms. Sanya Sikri, Law 
Researchers. 


Mr. Manoj Kumar Singh, Asstt. Director, Mr. Antariksh Singh Rathore, 
Asstt. Commandant and Mr. Sameer Shukla, Asstt. Section Officer, 
Ministry of Home Affairs. 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


ORDER 


Ls This order answers reference under Section 4(3) read with Section 3(3) of 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 967 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’ 
or ‘UAPA’, for short) made to this Tribunal constituted vide Gazette Notification 
No. S.0.577 (E) dated 3™ April, 2025 under Section 5() of the Act issued by the 
Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, for adjudicating whether or not 
there is sufficient cause for declaring Jammu and Kashmir Ittihadul Muslimeen, 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘JKIM? or ‘association’ or ‘organization’ in 
short) as an “unlawful association’. 


I. THE NOTIFICATION 

2; The Central Government published Gazette Notification (extra-ordinary) 
No. S.O. 4 (E) dated l" March, 2025 in exercise of powers conferred under 
Section 3() of the Act and declared JKIM to be an “unlawful association”. A copy 
of the said notification has been sent to this Tribunal, as contemplated under Rule 


5(i) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, !968 (“UAP Rules’ in short). 
The said notification dated l" March, 2025 reads as under:- 


“S.O. 7774(70).---- Whereas, the Jammu and Kashmir Ittihadul 
Muslimeen (hereinafter referred to as the JKIM), chaired by Masroor 
Abbas Ansari is indulging in unlawful activities, which are prejudicial 
to the integrity, sovereignty and security of the country; 


And, whereas, members of the JKIM have remained involved in 
supporting terrorist activities and anti-India propaganda for fuelling 
secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir; 


And, whereas, the leaders and members of JKIM have been 
involved in mobilising funds for perpetrating unlawful activities, 
including supporting secessionist, separatist and terrorist activities in 
Jammu and Kashmir; 


And, whereas, the JKIM and its members by their activities 
show sheer disrespect towards the constitutional authority and 
constitutional set up of the country; 


And whereas, JKIM is involved in promoting and aiding the 
secession of Jammu and Kashmir from India by indulging in anti- 
national and subversive activities; sowing seeds of discontent among 
the people; inciting people to destabilise law and order; encouraging 
the use of arms to cause secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the 
Union of India and promoting hatred against the established 
Government; 


And, whereas, the Central Government is of the opinion that if 
there is no immediate curb or control of unlawful activities of the 
Jammu and Kashmir Ittihadul Muslimeen (JKIM), it will use this 
opportunity to — 


(i) continue with the anti-national activities which are detrimental 
to the territorial integrity, security and sovereignty of the 
country; 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(ii) continue advocating the secession of Jammu and Kashmir from 
the Union of India while disputing its accession to the Union of 
India; and 


(iii) continue propagating false narrative and_anti-national 
sentiments among the people of Jammu and Kashmir with the 
intention to cause disaffection against India and disrupt public 
order; 


And, whereas, the Central Government for the above- 
mentioned reasons is firmly of the opinion that having regard to the 
activities of the Jammu and Kashmir Ittihadul Muslimeen (JKIM), it is 
necessary to declare the Jammu and Kashmir Ittihadul Muslimeen 
(JKIM) as an unlawful association with immediate effect; 


Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub- 
section (/) of section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, /967 
(37 of /7967) the Central Government hereby declares the Jammu and 
Kashmir Ittihadul Muslimeen (JKIM) as an unlawful association. 


The Central Government, having regard to the above 
circumstances, is of firm opinion that it is necessary to declare the 
Jammu and Kashmir Ittihadul Muslimeen (JKIM) as an unlawful 
association with immediate effect, and accordingly, in exercise of the 
powers conferred by the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 3 of the 
said Act, the Central Government hereby directs that this notification 
shall, subject to any order that may be made under section 4 of the 
said Act, have effect for a period of five years from the date of its 
publication in the Official Gazette.” 


3. As can be seen, the notification also enumerates the reasons/ circumstances, 
as contemplated under proviso to Section 3(3) of the Act, for declaring the 


association as unlawful, with immediate effect. 


Yl. THEBACKGROUND NOTE 

4. Along with the reference to this Tribunal under Section 4 of the UAPA, the 
Central Government has submitted and filed before this Tribunal a background 
note, as contemplated under Rule 5(ii) of the UAP Rules, 968. 

Ds The background note states that JKIM is a Pakistan backed separatist 
organisation, currently headed by Masroor Abbas Ansari. JKIM has been a founder 
constituent of All Party Hurriyat Conference (hereinafter referred to as ‘APHC’ for 
short) (conglomerate of separatist outfits) and very proactive in fuelling 
secessionism and organizing separatist activities in Jammu and Kashmir 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘J & K’ for short). 

6. The background note gives a brief summary of the association and its 


activities which has been duly classified/ categorized hereunder. 


[भाग Ive 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 7 


i, Organisational History 

re As per the background note, JKIM was founded by a religious cleric Abbas 
Ansari in 962. JKIM’s founder Abbas Ansari was at the forefront in fueling and 
organizing anti-India protests in December 963, which had erupted after the 
alleged theft of holy relic from Hazratbal shrine, Srinagar. Because of his 
participation in anti-India demonstrations, Abbas Ansari was detained for a short 
period. After release, he continued to propagate secessionist views to mobilize 
Kashmiris in favour of the ‘right of self-determination’. It is also mentioned that 
Abbas Ansari was Chairman of APHC in 2003 and after the split, JAIM remained 
with All Party Hurriyat Conference- Ansari (APHC-A) faction. Further, 
representative of JKIM in Pakistanis Mir Tahir Masood. After the death of Abbas 
Ansari, his son, Masroor Abbas Ansari became the full-fledged president of the 


association. 

ii. Leadership/Office Bearers of JKIM 

8. As per the background note, JKIM has its central office located at Al-abbas 
Building, Medical College Road, Karanagar, Srinagar !9000, Jammu & Kashmir. 


Details of JKIM’s important prominent executives and office bearers are as under: 


Sl. | Name Designation Address Present 
No. whereabouts 
i. | Masroor President Khan Kai Sokhta, | Presently, he is 
Abbas Nawakadal, Police | residing at his 
Ansari Station-Safakadal, | own home. 
(S6yrs) Srinagar 
i. | Aga Syed | Vice President | Bota Kadal, Lal | He is residing 
Yousuf (However, Ittihadul | Bazaar, Srinagar at Lal Bazaar, 
Muslimeen has now | o/t/o Devar, | Srinagar. 
dismantled its core | Parihaspora, Pattan, 
committee) Baramulla 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


in. | Syed Ex-General Mir Mohalla, | He is residing 
Muzaffar | Secretary & | Gundi Khawaja | at his own 
Rizvi spokesperson, [(He | Qasim, Pattan, | home. 


has joined Jammu | Baramulla 
Kashmir Apni Party 
(JKAP)] in October, 
2023) 


iv. | Ghulam District President, | Hanziyara, Pattan, | He is residing 


Ahmad Baramulla Baramulla. at his own 
Malla home. 

v. | Mohd. District President, | Gulabpora, He is residing 
Qasim Bandipora Kawapora Bala, | at his own 
Kawa Police home. 

StationSumbal, 
Bandipora 

vi. | Mohd. Office caretaker, Chattabal, He is residing 
Shafi Ex-District Safakadal, Srinagar | at his own 
Wani President, Srinagar home. 


vii. | Ghulam District President, | Panzoo, Beerwah, | Currently at his 
Hassan Budgam Police Station | own home. 
Mir Khag, Budgam 


iii, Separatist Activities Indicating Minacious Nexus with Cross-border 
Agencies /Establishments 


9. The background note further states that JKIM has been giving impetus to the 
Pakistani narrative of propagating hatred and disaffection among the public of 
Jammu and Kashmir (hereinafter referred to as ‘J & K’ for short), against Indian 
state and perpetuating so called ‘resistance movement’ by spreading false narrative 


through literature, open letters, memoranda, press conferences, conferences, 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9 


seminars and meetings etc. and by arranging, organizing and coordinating rallies, 
protest demonstrations, hartals, stone-pelting and other violent means with a larger 
objective to secede J & K from Union of India (hereinafter referred to as ‘UOT’, for 
short). It continues to call Kashmir as an ‘International dispute’, terms Kashmir as 
‘Indian Occupied Kashmir’ and brands so called ‘Kashmir resistance’ as a religious 
movement, maintaining India as a ‘foreign occupant’. 

0. As per the background note, JKIM advocates Shia-Sunni unity for getting 
‘independence’ of Jammu & Kashmir from India. Association’s prime objective 
has been to secure so called ‘liberation’ and re-unification of Jammu & Kashmir, 
as it existed before 947. In pursuance of its objective, the association in 993 
joined APHC as a founder member and continued separatist activities to 
fulfill the Pakistani agenda of generating feeling of hatred and disaffection against 
India; and severing Jammu & Kashmir from UOI. 

ll. Further, according to JKIM, J & K is a disputed territory and requires UN 
intervention. It considers Kashmir as the ‘unfinished agenda of partition’ and is 


working on the strategy to favour Pakistan’s claim on J&K. 


iv. Anti-national Activities indicating Terrorist Linkages 


2. The background note further states that the people associated with this 
association have been glorifying terrorists, providing background support to 
terrorist outfits, propagating false narrative among masses, boycotting elections and 
inciting youth for violent activities. 

3. Further, JKIM was opposed to the move of the Government of India to 
hold political process in Jammu & Kashmir. The association was involved in anti- 
election campaign along with other constituents of APHC. Abbas Ansari along with 
other Hurriyat leaders renewed their pledge to take forward the APHC’s separatist 
agenda towards so called ‘liberation’ of Jammu & Kashmir from India. 

4.___ As per the background note, on the instruction of Mirwaiz Umar Farooq 
(Chairman, APHC-A), Abbas Ansari was at the fore front in organizing 
demonstrations of Shia solidarity with the ‘Separatist movement’ in September 


208 during celebration of Muharram where banners of Burhan Wani (Hizb-ul- 


0 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Mujahideen Commander, who was killed in July 206) were displayed by the Shia 
mourners. The banners were provided by Masroor Abbas Ansari with active support 
of Mirwaiz Umar Farooq. 

I5. It is stated that JKIM through various media outlets has been involved in 
anti-India and secessionist propaganda. Association’s ‘LinkedIn’ profile while 
promoting ‘freedom of Kashmir’ narrative calls for religion-based unity of masses. 
It further maintains that the people of the state are the sole masters of their mother 
land and are competent to determine the future status of their state. The profile 
stated that ‘freedom’ means people’s resistance to ‘forcible occupation’ of the State. 
6. | JKIM declares Kashmir issue as an unsettled international dispute which 
has threatened the very existence of Kashmiris as a nation besides endangering the 
peace and stability in South Asia. JKIM maintains that Jammu Kashmir State 
comprising ‘Indian occupied Kashmir’, Pakistani controlled parts i.e., ‘Azad 
Kashmir’ and Gilgit-Baltistan is geographically and politically one unit and no part 
of the state is constitutionally or legally a part of any country. While justifying the 
‘Right to self-determination of Kashmiris’, JKIM quotes the UN resolutions on its 
posts reaffirming the right of people living under foreign occupation for self- 
determination in accordance with UN Charter and international law. 

7. It is stated that the association has created its YouTube channel on 7th April 
2009, available at http://www.youtube.com/@lttihadul, mostly containing video 
speeches by Masroor Abbas Ansari, through which JKIM continues to perpetuate 
secessionism, extends support to terrorists, incites the youth of Kashmir against 


India and vilifies India and its security forces. 


y. Criminal Cases against JKIM’s activists 


8. As per the background note, complicity of JKIM cadres in criminal and anti- 
national activities is evident from the series of criminal cases that stand registered 
against them. Further, the cases registered against the JKIM activists/ members 
provide clinching evidence regarding their involvement in various unlawful 
activities. Details of the cases registered by the Government of J & K against JKIM, 


as mentioned in the background note, are given as under:- 


[भाग Il—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


l 


SI. 


FIR No. with 
section of law 


Name of 
accused in FIR 


Brief of the 
FIR 


Status of the 
case 


FIR No. 
23/987 u/s 
4(2) TADA (P) 
Act, 

Police Station 
Sheragarhi, 
Srinagar. 


Abbas Ansari 
(Patron, JKIM) 


On 04/07/987 
at Iqbal Park, 
Syed Ali Shah 
Geelani, Prof 
Abdul Gani 
Bhat, Abbas 
Ansar and others 
addressed a 
gathering and 
introduced MUF 
(Muslim United 
Front) 
candidates and 
provoked 
towards creating 
differences 
between 
communities and 
challenged the 
Indian Union. 
They also 
requested voters 
to vote for 
independent 
Kashmir etc. 


Charge 
sheeted on 
22/04/997 
before Addl. 
TADA Court 
Srinagar. 
Under Trial 


37/998 u/s 
88, 32 

RPC 32 at 
Police Station 
Nishat, Srinagar. 


Abbas Ansari 


On 2.2.998, 
accused persons 
namely Yasin 
Malik, Gh. Nabi 
Sumji, Prof. 
Abdul Gani 
Lone and Zayed 
Mir addressed a 
gathering at new 
Theed Harwan 
and exhorted 
people to 
boycott 
elections. 

They also 

raised anti- 
national slogans. 


Charge sheeted 
on 2/02/998 
in Srinagar 
District Court 
Under Trial. 


6/2000_ u/s 
53-B, 

20B RPC, 
Police Station 


Abbas Ansari 


On the Occasion 
of Eid-e-Milad- 
un-Nabi, accused 
persons SAS 


Charged 
Sheeted on 
28.2.2022 
Under Trial 


2 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Shaheed Gun], 
Srinagar 


Geelani and 
Abbas Ansari 
delivered anti- 
national speeches 
in the mosque at 
the Jehium 
Market Srinagar. 
They instigated 
people against 
the integrity and 
sovereignty of 
the country 

and asked them 
to be a part of 
the ongoing 
movement. 


FIR No. 

99/20 u/s 48, 
49, 336, 88, 
52 RPC 

Police Station 
Shaheedgunj, 
Srinagar 


Masroor Abbas 
Ansari 
(Chairman 
JKIM) and few 
others- 


a) Shafiq Ah Dar 
s/o Ali Mohd 
Dar r/o Khankah 
Moula, Srinagar 


b) Waseem 
Asgar Khan s/o 
Shabbir Hussain 
Khan r/o 
Khankah Moula, 
Srinagar 


c) Abid Hussain 
Dar s/o Shabir 
Hussain r/o 
Sharifabad 
Srinagar 


d) Amir khan 
s/o Mohd Afzal 
khan r/o Saribal 
Srinagar 
Masroor Abbas 
Ansari 
(Chairman 
JKIM) 


A mob led by 
Masroor Abbas 
Ansari and 
others at 
Jehangir Chowk 
Srinagar pelted 
stones on 
Security Forces 
deployed for 
Law and Order 
duties. The stone 
pelting resulted 
in the damage of 
government 
vehicles. 


Charge 

Sheeted on 
8/2/20] 
before 

Principal 
District 

Session Judge 
Srinagar. Under 
Trial 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


9. Referring to the above facts, circumstances and acts of the JKIM, it is stated 
that the same leads to the conclusion that this organisation is unceasingly working 
towards secession and separation of the State of J & K from the UOI. As per the 
background note, the association has glorified terrorists and provided background 
support to them and has continuously and actively encouraged separatist activities 
aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty, dis-harmony by promoting feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government and is indulging and acting in a 
manner prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Indian Union 
and therefore, the activities of JKIM fall within the purview of unlawful activities. 

vi. Declaration of JKIM as an Unlawful Association 

20. The background note states that keeping in view the severity of the situation 
and the unlawful activities by the organisation, the Central Government decided to 
declare JKIM as an unlawful association under the provisions of the Unlawful 


Activities (Prevention) Act, 967. 


HiIl. REPLY ON BEHALF OF THE ASSOCIATION 


2l. JKIM has filed a reply to the background note filed by the UOI. The 
allegations made in the background note are denied by the association on the 


following grounds:- 


i. JKIM is a religious organization 

22... Itis stated that JKIM is a religious orginasation, dealing exclusively with the 
religious matters as per Shia Sect of Islam and believes in peace and tranquility and 
above all, love and affection towards motherland (India). It is stated that JKIM never 
believed and does not indulge in any act of violence, intolerance, secessionist 
activities and it has never ever played any role against the integrity and sovereignty 


of India and it has faith in the Constitution and laws governing the field. 
ii. No extraordinary circumstances exist to issue the Notification 


23. — Itis stated that JKIM has been declared unlawful by the Central Government 


while exercising powers under proviso to Section 3 of UAPA. The said proviso, it 


4 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


is stated, deals with extraordinary circumstances and the reasons given in the Notice 
for invoking the said proviso are non-existent and irrelevant. Further, the object of 
JKIM has always remained lawful and means adopted for achieving such object has 
been and are legal and lawful. It is stated that there were no extraordinary 
circumstances which would have called for immediate action for declaring the 
association as unlawful association without affording any opportunity of being 
heard and without following the principles of natural justice. 

24. ‘It is stated that the reasons mentioned in the notification are prejudicial to 
integrity, sovereignty and security of the country. The grounds mentioned in the 
notification, it is stated, are vague, unjustified and irrelevant as being without 


specific details and/ or without any supporting material. 


iii, Non-supply of relevant material/ documents 

25. Areference has been made to Rule 5 of the UAP Rules 968 to state that all 
the facts forming the grounds specified on the basis of which the notification has 
been issued are to be supplied to the association. However, no such facts have been 
supplied or made available to the association. In the absence of furnishing the 
grounds on which the notification is based, the association is incapable of furnishing 
a detailed reply. 

26. It is stated that the claim of privilege claimed is misplaced. Blanket refusal 
to disclose any material is ‘to seek shield from disclosing material’. It is simply a 
case of no material against the association or material which is manipulated and 
unsustainable. It is stated that the association is being sought to be punished without 
supplying any relevant material. This, it is stated, is against the letter and spirit of 
constitutional guarantees and the principle of audi-alteram-partem and cannot be 
sustained in the eyes of law. 

27. Reliance is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of 
Jamaat-e-Islami Hind vs. Union of India, (/995) I SCC 428 to state that it is not 
all material which can be withheld by the central government. The purport of the 
judgment is that only the material which the central government considers against 
public interests to disclose, be withheld. It is stated that given the nature of the 
association, there would exist no material against the organisation which can be made 
basis for the impugned action, nor can disclosure of any alleged material be 


“against public interest”. 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


28. Reliance is also placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of 
Maneka Gandhi vs. UOT, (7976) I SCC 248, to state that the designated authority 
cannot ‘take shield under “against public interest” and it cannot be the sole judge to 
state what is against “public interest to disclose”’. In this regard reference is made 
to para 3 of the reply of UOI to the application filed by the association seeking 
supply of material. 

29. It is stated that in the absence of providing any material to the association 
except background note and notification dated .03.2025, the association is not in 


a position to furnish/ give proper and effective reply. 


iv. Brief History of JKIM 

30. 735 stated that after completing religious studies in Najaf Iraq in Shia Islam, 
Late M. Abbas returned to Kashmir in 4960 and founded monthly magazine 
“SAFEENA” to provide platform to all educated class and intellectuals, writers of 
Shia Community to express their views on socio-religious and economic problems 
faced in the community. It is stated that all these scholars, intellectuals and other 
well wishers of the Shia Community felt need to form an organisation and 
accordingly, in March 962, JKIM was founded by Late Moulana Mohammad 
Abbas Ansari (in short “M.A. Ansari’). The association was created after adopting 
a constitution which was completely democratic in nature and it also dabbled into 
politics to safeguard the rights of the Shia Community of Kashmir. 

3l. ‘It is stated that Shia and Sunni Unity was the main object of JKIM and also 
unity within Shia Community. JKIM mainly focused on the social and religious 
needs of the Shia Community and worked for introducing reforms in the 
Community in these fields. 

32. On the political front, it is stated, Late M.A. Ansari fought against the 
‘divisive’ policies of Govt. of J& K. He raised voice against Sheikh Mohammad 
Abdullah for ignoring Shia Community which led to his arrest. After a long drawn 


legal battle, Late M.A. Ansari was released and acquitted of all charges. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


९, JKIM’s activities are not anti-national in nature 


33. It is stated that it is wrong to characterize JKIM as Anti-peace as Late M.A. 
Asnari was consistent in rejecting/opposing violence and called for dialogue for 
peaceful solution of the problems. The following facts have been referred to 


demonstrate the same: 


(i) M. A. Ansari was one of the first Hurriyat Leaders to call for and lead 
formal talks with the Central Government, breaking a long-standing 
deadlock. In January 2004, M.A. Ansari led a five member Hurriyat 
delegation to New Delhi to meet the then Deputy Prime Minister Sh. L.K. 
Advani, marking the first official meeting between ‘separatist leaders’ and 
the Indian stage (sic) without preconditions. This move was hailed nationally 


and internationally as a watershed moment in Kashmir’s political landscape. 


(Emphasis Supplied) 


(ii) It is stated that M.A. Ansari’s peace-oriented politics earned him 
sharp criticism/backlash from  pro-Pakistan factions भाव radical 
separatists/hardliners and effigies of M.A. Ansari were also burnt accusing 
him of “selling out” and “betraying the resistance”. Also, M.A. Ansari’s 
moderate approach drew sharp criticism from Syed Ali Shah Geelani, 


causing deep fissures within ‘the separatist camp’. 


(Emphasis Supplied) 


(iii) It is stated that although the Hurriyat had a general policy of 
boycotting election, M.A. Ansari consistently called for reviewing this 
stance. He floated the idea of ‘conditional participation in election’ as a 
means to reassert political agency, which was again viciously attacked by 


hardliners. 


(Emphasis Supplied) 


(iv) M.A. Ansari’s role in defusing Hazratbal Crisis- It is stated that in 
October 993, the Hazratbal Shrine in Srinagar became the focal point of a 
tense standoff as approx. 50-70 armed militants had taken refuge within the 


shrine complex. In response, the Indian security forces laid siege to the area, 


[भाग Il—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण [7 


34. 


aiming to flush out the militants without causing damage to the sacred site. 
Amidst this precarious situation, M.A. Ansari emerged as a key figure to 
help to defuse the crisis. It is stated that his efforts averted a potential 
disaster. 

(v) Track II Diplomacy and civil Society Engagement-It is stated that in 
2002, Sh. Ram Jethmalani, senior lawyer, launched an informal peace 
initiative through the Kashmir Committee/Most Hurriyat leaders refused to 
engage but M.A. Ansari made a different choice. He welcomed Sh. 
Jethmalani and held frank, open discussions on the possibilities of peace and 
reconciliation. He defended his move, stating: “How can dialogue harm us? 
Dialogue is not surrender. It is the only way to explore solutions.” 


(Emphasis Supplied) 


(vi) In 2008, Amarnath Land Transfer ‘Controversy’ and during 200 
killing of 20 people, it was M.A. Ansari who clearly stated that stone pelting 
is not beneficial for anybody and gave a religious decree (Fatwa). 


It is stated that the above actions of M.A. Ansari were criticized by 


hardliners. Despite being pilloried by ‘hardliners’, M.A. Ansari never retracted 


his stance. Instead, he reiterated his belief in dialogue as the only route to justice 


and resolution. He often quoted Islamic teachings that emphasize peace over chaos, 


dialogue over violence, and dignity over blood shed. It is stated that his position 


invited not just verbal attacks, but significant political isolation ‘within the 


separatist ecosystem.’ 


655 


(Emphasis Supplied) 


It is stated that from the above facts, it is clear that M.A. Ansari was not a 


stooge of anyone and that he rejected the radical ideology. It is stated that he 


belonged to a rare class of leaders who would always speak truth and support it at 


all costs. The allegation of being anti-peace or anti-national is not only unjust, 


unfair, the same is profoundly ironic, for it was M.A. Ansari who stuck his neck out 


in the most volatile political environment to pursue peace and dialogue. Reference 


in this regard has been made to the following publications:- 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“| Hurriyat names teams for talks with Advani “Times of India, I5" 
January 2004. 


2. “Five member Huriyat team for talks with Advani” Rediff News, 
5 January 2004 


3. “First ever-talks between Hurriyat, L.K. Advani end on positive 
note.” India Today, 2 February 2004 


4. “Geelani warns against Hurriyat Chairman Maulana Abbas 
Ansari’s move to meet L.K. Advani.” India Today, 8 Deccember 
2003. 


5. “Dialogue Details,” Kashmir Life, 27 December, 2004 
6. “The battle within.” Frontline, | August 2003.” 


36. It is stated that after August 209, all political activities of the association 
led by Late Molvi Abbas Ansari were stopped and after his death, in August, 
2022, JKIM has functioned solely as a religious organisation without any political 
activity. It is stated that the present Acting President of the association- Maulana 
Masroor Abbas Ansari, who is son of M.A. Ansari, is a religious scholar who has 
never indulged in any anti-national or anti social activity. 

(Emphasis Supplied) 
37. It is further stated that in September 2023, JKIM was dissolved as some of 
its members were not following the objectives of the organisation and were 
indulging in anti party activities. It is stated that from September 2023, there is no 
association structure, as all its functions are performed by the Acting President 
Maulana Masroor Abbas Ansari till democratic body for association is elected. It is 
stated that to label the association as unlawful, when no association exists because 
of the dissolution in September 2023 is in fact abuse of process of law, which is 
quite strange and ironic and bereft of any factual position. 
38. At the end, it is prayed that after going through the material collected/filed 
by the UOI against the association, this Tribunal may direct the same to be supplied 


to the association for effective response/reply. 


vi. Concept of Shia School of Thoughts 
39. ‘It is pointed out that under Shia School of Thought, there is a concept of 
VillaytiFaqui whereby religious scholars are to be approached by the common Shia 


population for their religious issues i.e. guidelines regarding marriage, sermons, 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9 


mehar, divorce, hibba and other related matters. These religious scholars provide 
guidance to common masses in accordance with teachings of Ahlulbait (a.s.), Shia 
School of Thought. The connection of common masses with religious scholars is 


not any political activity and any act against the country. 


vii. No Cross-border connection 

40. It is submitted that the association is a Socio-religious and _ political 
organisation working for upliftment of Shia Community. It is denied that Tahir 
Masood is representative of JKIM in Pakistan and the association has any cross- 
border connection. In fact, association has always been target of pro-Pakistan 
elements. Several workers of the association have been assassinated by Pakistan 
based organisations. 

viii, No Linked In Profile 

4]. It is denied that the association has any LinkedIn profile. It is stated that 
one profile listed as ‘Media Coordinator at JKIM’ appears to be a fake personal 
profile. 


ix. No anti-national video on YouTube Channel of JKIM 


42. It is stated that in conformity with applicable laws and adhering to content 
regulations, YouTube channel for the association has been created. The said channel 
has never been banned or designated as illegal or anti-national. It is stated that this 
YouTube channel provides information about religious sermons, political activities 


and social work of the association. 


x. Cases referred to in the background note are irrelevant 
43. It is stated that the three out of total four FIRs referred to in the background 


note, were against Late Molvi Abbas Ansari, and the same are very old. It is stated 
that these cases are irrelevant and stale for the purposes of the present 
proceedings. It is stated that due to death of Molvi Abbas Ansari in August 2022, 
all these cases stand abated. 

44... It is stated that one FIR which was registered against the present Acting 
President stands disposed off and no conclusion can be drawn that the association 


is unlawful. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


IV. STATUTORY PROVISIONS 


45. Section 2 (0) and (p) of the UAPA, read as follows:- 


“2. Definitions. — (7) In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires, - 

XXX XXX XXX 
(०) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or association, 
means any action taken by such individual or association (whether by 
committing an act or by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or 
by visible representation or otherwise), - 


(i) Which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring 
about, on any ground whatsoever, the cession of a part of the 
territory of India or, the secession of a part of the territory of 
India from the Union, or which incites any individual or group 
of individuals to bring about such cession or secession; or 


(ii) Which disclaims, questions, disrupts, or is intended to 
disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India; or 


(tii) | Which causes or is intended to cause disaffection 


against India; 


(p) “unlawful association” means any association, - 


(i) which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which 
encourages or aids persons to undertake any unlawful activity, 
or of which the members undertake such activity; or 


(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable 
under Section ॥353-4 or Section 733-8 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 78609), or which encourages or aids persons to 
undertake any such activity, or of which the members 
undertake any such activity: 


Provided that nothing contained in sub-clause (ii), shall apply 


to the State of Jammu and Kashmir”’. 


46. Section 2(0) of the Act defines ‘unlawful activity’. It means “any action 
taken” by an association or an individual of the kind mentioned in clauses (i), (ii) 
and (iii) of the said sub-section. Any action taken has reference to and must be of 
the kind stipulated in and covered by clauses (0), (ii) or (iii). Action can be either 
written or spoken, by sign or by visible representation or even otherwise. Clause 
(i) refers to “action taken” with the intent or which supports any claim for secession 
or cession of any part of India or incites any individual or group of individuals to 
bring about secession or cession. Clause (ii) refers to “action taken” which has the 
effect of disclaiming, questioning, disrupting or intending to disrupt the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. Clause (iii) refers to “action taken” 


which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India. 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 2] 


47. Unlawful association has been defined in Section 2(p) of the Act and consists 
of two parts; (i) and (ii). Part (i) refers to unlawful activity defined in Section 2(0) 
and encompasses associations which have the object that encourages or even aids 
persons to undertake the said activity. The last part of Part (i) widens the definition 
of the term “unlawful association” to include an association of which members 
undertake unlawful activity. In a way, therefore, the association is vicariously liable 
and can be regarded as an unlawful association if members of an association 


undertake unlawful activity. 


V. NATURE AND SCOPE OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE 
PRESENT TRIBUNAL 


48. The nature of the proceedings before this Tribunal and the scope of inquiry 
in the present proceedings have been laid down by the Supreme Court in Jamaat- 
e-Islami Hind vs. Union of India, (/995) I SCC 428 in the specific context of the 
provisions of the UAPA, 967. The proceedings before this Tribunal are governed 
by the Code of Civil Procedure as set out in Section 9 of UAPA, 967. The standard 
of proof is the standard prescribed by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e- Islami 
Hind (Supra). This lis has to be decided by objectively examining which version 
is more acceptable and credible. In this regard, reference may be made to 


following observations in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra): 


#7, Section 4 deals with reference to the Tribunal. Sub-section (/) 
requires the Central Government to refer the notification issued under 
sub-section (7) of Section 3 to the Tribunal “for the purpose of 
adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the 
association unlawful”. The purpose of making the reference to the 
Tribunal is an adjudication by the Tribunal of the existence of 
sufficient cause for making the declaration. The words ‘adjudicating’ 
and “sufficient cause” in the context are of significance. Sub-section 
(2) requires the Tribunal, on receipt of the reference, to call upon the 
association affected “by notice in writing to show cause” why the 
association should not be declared unlawful. This requirement would 
be meaningless unless there is effective notice of the basis on which 
the declaration is made and a reasonable opportunity to show cause 
against the same. Sub-section (3) prescribes an inquiry by the 
Tribunal, in the manner specified, after considering the cause shown 
to the said notice. The Tribunal may also call for such other 
information as it may consider necessary from the Central 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Government or the association to decide whether or not there is 
sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. The 
Tribunal is required to make an order which it may deem fit “either 
confirming the declaration made in the notification or cancelling the 
same”. The nature of inquiry contemplated by the Tribunal requires it 
to weigh the material on which the notification under sub-section (/) 
of Section 3 is issued by the Central Government, the cause shown by 
the Association in_reply to the notice issued to _it and take into 
consideration such further information which it may call for, to decide 
the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the Association to_be 
unlawful. The entire procedure _ contemplates का objective 
determination _made_on_the_basis_of _material_placed_before_the 
Tribunal_by_the_two_sides; and_the inquiry is in the nature of 
adjudication of a lis between two parties, the outcome _of which 
depends on the weight of the material produced by them. Credibility of 
the material should, ordinarily, be capable of objective assessment. 
The decision to be made by the Tribunal is “whether or not there is 
sufficient cause for declaring the Association unlawful”. Such a 
determination requires the Tribunal to reach the conclusion that the 
material to support the declaration outweighs the material against it 
and the additional weight to support the declaration is sufficient to 
sustain it. The test of greater probability appears to be the pragmatic 
test applicable in the context.” 


(emphasis supplied) 


49. On the question of confidential information that is sought to be withheld, the 
Supreme Court emphasized that the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose 
of assessing credibility of the information and the Tribunal should satisfy itself 
whether it can safely rely upon it. This was necessary as in certain situations, source 
of information or disclosure of full particulars may be against public interest. Such 
a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of information and its source 
in public interest, enables the Tribunal to test the credibility of confidential 
information for objectively deciding the reference. It was emphasized that the 
unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine in nature and, 
therefore, material or information for various reasons may require confidentiality. 
Disclosure, it was held, can jeopardize criminal cases pending investigation and 
trial. 

50. | On the question of nature and type of evidence, which can be relied upon by 
the Tribunal, the Supreme Court referred to Rule 3 of UAP Rules, 968. Rule 3(/) 
stipulates that the Tribunal subject to sub-rule (2) shall follow, “as far as 


practicable’, the rules of evidence laid down in Indian Evidence Act. 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 23 


a Ie With regard to confidentiality and with regard to nature of evidence, 
reference can be made to the following observations in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind 
(Supra):- 


“22. ...The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in 
the strict sense. Such a procedure would ensure that the decision of 
the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in controversy 
after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, 
without abdicating its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the 
Central Government. Such a course would satisfy the minimum 
requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of 
each case, while protecting the rights of the association and its 
members, without jeopardizing the public interest. This would also 
ensure that the process of adjudication is not denuded of its content 
and the decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by it 
on all points in controversy after adjudication and not by mere 
acceptance of the opinion already formed by the Central Government. 
23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher 7. Lou B. Brewer [408 
US 477, 33 L Ed 2d 484 (/9/22)7 the United States Supreme Court, in 
a case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum requirements to 
be followed, as under: (L Ed pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due 
process. They include (a) written notice of the claimed violations of 
parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of evidence against him; (c) 
opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and 
documentary evidence; (d) the right to confront and cross-examine 
adverse witnesses (unless the hearing officer specifically finds good 
cause for not allowing confrontation); (e) a ‘neutral and detached’ 
hearing body such as a traditional parole board, members of which 
need not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement by 
the factfinders as to the evidence relied on and reasons for revoking 
parole. We emphasise there is no thought to equate this second stage 
of parole revocation to a criminal prosecution in any sense. It is a 
narrow inquiry; the process should be flexible enough to consider 
evidence including letters, affidavits, and other material that would 
not be admissible in an adversary criminal trial. ”. 


XXX XXX XXX 


26. The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a 
show-cause notice, of existence of sufficient cause to justify the 
declaration must necessarily imply and import into the inquiry, the 
minimum requirement of natural justice to ensure that the decision of 
the Tribunal is its own opinion, formed on the entire available 
material, and not a mere imprimatur of the Tribunal affixed to the 
opinion of the Central Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a fair 
procedure to prevent the vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the 
fair procedure in a given case, would depend on the materials 
constituting the factual foundation of the notification and the manner 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


in which the Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to be 
determined by the Tribunal keeping in view the nature of its scrutiny, 
the minimum requirement of natural justice, the fact that the materials 
in such matters are not confined to legal evidence in the strict sense, 
and that the scrutiny is not a criminal trial. The Tribunal should 
form its opinion on all the points in controversy after assessing 
for itself the credibility of the material relating to it, even though it 
may not be disclosed to the association, if the public interest so 
requires.” 


(Emphasis supplied) 


52. The present Tribunal, constituted under the UAPA, has been vested with 
certain powers and the procedure to be adopted by it under Section 5 read with 


Section 9 of the said Act, which are reproduced as under: 


“5. Tribunal. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute, as and when necessary, a tribunal to be 
known as the "Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal" consisting 
of one person, to be appointed by the Central Government: Provided 
that no person shall be so appointed unless he is a Judge of a High 
Court. 


(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) 
occurs in the office of the presiding officer of the Tribunal, then, the 
Central Government shall appoint another person in accordance with 
the provisions of this section to fill the vacancy and the proceedings 
may be continued before the Tribunal from the stage at which the 
vacancy is filled. 


(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Tribunal 
such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of its functions under 
this Act. 


(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be 
defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


(5) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the Tribunal shall have 
power to regulate its own procedure in all matters arising out of the 
discharge of its functions including the place or places at which it will 
hold its sittings. 


(6) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this 
Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, /9068 (5 of 7906), while trying a suit, in respect of 
the following matters, namely:- 


(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any 
witness and examining him on oath; 


(b) the discovery and production of any document or 
other material object producible as evidence; 


(c)the reception of evidence on affidavits; 


(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court 
or office; 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 25 


(e)the issuing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 


(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections /93 and 228 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 76609) and the Tribunal shall be deemed 
to be a civil court for the purposes of section /935 and Chapter XXVI 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, /696 (5 of /6898,. ? 


“9. Procedure to be followed in the disposal of applications under 
this Act.—Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, the 
procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding any inquiry under 
sub-section (3) of section 4 or by a Court of the District Judge in 
disposing of any application under sub-section 


(4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section 8 shall, so far as may be, 
be the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, /996 (5 of 
/908) for the investigation of claims and the decision of the Tribunal 
or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall be final.” 


53. Further, under Section 4(l) of Act, the Central Government refers the 
notification (issued under Section 3() of the Act) to the Tribunal for “adjudicating” 
whether or not there is “sufficient cause” for declaring the association unlawful. 
Section 4(2) requires issuance of notice to the association affected to show cause 
why the association should not be declared as unlawful. Section 4(3) mandates an 
inquiry in the manner specified in Section 9 after calling for such information as 
may be necessary from Central Government or from office bearers or members of 
the association. The Tribunal under Section 4(3) is required to adjudicate and make 
an order, as it may deem fit, either confirming the declaration made in the 
notification or cancelling the same. 

54. As regards the evidentiary standards, reference is apposite to the 
observations in a report under Section 4(3) of UAPA, authored by Hon’ble Mr. 
Justice Sanjiv Khanna in the context of ban on SIMI (dated 04.08.200), the same is 
as under: 


“62. Section 9 uses the words "so far as may be” The words signify that 
the Legislature's intent does-not mandate that the Code should be 
followed in its entirety, section by section, order by order or. Word by 
word. Use of the words "so far as may be" ensure sufficient flexibility 
and freedom to the Tribunal to follow and regulate its own procedure 
which should be in consonance with, the procedure stipulated as per 
the- Code. The procedure prescribed in the Code can be modified and 
changed keeping in view the practical requirements, need and 
necessity. This may be required in view of the object and purpose of 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


the Act and practical problems which may be faced in case the 
requirements of the Code are strictly and entirely followed, in Abdul 
Haji Mohd. Versus R. R. Naik AIR 7957 Bom, 440, it was held that 
the, words "as far as practicable" must be construed to mean to the 
extent it is practicable. Bombay, High Court in a subsequent decision 
Keshrimal Jeevli Shah and another versus Bank of Maharashira 
and others, 2004 (722) Company cases 83I has held that whenever 
words like “as far as possible" or as far as practicable etc. are used, 
the legislative intent is not to apply all the provisions in their entirety, 
but the provision have to be applied as far “as possible" and subject 
to such modifications as the context as well as the object and purpose 
of the enactment require. The setting in which the words occur, the 
statute in which they occur, the object and purpose behind the 
enactment and mischief which is sought to be taken care of and 
remedy which are relevant in determining to what extent and subject 
to what modifications the required enactment should be applied. 


63. Section 5(5) of the Act states that the Tribunal shall have power to 
regulate its procedure in matters’ arising out of discharge of its 
functions including the place/places at which it will hold sittings. 
Therefore, the aforesaid sub-Section gives flexibility and freedom to 
the Tribunal to fix and regulate the procedure. To be followed subject 
of course to the requirement of fair and just hearing. Sub-section (6) 
to Section 5 further stipulates that the Tribunal while making the 
enquiry will have the power of a civil court in respect of matters 
stipulated in clauses (a)to (e). As per Section 4(3) of the Act, the 
Tribunal has to hold an enquiry within a period of six months from the 
date of issue of Notification under sub-section (/) of Section 3. There 
is no provision under which this time can be extended. The use of the 
expression “as far as may be” in Section 9 of the Act and the power 
given to the Tribunal to regulate its own procedure in Section 5(5) of 
the Act indicates that the strict procedure as stipulated and applicable 
to trial of civil suits is not envisaged or required. One will also have 
to keep in mind the time limit of six months within which the Tribunal 
is required to complete the enquiry and answer the reference: A 
summary procedure or a hybrid procedure which may be akin or 
similar to and in consonance with the procedure for adjudication of 
claims in the Code can be followed. 


64.The above ratio and reasoning will equally apply to Rule 3(4) 
which uses the expression "as far as practicable" the rules of evidence, 
as laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, will apply. It may be noticed 
that Rule ३3(7) uses the words "rules of evidence" and does not use 
the words "provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 7672 would 
apply". Therefore general principles or rules of evidence underlying 
the Evidence Act are applicable to the extent practicable. In these 
circumstances, I do not think that the Act or the Rules envisage and 
require an elaborate, and a detailed procedure for summoning of each 
and every witness mentioned in the charge-sheets, presence and 
examination of witnesses present at the time of preparation of 
panchanama or all police officers who were involved in the 
investigation. Summoning of record will be counter-productive, 
cumbersome and time consuming. There will be concerns about safety 
and security of the persons appearing as well as the records which 
may have to be summoned or produced. Normally, cases relied upon 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 27 


by the central government will be cases of serious cases and the 
chargesheet etc. will be voluminous and number of witnesses also 
substantial. The nature of material in-most-cases where unlawful 
activity is alleged would include oral evidence, documentary 
evidence; as well as confidential inputs based on information received 
from intelligence. These cases can have inter-State or trans-border 
involvement and a-large number of persons are normally involved in 
conspiracy. This aspect cannot be ignored as proceedings before the 
Tribunal have to be pragmatic and the provisions of the Code and 
the Evidence Act have to be applied to the extent possible and 
practicable.” 


(Emphasis supplied) 
55. It is in the light of the aforesaid principles that this Tribunal is to examine 
whether there is sufficient cause for declaring JKIM as an unlawful association. It 
needs to be borne in mind that the inquiry before this Tribunal does not entail 
adjudicating the guilt of the accused but rather assessing the adequacy of material 


before the Central Government to designate JKIM as an unlawful association. 
VI. PROCEDURE FOLLOWED BY THIS TRIBUNAL 


56. Consequently, upon due consideration of the aforesaid Notification No. S.O. 
4(E) dated .03.2025 and Notification No.S.O. 577(E) dated 03.04.2025, this 
Tribunal held a preliminary hearing on 6.04.2025, whereupon on a consideration 
of the material placed on record by the Central Government, notice under Section 
4(2) of the Act was issued to the association-JKIM to show cause, within a period 
of 30 days, as to why it should not be declared as an unlawful association. The 
notices issued were given due publicity as required under Section 3(4) of the Act. 

57. The Gazette Notification dated !.03.2025 was also published in a National 
Newspapers (all India Edition), in English. The said notification was also published 
in local newspaper/s in vernacular language having wide circulation in the Union 
Territory of J & K where the activities of the JKIM were or are believed to be 
ordinarily carried out. The method of affixation and proclamation by beating of 
drums, as well as loudspeakers, was also adopted. Proclamation was made at the 
last known address of the JKIM along with all their leaders, members, factions, 


wings and front organisation as well as that of their principal office bearers. 


28 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


58. The notice issued by the Tribunal along with the Gazette Notification dated 
.03.2025 was displayed on the notice board of the Deputy Commissioner/District 
Magistrate/Tehsildar in all the district headquarters of the U.T. where the activities 
of the association were or are believed to be ordinarily carried on. Help of All-India 
Radio and electronic media of the State edition was also taken. Announcements 
were made through radio/electronic media at prime time. Notices were also pasted 
at the prominent places in the U.T. where the activities of the association were or 
are believed to be carried on. 

59. Apart from above, notices were also issued to the Union Territory of J & K 
through its Chief Secretary. 

60. The Registrar attached to the Tribunal was directed to ensure the compliance 
of the service of notice issued to JKIM in the manner indicated. The Registrar was 
directed to file an independent report in that behalf before the next date of hearing 
i.e. 6.05.2025. 

6l. Accordingly, the Union Territory of J & K filed its affidavit along with 
supporting documents contained in Envelopes-Hl to H7 containing therein 
Annexures GI to G7 as proof of service, affirming that service had been effected as 
directed by the Tribunal on 6.04.2025 affirming that service had been affected as 
directed by the Tribunal. On 6.05.2025, learned Additional Solicitor General 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘ASG’ for short) for the UOI and learned counsel for the 
Union Territory of J & K were heard and this Tribunal recorded the satisfaction as 
regards effecting of service in compliance of the order dated 6.04.2025. 

62. The Registrar, vide his report dated 5.05.2025, also confirmed service of 
notice issued by the Tribunal. 

63. During the course of hearing on 6.05.2025, Mr. Ibrahim Hussain Wani, 
Advocate entered appearance on behalf of the association stated to be authorised by 
Masroor Abbas Ansari, Chairperson of the association. He also filed his 
vakalatnama. He pointed out that he had moved an application on behalf of the 
association praying as under: 


“this Hon’ble Tribunal may be pleased to direct the Registry of this 
Hon’ble Tribunal to_supply/make_available/furnish_to_Jammu_and 


Kashmir Itehadul_Muslimeen (JKIM) the material/copy of reference 


submitted by the Central Government before this Hon’ble Tribunal 


alongwith _all_documents/copies, which_has_been_made_basis_ for 


issuance of Notification No. S.O. ॥//4 (E) वबरढार्व ॥/.०3.2025, 


alongwith other connected material, so that the affected Organization 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 29 


is able to respond/submit reply effectively as directed vide Order 
(supra). The material be supplied through the Counsel engaged on 
payment of the requisite fee/costs.”’ 


64. However, since the copy of the aforesaid application was not supplied to the 
learned counsel for the UOI/U.T. of J & K, Mr. Wani was directed to supply the 
same and the learned counsel for the UOI and the Union Territory of J & K were 
directed to file their reply. Accordingly, the matter was fixed on 23.05.2025 for 
further proceedings. 

65. The matter was taken up on 23.05.2025 to decide the application filed on 
behalf of the association seeking supply of the copy of reference submitted by the 
Central Government alongwith all documents/copies, which has been made basis 
for issuance of the notification alongwith other connected material. Vide order dated 
23.05.2025, the said application was disposed of by this Tribunal passing a detailed 
order, and the Registrar of the Tribunal was directed to supply the copy of the 
background note as also a copy of the notification issued under Section 3() of the 
UAPA, [967 to the counsel for the concerned association. 

66. Learned counsel for the association sought time to file its reply/response to 
the show cause notice issued under Section 4(2) of UAPA, 967 within a period of 
0 days. The UOI was directed to file its affidavit/s along with documents in support 
of the grounds on which the concerned association was declared as unlawful. 
Learned ASG submitted that the affidavits of all the witnesses from the Union 
Territory of Jammu & Kashmir would be filed on or before 20.06.2025. The matter 
was posted for 20.06.2025 for directions. 

67. On 20.06.2025, as directed, the association through its counsel filed its reply, 
along with annexures, to the show cause notice issued under Section 4(2) of UAPA, 
967. The same was directed to be taken on record and the UOI was directed to file 
its rejoinder, if any, within one week. Further, the UOI filed two affidavits of 


evidence of the following two officers from the Union Territory of J & K: 


7?9५५-] - Mr. Parvaiz Ahmad, Inspector, SHO, PS Nishat, Srinagar, Kashmir. 
PW-2 — Mr. Dheeraj Kumar, SDPO, Shaheed Gunj, Srinagar, Kashmir. 


30 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


68. The said affidavits were directed to be taken on record. Learned counsel for 
the UOI stated that affidavits of remaining witnesses (including an official of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs) would be filed on or before 0.07.2025. Learned counsel 
for the association was also directed to file its list of witnesses, positively before the 
next date of hearing. Learned counsel for the association submitted that affidavits 
of evidence on behalf of its witnesses would also be filed on or before .07.2025. 
The matter was fixed for directions and for fixing schedule of examination of the 
respective witnesses of the parties on 0.07.2025. 

69. On 0.07.2025, as per the directions, the UOI filed affidavit of one more 
witness i.e. PW-3 Mr. Liyaqat Ali, Inspector, CID, J & K, Srinagar alongwith 
supporting documents and a pen drive. It was submitted on behalf of the UOI that 
apart from the affidavits of three witnesses that had already been filed, the UOI 
would produce one witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). It was 
submitted that the affidavit of the said witness would be filed after the recording of 
the evidence of the other witnesses. The UOI was directed to file affidavit of the 
said witness from MHA latest by 4.07.2025. 

70. However, neither any list of witnesses nor any affidavit of evidence was filed 
on behalf of the association. Learned counsel for the association submitted that the 
list of witnesses along with evidence affidavits of such witnesses would be 
filed/emailed latest by 07.07.2025. Accordingly, with the consent of the counsel for 
the parties, the proceedings were fixed for recording of evidence of the parties at 
Srinagar for !.07.2025 and 2.07.2025. Accordingly, a public notice was issued 
for the hearing at Srinagar. 

eee On .07.2025, the following three witnesses of the UOI were examined and 
cross-examined at Srinagar: 


l. Mr. Parvaiz. Ahmad, Inspector, SHO, PS | ?7४७-। 
Nishat, Srinagar, Kashmir. 


22: Mr. Dheeraj Kumar, SDPO, Shaheed Gunj, | PW-2 
Srinagar, Kashmir. 


3. Mr. Liyagat Ali, Inspector, CID, J & K, | PW-3 
Srinagar 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3] 


Ade, As directed, learned counsel for the association emailed/filed a list of four 
(04) witnesses along with evidence affidavits of the said witnesses. 

33. On the directions of this Tribunal, e-mail and postal address at which any 
interested party could contact the Tribunal, was published in the public notice with 
regard to the hearing of the Tribunal on .07.2025 and 2.07.2025 at Srinagar. In 
terms thereof, two emails dated 09.07.2025 were received from email ID 
<dangertiger09@gmail.com> and email ID <advishraf@gmail.com> attaching 
same PDF file containing around 24 affidavits. However, none of the deponents of 
the said affidavits was present before the Tribunal on .07.2025. Accordingly, the 
deponents of the said affidavits were directed to remain present on 2.07.2025 at 
:00 AM. 

74. The Registrar of this Tribunal was directed to send a reply to the said emails 
dated 09.07.2025, enclosing the copy of the order dated !.07.2025 containing the 
relevant directions to apprise the senders. The Registrar was also directed to supply 
copies of these affidavits to the learned counsel for the UOI and the learned counsel 
for J & K as well as the learned counsel for the association. 

75. With the consent of the parties, the matter was fixed for examination and 
cross-examination of the witnesses of the association on 2.07.2025 at .00 A.M. 
at Srinagar. 

76. On 2.07.2025, the following four (04) witnesses of the association were 


examined and cross-examined at Srinagar: 


l. | Mr. Masroor Abbass Ansari s/o Mohd. Abbass | २५४-] 
Ansari r/o Srinagar, J&K 


2. | Master Ghulam Hassan Ganai s/o Ghulam Ahmad | RW-2 
Ganai r/o Srinagar, J&K 


3. | Mr. Syed Muzaffar Rizvi s/o Late Syed Ibrahim | RW-3 
Rizvi r/o Magam, J&K 


4. | Haji Mohammad Shafi Ganai s/o Late Abul | RW-4 
Rehman Ganai r/o Srinagar, J&K 


32 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


as With the consent of the parties, it was recorded that the aforesaid witnesses 
of the association had been examined and cross-examined with the understanding 
that in case, after recording of evidence of the remaining witness/es from the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, if any additional evidence would be required to be 
adduced by the association, it would be at liberty to move an appropriate application 
in this regard. 

78. As directed vide order dated |.07.2025, out of total 24 public witnesses, 2] 
public witnesses were present on 2.07.2025. Details of the said public witnesses 


are as follows- 


SI. Name 

No. 

l. Mohammad Akbar Dar 
2; Zawat Mohd. Yusuf Sofi 
3. Ghulam Hassan Sofi 

4. Hakim Mohd. Yousuf 

5. Zahid Hussain Khwaja 
0. | Hakim Mohd. Magbool 
ve Nasir Ali Dar 

8. | : Ishfaq Hussain Parray 
Ca Haji Mohd. Ameen Ashraf 


0. Mohammad Yousuf Dar 
l. Ghulam Mohd. Joo 


(2: Inaam Hussain 

3. | Haji Ghulam Mohuddin Sofi 
4. Mohd. Mohsin Sofi 

LS: Mohammad Abass Parray 
6. | Amjad Ali Malik 

7. Mohammad Qasim Dar 

8. Ghulam Mustafa Bhat 

9. Ali Mohammad Malik 

20. Shabir Hussain Dar 

Zt Ghulam Hassan Dar 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 33 


79. The aforesaid 2] public witnesses were directed to appear before the 
Registrar of the Tribunal on that day itself after completion of the proceedings. The 
Registrar was directed to check/ verify their affidavit/s and their photo identity 
card/s and submit a report. In view thereof, the Registrar filed his report dated 
2.07.2025 pointing out discrepancies in the affidavits/photo identity cards. 


80. Following three public witnesses were not present on |2.07.2025: 


22. Mudasir Ahmad Sofi 
23. Hakim Masood UI Hassan 
24. Shabeer Hussain Bhat 


8. Since perusal of the affidavits of the aforesaid deponents revealed that each 
affidavit was just a two-page affidavit containing similar averments, the aforesaid 
24 deponents/public witnesses were directed to file supplementary affidavit/s, 
within a period of two weeks, specifically disclosing:- 

(i) Whether they are/have been members of JKIM? If so, during what 

period? 

(ii) Whether they have had any connection with JKIM or its Office 

Bearers? 

(iii) Whether they are/have been actively involved in the activities of 

JKIM and if so, in what capacity? 

(iv) Whether they have been receiving any correspondence or instructions 


from JKIM or from its Office Bearers? 


82. Learned ASG submitted that the UOI would not cross-examine the aforesaid 
deponents. However, the UOI sought to reserve its right to make appropriate 
submissions as regards the relevance of the said affidavits. 

83. At request of learned counsel for the association, the next date fixed for 
recording of evidence of the remaining witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs 
(PW-4) i.e. |6.07.2025, was cancelled and the matter was fixed for the recordal of 


statement and cross-examination of the said witness on 28.07.2025. 


34 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


84. On 28.07.2025, PW-4 Mr. Atul Kumar Shahi, Commandant (CT), CTCR 
Division, MHA was examined and cross-examined and the evidence stood 
concluded. In compliance of order dated 2.07.2025, 2 public witnesses/ 
deponents who had appeared before the Tribunal on the said date, filed their 
supplementary affidavits. The said supplementary affidavits were taken on record. 
85. Learned ASG appearing for UOI submitted that she would make appropriate 
submissions as regards the relevance of the affidavits/supplementary affidavits of 
the public witnesses at the time of final arguments. 

86. With the consent of the parties, the matter was listed for arguments on 
05.08.2025. 

87. On 05.08.2025, learned ASG for the UOI concluded her arguments. The 
matter was listed on 06.08.2025 for fixing dates/ schedule for arguments on behalf 
of the association. 

88. On 06.08.2025, with the consent of the parties, the matter was fixed for 
22.08.2025 and 23.08.2025 at Srinagar to hear arguments on behalf of the 
association and for rejoinder arguments, if any. 

89. On 22.08.2025, learned counsel for the association concluded his arguments. 
On 23.08.2025, rejoinder arguments were heard on behalf of the UOI and the 


association. The matter was reserved for orders. 


VU. EVIDENCE ADDUCED BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL ON BEHALF OF 
THE CENTRAL —_ GOVERNMENT, — INCLUDING CROSS 
EXAMINATION OF THE CONCERNED WITNESSES 


PW-I 


90. Inspector Parvaiz Ahmad (PW-l) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-I/A; 
deposed that he is posted as a Station House Officer at Police Station Nishat, 
Jammu & Kashmir and is the Holding Investigating Officer in respect of FIR 
No.37/998. 

9]. He stated that FIR ]२०.३//ध996 was registered on 25.02.998 at P.S. Nishat, 
Srinagar, J&K, u/S 32-B of the Jammu and Kashmir Representative of the People 
Act, 957, Section 47 of Criminal Law Amendment Act, Section 43 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, !967 and Section 88 of Ranbir Penal Code, 
989. The said FIR was constituted on account of the fact that on 2.02.998, a 


specially designated official (Kaar-e- Khas) posted at P. S. Nishat, Srinagar, J&K, as 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 35 


part of his government duty went to New Theed Harwan for observing the situation 
and witnessed that the founder of JKIM, namely, Mohammad Abbas Ansari along 
with other separatist leaders of the APHC, namely, Mohammad Yaseen Malik, 
Professor Ab Ghani Bhat, Ghulam Nabi Sumji and Javid Ahmad Mir arrived at 
New Theed Harwan and delivered speeches exhorting the masses to boycott the 


parliamentary elections and undertook actions to stop the electoral candidates and 


their workers from holding the electoral process with an objective to overthrow the 


incumbent Government. They raised anti-India slogans and exhorted the public for 


maintaining unity against the Government till the freedom of J & K is achieved, 
ending the dominance of India in J & K. Further, they instigated the general public 
to create law and order situation to foil the upcoming elections and asked the public 
to use their own resources and resort to the use of force to restrain the electoral 
candidates and their workers from holding election campaigns regardless of the 


party. These individuals also asked the public to work shoulder to shoulder with 


them to end the alleged ‘illegal occupation’ of J & K. The aim of the speech was to 


instigate the public against India and spread hate amongst the people to propagate 
separatist and secessionist sentiments. 

92. He relied upon the true copies of FIR 7]२०.३३/998; the statements of the 
relevant witnesses recorded under Section 6] of Cr.P.C. and the charge-sheet dated 
05.04.2005 filed pursuant to FIR No. 37/l998alongwith their true English 
Translations which have been exhibited as Ex. 7७]/] to ?7७४।/4७ in the present 
proceedings. 

93. He stated that the delay in filing of chargesheet was attributable to the 
significant challenges faced while investigating the case against the prominent 
separatist leaders of J & K and due to volatile situation in the valley orchestrated by 
the said separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering 
support from across the border and terrorist organisations and any attempt to probe 
these separatist organisations and their leaders triggered widespread unrest and 


turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in concluding the investigations. 


36 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


94. He stated from his personal experience, gained during the course of his 
service that, it is manifest that JKIM and its leaders have been actively and 
continuously but covertly and discreetly working for secession of J & K from the 
UOI and Cession of the territory to Pakistan by promoting and orchestrating 
feelings of enemity and hatred in the masses against the Government of India. 
Evidently, the aforesaid is against the interest and integreity of the nation. The said 
conduct is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Union of India 
and hence the ban upon the association is necessary and correct. 

95. Mr. Ibrahim Hussain Wani, learned counsel for the association cross 


examined PW-I! on |!.07.2025. The same is reproduced hereunder: 


“T joined the Police Department in the year 2002. I have been serving 
in the Police Department for more than 22 years. The organization 
with regard to which I have deposed in my affidavit, was born in 
/967. 


In para 2 of my affidavit, I have stated that I have read the 
background note on JKIM prepared by the Central Government. I have 
also referred to the fact that I have perused the “material available”. 
The “material” referred to by me includes the records of the FIR with 
regard to which I have deposed as also the information gathered by me 
during the course of my service in the Police Department. My 
deposition is also on the basis of knowledge derived by me during the 
course of my service. The said material is not available with me in the 
form of a written document as such. 


I was never a member of JKIM. 


Before joining the police department, I did not personally attend any 
meetings (public or private) or seminars or gatherings of the 
organization. However, I acquired an idea of the activities of the 
association through newspaper reports, books and other writings. 
Currently, I do not have copies of those newspapers, books or writings. 
I cannot give the exact date of the newspapers and writings referred to 
by me. However, information about the association was reported in 
newspapers on a recurring basis. 


After joining the service of the Police Department, I have not attended 
any meetings (public or private) or any seminars or gatherings of 
JKIM. I have not personally filed any complaint with regard to the 
activities of the association based on the newspaper reports and 
writings which I came across during the course of my responsibility as 
a Police Officer. (Vol.) The situation prevalent in Jammu and 
Kashmir, particularly, in the aftermath of /9680द38 such that it was 
not possible for any member of the public to file a complaint in the 
Police Station with regard to the activities of the association. 


After joining the Police Department, also, I did not file any complaint 
against the association in my personal capacity. 


[भाग Il—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


37 


I have had occasions to brief my senior officers on different issues from 
time to time. However, there has been no occasion for me to file a 
specific complaint or submit any specific written report to my senior 
officers with regard to the association in question. None of the senior 
officers has ever issued any specific direction to me to lodge any 
complaint or FIR against the association. 

Tam not aware of the official constitution of the association. 

The members of the association as referred to by me in my affidavit are 
Late Mohammad Abbas Ansari and his son i.e. Masroor Abbas Ansari. 
Apart from that, as of now, I cannot name any other member of the 
association. 

Question: Are you aware that this association had lakhs of members 
immediately before banning? 

Answer: Iam not aware. 

Question: During the course of your entire service, have you ever given 
any statement before any court or authority against the association? 
Answer: I have nothad any occasion to deposebefore any court with 
regard to the association or its members in any case during the course 
of my career. 

4 am not aware of the addressesof the head office / zonal office / tehsil 
office of the association. (Vol.) I am aware that the same are in 
Srinagar, I do not agree that the organization is a_ religious 
organization. (Vol.) This organization is part of Hurriyat Conference 
and my understanding of the activities of the association is in that 
context. 

I agree that the association in question is essentially a Shia Muslim 
Organization. I am not aware of the concept of “Doctrine of FIOH”. 
Generally speaking, I agree that Shia muslims follow a religious 
leader in all religious and day to day activities. 

Iam not aware if Late Mohammad Abbas Ansari was a religious leader 
of ‘FIOH’. I have never seen Late Mohammad Abbas Ansari leading a 
religious procession. I have not seen the son of late Mohmmad Abbas 
Ansari i.e. Masroor Abbas Ansari leading a religious procession on 
the occasion of Moharram this year. 

I am not aware of the exact numbers of cases registered against 
JKIM. I agree that Hurriyat Conference was not banned before 20]9. 
(Vol.) Some constituents of the Hurriyat Conference were banned even 
prior to 20]9. 

The statement made by me in Para 5 of my affidavit to the effect that 
the JKIM played a vital role in providing support to different terrorist 
organizationsis on the basis that some constituents of the Hurriyat 
have been engaged in such activities and the association in question 
has played a supportive role in that regard. 

Apart from this FIR with regard to which I have deposed, I cannot refer 
to any specific incident in which JKIM was involved. I cannot refer to 
any specific incidenton the basis of which averments have been made 
by me in para 6 of my affidavit. (Vol.) The same are based on the 
activities of certain elements of the Hurriyat which are engaged in 
such activities. 


38 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


It is wrong to suggest that the statement made by me in para 6 of my 
affidavit is based on any assumption. 

Question: In para 6 of your affidavit, you have stated that JKIM has 
supported Pakistan and glorified terrorists or supported terrorism. 
Can you provide any details of any specific incident/date/time as 
regards the same? 

Answer: As of now, I cannot give details of any specific incident. 
(Attention of the witness has been drawn to para 7 of his affidavit.) 

I am aware that Mir Tahir Masood, referred to in para 7 of my 
affidavit, is based in Pakistan. However, I cannot say about his 
nationality. I am not aware of any specific communication between 
Mir Tahir Masood and JKIM. The statement made by me is based on 
the inputs received from different agencies. I have not registered any 
FIR against Mir Tahir Masood. 

In FIR No. 3///998, the only member of the JKIM who had been made 
an accused, was Late Mohammad Abbas Ansari. At no stage, I was the 
investigating officeror was a witness in the said case. 

It is correct that the concerned witnesses whose statements are 
referred to in para 7 of my affidavit, have not deposed before any 
court. The reasons thereof are mentioned in subsequent portion of my 
affidavit. It is correct that no statement was recorded under Section 
464 of CrPC in respect of FIR No. 3/2/7996. 

I agree that when a chargesheet is filed before a court, a receipt is 
furnished by the concerned court. As of now, I am not able to produce 
the receipt furnished by the Court at the time of filing the chargesheet 
in the present case. (Vol.) As per the records of the concerned Police 
Station, the chargesheet has been duly filed. It is incorrect to suggest 
that the chargesheet has not been filed in respect of FIR ४०.३3//9986, 
At present, I cannot tell the date on which charges were framed by the 
Court in the matter. (Vol.) The concerned records were unfortunately 
destroyed during the flash floods that occurred in Kashmir in the year 
2044, To my recollection, the charges have been framed under Section 
732(8) of the People’s Representation Act and Section 766 of RPC. I 
cannot say, as of now, whether any charges were framed under Section 
3 of the UAPA.The concerned investigating officer who had filed the 
chargesheet may be able to apprise about the same. 

It is correct that Late Mohammad Abbas Ansari was around §5 years of 
age when he died. 

As I have mentioned, I have not personally investigated the case, 
therefore, I cannot say whether Late Mohammad Abbas Ansari was 
cooperative during the investigation or not. 

I cannot conclusively say whether the witnesses referred to in the 
chargesheet filed in respect of FIR No. 3///996 are alive/available or 
not. 

4 agree that my knowledge as regards FIR १४०.3//7996 and subsequent 
chargesheet filed in this case is derived exclusively from the records. I 
do not recall at this stage, the exact court where the chargesheet was 
filed. 

I do not specifically remember the concerned court where the records 
were sought to be re-constructed. I am not aware of any official 
communication from the Court stating that the records have not been 
reconstructed. I am not personally aware as to whether any 
application for reconstruction of the relevant records has been filed in 
the concerned Court and/or the details thereof. 


[भाग II—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


39 


96. 


It is correct that the statements made by me in my affidavit are based 
on the records/information gathered by me from the concerned Police 
Station. I do not have any personal knowledge as regards thereto, 
apart from the records of the case. 

At present, I am unable to produce any specific material or document 
on the basis of which I have made statements in Para 7(9) 77750) of 
my affidavit. (Vol.) The same is based on the reports received from 
various agencies. 

I cannot say whether JKIM had a militant wing or not. (Vol.) Other 
elements of the Hurriyat with which JKIM was associated had militant 
wings. 

Question: Do you know that Late Mohammad Abbas Ansari was 
elected as Chairman of Hurriyat Conference in 2003 and that election 
was not liked by any of the hardline parties of Hurriyat, and he was 
later expelled from Hurriyat Conference at the behest of Syed Ali 
Shah Geelani? 

Answer: I am not aware of this. 

Suggestion: I suggest to you that there are no inputs that you have 
received, contrary to what you have stated hereinabove. 

Answer: It is incorrect to suggest that I havenot received any inputs 
from different agencies from time to time. However, at present, the 
inputs are not available with me. 

Question: Are you aware of the exact utterings of Late Mohammad 
Abbas Ansari which are subject matter of FIR ॥४0.3///9962 

Answer: No. (Vol.) The concerned witness who had deposed in 
thiscasehas referred to, and elaborated the same. I am not personally 
aware of the exact utterings. 

Question: Did you personally prepare any report recommending the 
banon the association? 

Answer: I have not personally made any such report. (Vol.) In view of 
my postings at the relevant stage, there was no occasion for me to 
prepare any such report. 

I have not personally conducted any verification exercise for any 
intelligence report. I have not played any personal role in declaring 
the association as an unlawful association. I have not personally 
interacted with any member of the association which has been banned 
by the impugned notification No. S.O, ॥/74 (E) dated //.93. 2025. 

I am not aware whether any member of the association has been 
convicted under the provisions of UAPA. 

The translations of the documents enclosed along with my affidavit 
have been done by me. 

Question: Have you done any course in ‘translation’? 

Answer: No. 

Suggestion: I suggestthat you have deposed falsely. 

Answer: It is wrong.” 


Opportunity for re-examination was given, but not availed of. 


40 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


PW-2 


97. Dheeraj Kumar (PW-2) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW2/A; deposed that he 
is posted as Sub-Divisional Police Officer at Shaheed Gunj, J&K and is the 
Supervisory Officer in respect of FIR No.6I/2000. 

98. It is stated that FIR १२०.6/2000 was registered on 23.06.2000 at Police 
Station Shaheed Gunj, Srinagar, J&K under Sections 53A/l20B/l2(B) of Ranbir 
Penal Code, 989 when a docket was received at PS Shaheed Gunj through SPO 
Naseer Ahmad No.8I/SPO informing that on the occasion of Eid-e-Milad-un Nabi 
and Friday Prayer, while on official duty, he saw Syed Ali Shah Geelani (the then 
Chairman of APHC) and Moulvi Abbas Ansari and others delivering Anti-National 


Speech in Masjid Hamdaniya at Jhelum Market, Batmaloo. The said separatist 


leaders denied to the accession of Kashmir with India and asked the youth of 


Kashmir to continue their struggle against India, Indian Army and Police. The 


separatist leaders through their provocative speeches stirred emotions of youth to 
maintain a bloody war and tried to harm the integrity of India. Resultantly, the FIR 
was registered, the investigation was carried out. 

99. He relied upon the true copies of FIR No.6l/2000; the statements of 
witnesses recorded under Section l6l of Cr.P.C and the charge-sheet dated 
28.2.2022 filed pursuant FIR 7१२०.64/2000 along with their true English 
Translations which have been exhibited as Ex. 7७2/॥ to PW2/4A in the present 
proceedings. 

00. It is stated that both the accused persons have passed away and as such the 
case against them has also been abated. 

0l. ‘It is further stated that the delay caused in filing of chargesheet is attributed 
to significant challenges faced while investigating the case against the prominent 
separatist leaders of J & K and due to volatile situation in the valley orchestrated by 
the said separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering 
support from across the border and terrorist organisations and any attempt to probe 
these separatist organizations and their leaders triggered widespread unrest and 
turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in concluding the investigations. 

02. He stated from his personal experience, gained during the course of his 
service, that it is manifest that JKIM and its leaders have been actively and 


continuously but covertly and discreetly working for secession of J&K from the 


[भाग II—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


4] 


UOI and Cession of the territory to Pakistan by promoting and orchestrating 
feelings of enemity and hatred in the masses against the Government of India. 
Evidently, the aforesaid is against the interest and integrity of the nation. The said 


conduct is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of 


India and hence, the ban imposed upon the association is necessary and correct. 


03. 


During the course of deposition, a question posed to PW-2 by the learned 


counsel for UOI, was answered as under: 


04. Mr. Ibrahim Hussain Wani, learned counsel for the association cross 


“Question. (On behalf of UOI): After imposition of the ban on the 
concerned association, does the association continue to carry out its 
activities ? 


Answer. After the ban on the concerned organization, we got the 
information from reliable sources that the concerned organization is 
working under the guise of Al Abbas Relief Trust, Karan Nagar, 
Srinagar. We registered an FIR i.e. FIR No. 02/2025, PS Karan 
Nagar and thereafter, we searched the concerned premises after 
getting search warrants from the concerned court, where we found 
letter-pad, envelopesand receipt books of the organization from the 
office. A copy of the FIR and the seizure memo prepared therein has 
been submitted by PW-2 in Court today. 


[Per Tribunal: The aforesaid documents are taken on record, subject 
to objections of the learned counsel for the organization that (i) The 
said documents have been filed belatedly; and (ii) The said documents 
have no relevance inasmuch as they pertain to the period after banning 
of the concerned organization. There was no reasonable cause given 
for banning the organization, in the first place. The above objection/s 
shall be decided at the stage of final adjudication. ] 


examined PW-2 on .07.2025. The same is reproduced hereunder: 


“I joined the Police Department in September, 20/9, It is correct to 
say that the Association was born in 7964, In Para 2 of my affidavit, I 
have referred to “material available with regard to the prime objects 
of JKIM”. The “material available” refers to the statements of the 
concerned witnesses in FIR No. 67/2099 with regard to which I have 
deposed. Reference to“Various cases registered against the said 
organization” in para 2 of my affidavit refers to FIR 67/2090ककवें 6/8४0 
FIR No. 372//996, PS Nishat. I am not personally aware of any other 
cases in respect of the said organization before the ban. I am not 
aware whether the concerned organization is essentially a “Shia 
Muslim” organization. I am not aware of “Doctrine of FIOH” of Shia 
School of thought. I am not aware that in Shia School of thought, 
general masses pursue the lines and/or abide by a particular religious 


42 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


leader. (Vol.) All these aspects are beyond the scope of my affidavit. 

It is correct that till 20/9, Hurriyat Conference had not been banned 
under any law. I am not aware whether Lt. Molvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari 
led a delegation on behalf of the Hurriyat in 2004 to hold talks with the 
then Prime Minister Late Atal Bihari Vajpayee and other political 
leaders thereafter. 


4 am not aware whether Lt. Molvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari was provided 
security by the Government at any point of time. Statement made by me 
in para 4 of my affidavit is based on FIR No. 67/200900707 regard to 
which I have deposed. The same is also corroborated by certain videos 
available on You-tube (a social media platform). I have not personally 
verified any of those videos. I cannot say who has uploaded those 
videos on the said platform. 


The statement made by me in para 5 of my affidavit is based on the 
inference derived by me from FIR No. 67//2000. 


It is correct that Lt. Molvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari was around 85 years of 
age when he passed away. 


I am not aware whether Lt. Molvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari was ever 
underground at any stage. He was never arrested inFIR No. 67//20909. 
(Vol.) In view of the prevalent situation in Kashmir, it was not 
considered feasible to arrest him as elaborated in para 4 of my 
affidavit. I am not aware whetherLt. Molvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari was 
prosecuted under Sections 82, 83 & 84 of the Cr.P.C. I am not aware 
whether Lt. Molvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari was ever declared as 
proclaimed offender. 


It is correct that I have never been the investigating officer in FIR No. 
64/2000 nor am I a witness in the said case. 


It is correct that no statements under Section 764 of Cr.P.C. with 
regard to FIR No. 67/2000 were recorded. It is correct that the 
chargesheet in the present FIR was filed after 22 years and the same 
included the name of Lt. Molvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari as an accused 
person even though he had already passed away by the time the 
chargesheet was filed. 


Till the banning of the concerned organization, as a police officer I have 
had no occasion to personally deal with/investigate any case 
pertaining to the Association. (Vol.) However, after imposition of ban, 
I have had an occasion to deal with the case where the activities of the 
association have come to light. The same has been referred to in my 
examination- in-chief. 

Tam not aware of the further course of proceedings after submission of 
chargesheet in respect of FIR no. 67/2009. (Vol.) After filing of the 
chargesheet, the case was disposed of since the accused person had 
died and this fact has been mentioned in para उ of my affidavit. 


It is correct that since the case was abated, there was no occasion to 
take cognizance against the accused persons. 


Thereason for the delay in filing the chargesheet has been mentioned 
by me in para |4 of my affidavit. 


Question. Did the chargesheet disclose any reason for the delayed 
submission thereof? 


[भाग Il—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


43 


Answer.I am not aware. 


I am not aware of any other case where there has been delay in filing 
the chargesheet to the same extent as in the case of FIR No. 6//20090. 


I have had no occasion to personally prepare and send any report 
pertaining to ban of the concerned organization to central government 
or state agencies. 


I have not personally participated in any meeting (public or private), 
seminar or rally of the concerned organization. 


Suggestion: I suggest to _you_that_recently_on_the_occasion_of 
Muharram, a religious procession was led by Masroor Abbas Ansari 
on_04.07.2025 corresponding to 8" Muharram. The said religious 
procession was allowed by the Government in which lakhs_of people 
had participated. 


Answer: It is correct that the above procession was permitted by the 
Government after व hiatus of 30 years. I am not aware whether the 


said_procession was purely a religious procession. (Vol.) In the 
aftermath of the procession, an FIR was registered. I am not sure if 
the members of the group led by Masroor Abbas Ansariwere 
mentioned as the accused persons therein. 


It is correct that I have not personally witnessed any unlawful activity 
of the concerned organization (JKIM). During the course of my 
responsibility as a Police Officer, there was no occasion for me to 
report about any activities of the JKIM to any of my superior officers. 
However, after the issuance of the banning notification No. S.O. 
//44[+) dated ॥/.93.2025, I reported to my superior officers about 
the activities of the concerned organization, pursuant to FIR No. 
02/2025. My briefings to my superior officers as aforesaid have been 
verbal in nature. 


I have had no occasion to personally go through any written 
communications addressed by the organization or by any third party 
to the organization which reveal any unlawful activities of the 
organization. 


I have had no occasion, during the course ofdischarge of my official 
responsibilities to take action against any member of JKIM. (Vol.) This 
is not a part of my affidavit. 


Question. Apart from the religious procession on 04.07.2025, are you 
aware of any other religious procession led by Masroor Abbas 
Ansari? Answer. I am not aware. 


I have not personally gone through the official constitution of JKIM. I 
cannot personally name/recollect the names of the members of JKIM. 
(Vol.) Off hand, I can refer to Mr. Ghulam Hasan, Lt. Molvi Mohd. 
Abbas Ansari and Masroor Abbas Ansari as members of the 
organization. 


Although, FIR No. 67/2000 is registered against individual persons, 
there is reference therein to the activities of the both the organizations 


44 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


i.e. JKIM and Hurriyat Conference. I am not aware of the names of the 
members of the organization who are accused in the said FIR No. 
64//200900. 


I have seen videos of Mir Tahir Masood, reference of whom has been 
made in para 7 of my affidavit is based in Pakistan. I am aware that 
he is based in Pakistan, however, I am not aware of his nationality. 


I have had no occasion to see any written communication addressed 
to Mir. Tahir Masood orvice versa. 


I have had no occasion to verify any of the said videos of Mir. Tahir 
Masood. It is beyond the scope of my affidavit to speak about the 
possibility of deep faking or morphing of the said videos. 


It is beyond the scope of my affidavit to say that there is a possibility 
of deepfaking of the videos. 


Apart from FIR Nos. 67//2090 &63//7996 as referred to above, I have no 
personal knowledge about the activities of JKIM, except through social 
media. 


I have not been personally involved in the decision-making process to 
declare the concerned organisation (JKIM) as an_ unlawful 
organization. Suggestion: I suggest to you that you have deposed 
falsely. 


Answer: It is wrong.” 


05. Opportunity for re-examination was given, but not availed of. 


PW-3 


06. Inspector Liyaqat Ali (PW-3) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-3/A; 
deposed that he is presently posted as an Inspector in Crime Investigation Department 
(CID), Srinagar, Jammu & Kashmir and is working as In-charge of Social Media 
Cell at CID Headquarters and having investigated the activites of JKIM, as such he 
is conversant with the activities of JKIM and competent to depose before this 
Tribunal. 

07. It is stated that it is borne out from the records and materials that 
Mohammad Abbas Ansari, Chairman of JKIM till 25.0.2022 was also one of the 
founding members of APHC, a conglomerate of 26 separatist organisations and had 
also been its Chairman in the year 2003. After demise of Moulvi Abbas Ansari, his 
son Masroor Abbas Ansari became its chairman, who is still the President of JKIM 
and that out of the 26 parties who formed the conglomerate of APHC, ten (I0) 
number of organisations have been banned by the Central Government vide 
separate notifications which were already upheld by the respective Hon’ble 


Tribunals. 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 45 


08. It is further stated that it is also clear from the records, investigation 
conducted by CID, J & K and the inputs received by it with regard to JKIM that the 
prime objective of JKIM was to promote separatist ideas and to get the secession of 
J & K from India by way of provoking the masses by using different means and 
cession of the constitutional authority of India. 

09. Further, it is borne out from the records that Moulvi Abbas Ansari, his son 
Masroor Abbas Ansari and other officer bearers and leaders of JKIM have a long 
history of separatist activities in criminal conspiracy with various secessionist and 
terror groups. JKIM plays vital role in covertly providing support to different terror 
organisations for spreading terror in the erstwhile State of J & K and also in 
supporting the Over Ground Workers (hereinafter referred to as the ‘OGW’s’) who 
provide logistical and all other inputs and supports to the terrorist and terror 
organisations who are active in J & K and make all efforts to disrupt the peace of 


the State for keeping the same volatile in the interest of Pakistan. 


l0. He stated that JKIM and its leaders glorified and supported terrorist outfits 
propagated false narratives amongst masses, boycotted elections and incited youth 
for violent activities. The same is apparent from speeches of their leaders and that 
JKIM is a Pakistan backed separatist organisation having extensive links in Pakistan 


which is represented there by Mir Tahir Masood. 


lll. It is stated that it is apparent from the records that between 987 and 206, 
the leaders of JKIM including its Chairman and other prime leaders have been 
accused of committing offences of rioting, stone pelting, unlawful activities, 
unlawful assemblies, causing disruptive activities by way of hate speeches, in this 
regard, numerous FIRs have been registered against them under different 
provisions of law andthat Moulvi Abbas Ansari has delivered various secessionist 
speeches for Kashmir and has also given interviews to the media channels to that 
effect, out of which CID had obtained one such speech and three interviews which 
are preserved in a Compact Disk (‘CD’) and were provided to Central Government 
through proper channel before preparing of the brief note. In this regard, it is 
submitted that JKIM operates its Youtube channel where it has uploaded at least 


three videos of Moulvi Masroor Abbas Ansari delivering hate speeches against the 


46 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


nation and in favour of secession of J & K and also glorifying terror and terrorist in 
J & K. The links of the said provocative speeches delivered in vernacular are 


asunder:- 


https://youtu.be/6znqgNkeDIKo; 


https://youtu.be/oLx VlC8uqvg; 
https://youtu.be/pmodR604MfA; 


2. He stated that as the interviews were in vernacular language i.e. Kashmiri, a 
transcript of the same has been prepared and translated in English; further, JKIM 
has uploaded an interview of its former Chairman Moulana Abbas Ansari with BBC 
and also various write-ups, schedules etc. on its website which are downloaded by 
him and his senior officers in the department and which was later on provided to 
the Central Government during preparation of the background note. 
3. He has stated, from the investigations and input received and from personal 
experience gained during the course of service, that it is manifest that JKIM and its 
leaders have been actively and continuously but covertly and discreetly working for 
the secession of J & K from the UOI and Cession of the territory of J & K to Pakistan 
which is obviously against the national interest and integrity by promoting feelings 
of enmity and hatred in the masses against the Government of India and hence are 
acting in a manner prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the UOI 
and hence the ban imposed upon the organisation is necessary and correct. 
l4. He relied upon various material, including: 
i. A pen drive containing 4 videos of Lt. Moulvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari 
delivering secessionist speeches and giving interviews and 3 videos of 
Masroor Abbas Ansari delivering provocative speeches in Kashmiri 
language which is exhibited as Ex. ७४३/॥ & Ex.PW3/3. 
ii. True transcripts of the speeches and interviews of Lt. Moulvi Mohd. 
Abbas Ansari which are exhibited as Ex.PW3/2. 
iii. True transcripts of the speeches delivered by Masroor Abbas Ansari 
along with their true English translation which are exhibited as Ex.PW3/4. 
iv. True copy of interview of Lt. Moulvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari with BBC 
which is exhibited as Ex.PW3/5. 
v. | True copy of various write-ups, schedules etc. uploaded on the website 
of JKIM which are downloaded by the witness and his senior officers in 


the department which are exhibited as Ex.PW3/6. 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 47 


l5. During the course of deposition, learned counsel for the UOI examined PW- 
3, the same is reproduced hereunder: 


“Question: Have you brought any certificate under Section 64 of the 
Bhartiya SakshyaAdhiniyam, 2023 ? 


Answer: I have brought the relevant recordwith me. Apart from exhibits 
filed along with my affidavit, I would like to file a certificate by way of 
an affidavit under Section 64 of the Bhartiya SakshyaAdhiniyam, 
2023 in support of the enclosures of my affidavit. [Per Tribunal: The same 
are taken on record and marked as Mark ‘A’, subject to the objections of the 
learned counsel for the Association on the ground of (i) delay in filing; and 
(ii) relevance. The said objection shall be decided along with the final 
adjudication. ]” 


l6. Mr. Ibrahim Hussain Wani, learned counsel for the association cross 


examined PW-3 on |.07.2025. The same is reproduced hereunder: 


“T have been working in the Police Department for the last /3 years. I 
have been working in CID Headquarters for the past /9 years. None 
of the videos referred to and enclosed along with and forming part of 
the Exhibits have been recorded by me personally. None of the 
communication / interviews referred to in the said videos have been 
recorded by me personally. 


It is correct that I have never personally interviewed Lt. Moulvi Mohd. 
Abbas Ansari and Masroor Abbas Ansari. It is correct that I am not a 
journalist or a camera person. 


It is correct that I have not communicated in writing with any 
authorized representative of the concerned channel or the platforms 
through which the concerned videos have been uploaded and from 
where the same have been perused by me. 


I am not a“Government approved examiner” for examination of 
electronic videos or electronic records. The material downloaded by me 
and referred to in my affidavit has not been examined by me or by any 
forensic expert. 


I am not an eyewitness to the speeches referred to in paragraphs8, 9 
and /09 of my affidavit. 

In my official capacity, I have not received any communication or 
complaint from any person or Government Agency regarding the videos 
referred to by me. In my official capacity, Ihave not “taken cognizance” 
or suo motu action in respect of the said videos referred to in my 
affidavit. (Vol.) During the course of discharge of my official duties, I 
have downloaded the videos and apprised my senior officers of the 
same. I am not aware whether these videos which have been referred to 
are the subject matter of any complaint/FIR or proceedings before a 
court of law. Iam not an “expert or certified translator”. 


4 am not aware of the apparatus used to prepare the videos. 
Question: For the purpose of reliance onthe videos referred to in your 


48 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


affidavit, did you follow the provisions of Section 65B of the Evidence 
Actor Section 64B of BSA? 


Answer: As referred to in my examination in chief, I have furnished a 
certificate by way of an affidavit under 64B of the BSA. 

(Attention of the witness is drawn to paragraph /4 of his affidavit) 
Question: As a police officer, have you ever filed any complaint or 
lodged any FIR against JKIM? 

Answer: No. 

Before imposition of the ban on the concerned Association vide 
impugned notification dated //.93,.20235, no agency specifically sought 
any material specifically for the purpose of banning the organisation. 
(Vol.) The videos in question were already available with the senior 
officers and have been forwarded by me in my usual course of official 
responsibilities. I have personally not played any role in banning the 
organisation. (Vol.) I had merely downloaded the videos and apprised 
the concerned superior officers about the same. 

Question: Have you personally prepared any report or supplied any 
specific information to the Ministry of Home Affairs or to any other 
Ministry of the Central or State Government for the specific purpose of 
banning of the concerned Association? 

Answer: I have forwarded the videos referred to in my affidavit to my 
superior officers in the due course of discharge of my responsibilities. I 
have not specifically made any report for the purpose of banning of the 
organisation. 

Question: Do you know that the report you have submitted to the 
superior officers has become ground for banning this organisation? 
Answer: I forwarded the concerned videos to my superior officers and 
I am not personally aware as to how the said videos were analyzed by 
my superior officers and for what purpose and to what extent they were 
used in any decision making process. 

With reference to the averments made in paragraph I3 of my affidavit, I 
state that the videos in question were sent by me to the superior 
officers and they analyzed the same and sent their report to the 
concerned Ministry on the basis thereof. My senior officers verbally 
apprised me about sending a report to the Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Govt. of India.There is no official covering letter / enclosing 
communication that was issued while sending the videos to the superior 
Officers. 

The concerned videos were sent by me to the superior officers in the 
current year. I do not remember the exact date on which I sent the videos 
to my superior officers, however, the same was done before March, 
20235. 

My senior officers asked me to download the videos and forward the 
same. The concerned officers who asked for the videos to be sent was 
Sh. Zaffar, S.P., CID HQs. He did not send any communication to me 
in writing. 

Question: Are you aware of any case registered against the concerned 
organisation? 

Answer: Yes. I cannot give any details of the cases, however, I am 
aware that PW-I and PW-2 have deposed regarding them. Personally, 
I am not aware of any case registered on the basis of or referring to 
the videos referred to in my affidavit. 

The reference in paragraph 2 of my affidavit to “various cases 
registered against the said organisation” is based on my knowledge. I 


[भाग II—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


49 


am specifically aware of atleast two cases, however, I do not remember 
the FIR numbers. I am not aware whether any inquiry was directed to 
be conducted with regard to the videos referred to in my affidavit. 
Question: Is there a possibility that the videos referred to by you are 
morphed or in the nature of deepfake? 

Answer: I do not think so. (Vol.) I know the person who has been 
depicted in the videos. 

Question: Is it possible that in the videos referred by you, somebody 
else’s voice has been superimposed/tampered? 

Answer: I have been in the Department for the last I5 years. On the 
basis of my experience and knowledge, I can say with confidence that 
no such thing has happened in the present case. The videos and the voice 
of the concerned person have not been doctored or tampered with. 

I do not have any degree in the Science of Forensics. 

In my official capacity, I have not received any complaint regarding 
any fake videos referred to in my affidavit, being uploaded. 

I did not conduct or verify the veracity of the videos from the person 
who was interviewing or making the videos. (Vol.) The interviewer in 
one of the videos was in Pakistan and it could not have been possible to 
contact the said person. 

I state that one of the videos referred in Ex.PW3/l was recorded in 
Pakistan when Lt. Moulvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari was there and this was 
an interview on Geo TV (Pakistan based News Channel) in 2005. 

The factum of Lt. Moulvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari being in Pakistan at 
that time is evident from multiple news reports of the relevant period. 
The said fact was very much in public domain. I did not apply to any 
court for authentication of any videos. There was no occasion for me to 
take any such course of action in my official capacity. 


I have prepared my affidavit (Ex. PW3/A) on my own accord. The 
affidavit furnished by me today i.e.Mark A, was for the purpose of 
giving details of devices through which the videos were downloaded. 
These devices were controlled by me at the time of downloading. 
Suggestion: I suggest to you that since you are neither a forensic expert 
nor a technical expert, the statement made by you are based on your 
personal subjective knowledge. 


Answer: It is incorrect. The views expressed by me are not subjective 
views. They are based on knowledge derived during the course of my 
official service and analysis of the concerned videos. I neither 
personally know nor have I met Lt. Moulvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari. I have 
not personally attended any meeting or seminar organized by JKIM. It 
is incorrect to say that prior to my joining the service, I was an active 
member of the JKIM at any point of time. 

Suggestion: I suggest to you that at the processions organized by JKIM, 
you were providing sharbat to the participants. 

Answer: It is incorrect. 


I came to know about the various videos referred to in my affidavit in 
the aftermath of 2045. During the period 20]5 to 2025, as and when I 
came across the incriminating videos, I forwarded the same to my 
senior officers in the routine course. I did not write to any social media 


50 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


platform for taking down these videos as the same was not within the 
scope of the official responsibility entrusted to me. 

It is incorrect to say that the statement made by me in the affidavit in 
Paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 are based on my personal subjective 
knowledge or that the same have been stated by me based on hearsay. 
Having been in service since 2070, I have received many inputs during 
the course of discharge of my official responsibilities. Whatever has 
been said in the paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 is based on the inferences 
derived by me during the course of discharge of my official functions. 
I cannot cite any statement that has been made in paragraph 5 of my 
affidavit whichis borne out from the video of Masroor Abbas Ansari 
where he was seen chanting slogans with regard to Burhan Wani. 

I can say that Mir Tahir Masood whose reference was made in my 
affidavit is based in Pakistan and he was the spokesperson of APHC 
POJK. I am not aware about his nationality. (Vol.) JKIM was part of 
APHC and Lt. Moulvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari was the founding member 
of the APHC. I am familiar with newspaper reports which stated that 
Lt. Moulvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari was expelled from APHC. 

4 cannot say whether hardline factions of APHC led by Syed Ali Shah 
Geelani wereresponsible for the same. I am not aware whether any 
delegation led by Lt. Moulvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari met with Late Prime 
Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee. 

4 am also not aware whether or not Lt. Moulvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari 
was part of the delegation that met Late Prime Minister Manmohan 
Singh. 

Tamalso not aware whether or not Lt. Moulvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari met 
ex-Home Minister, Govt. of India, Mr. L. K. Advani. I cannot say 
whether JKIM was Shia Muslim organisation. (Vol.) It is a separatist 
organisation. I have not read the constitution of JKIM. 

Question: Are you aware that several workers of the JKIM were killed 
by militants for the reason that Lt. Moulvi Mohd. Abbas Ansari was 
having a soft stand and was a believer in holding talks with the 
Government of India rather than taking recourse to militancy? 
Answer: I am not aware of the same. (Vol.) According to me, JKIM 
was openly supporting terrorism and was part of APHC. 

4 am not aware whether or not APHC was not banned before 20]9. 
Question: Although you have downloaded the videos, are you or are 
you not in a position to say that the contents of the videos are correct 
or not? 

Answer: I have downloaded the videos and to my belief, the contents 
of the same are correct. 

Question: Is it correct to say that the affidavit submitted by you today 
during the course of examination in chief which is marked as Mark A, 
is only based on your belief and that in the affidavit, the reference made 
by you by way of the certificate to the effect that the videos are authentic 
is merely based on yourpersonal belief? 

Answer: It is wrong. It is not merely a matter of my personal belief. It 
is based on the knowledge acquired by me during the course of 
discharge of my official functions. 

TI suggest to you that you have deposed falsely. 

It is incorrect.” 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5] 


PW-4 


!7.. Atul Kumar Shahi (PW-4) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-4/A; he 
deposed that he is presently posted as Commandant (CT) in the Government of 
India, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi and is authorized to depose before this 
Tribunal as he has been dealing with all the relevant files/records in his official 
capacity. He stated that the notification No.S.0.l4(E) dated " March, 2025 
issued by the Central Government is based on the information and material received 
from the central intelligence agency and Criminal Investigation Department of 
Government of Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir, with regard to the unlawful 
activities of JKIM and that based on this information, a note was prepared for the 
consideration of the Cabinet Committee on Security and a draft notification was 
also annexed to the said note and was sent to the Cabinet Secretariat and thereafter, 
the Cabinet Committee on Security took the decision and approved the proposal 
contained in the above note in the meeting held on 5" March, 2025 and accordingly, 
the declaration was made and published vide notification dated l" March, 2025, 
bearing No. $.0.I4(E). 

8. He further stated that that in terms of sub-section (l) of Section 5 of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 967 and vide notification dated 37 April 
2025, bearing No.S.O.577(E), this Tribunal was constituted and the background 
note was submitted to this Tribunal in terms of Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities 
Prevention Rules 968, vide letter dated 8 April, 2025 based upon the 
material/information as contained in the concerned files and that the various cases 
registered by the J & K Police throw light on the unlawful and subversive activities 
of its Chairman and members of JKIM. 

9. He further stated that the officers concerned of the Union Territory of J & K 
have filed affidavits before this Tribunal in respect of cases registered in Union 
Territory of J & K against the Chairman and the members of JKIM under various 
provisions of law including the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 
987, Ranbir Penal Code, 989, etc. 

20. It is further stated that various witnesses have already adduced evidence 


during the course of proceedings before this Tribunal in support of the declaration 


52 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


as contained in notification No. $.0.ll4(E) dated ll" March, 2025 and that the 
evidence so adduced clearly establishes that JKIM is continuously indulging in 
unlawful activities which pose a serious threat to the internal security of the country 
and that in addition to the above adduced evidence, various intelligence inputs show 
that JKIM is continuing its unlawful activities which are prejudicial to the security 
of the country. Considering all these facts, circumstances and evidences, which have 
been adduced before this Tribunal also, the JKIM has been banned under Section 
3() of the UAPA, 967. 

2. He further stated that as per the information received from various agencies, 
the Chairman and members of the JKIM have been indulged in radicalizing and 
brainwashing the minds, and indoctrination of youth through provocative speeches 
for separation of J & K from the UOI and that they have indulged in unlawful 
activities aimed at disrupting the sovereignty and integrity of India, peace, 
communal harmony, internal security and secular fabric of the Indian Society and 
hence, it is justified that banning of JKIM is necessary in the interest of national 
security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. 

22. During the course of deposition, he submitted original files containing 
central intelligence reports/inputs, referred to in paragraph 0 of the affidavit in a 
sealed cover for the perusal of this Tribunal which is exhibited as Ex. PW-4/3. The 
said submission of documents in the sealed cover was objected to by the learned 
counsel for the Association. 

23. He further stated that the Central Government is seeking the privilege for the 
original files mentioned as Ex. PW-4/3 to the affidavit relying upon Section 29 of 
the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 (Section 23 of the Evidence Act) r/w 
Rule 3(2) and proviso to Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 968 
and stating that the contents of the same are privileged and confidential in nature 
and the same cannot be made available to the banned association or to any third 
party as the Government considers it against the public interest to disclose the same 
to either the banned association or to any third-party inter-alia in terms of the 
provisions of Section 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 968. 


24. He then stated that the nature of the proceedings and the scope of inquiry 
before the Tribunal and the treatment which has to be given to documents in respect 
of which privilege has been claimed by the government or its nodal agency has been 
authoritatively laid down under paras 20-22 by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in 
Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra) in the specific context of the provisions of the 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 53 


Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, !967 and that vide the said judgment of the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court, after interpreting the scheme of the UAPA and the Rules 
framed thereunder, has unequivocally upheld the right’ of _ the 
government/prosecution/nodal agencies to claim privilege in respect of confidential 
documents in public interest. It is further stated that the documents for which claim 
of privilege is being sought, by their very nature, are confidential and sensitive in 
nature and, therefore, cannot be supplied as a public document as dissemination of 
the same to public at large may =impede/impeach the ongoing 
investigations/prosecutions against the incumbent banned organisation or its 
members and can also entail cross border national security concerns and therefore, 
the said documents can be verified by the Tribunal only. 


25. It is further stated that JKIM is promoting anti-national and separatist 
sentiments prejudicial to the integrity and security of the country and is tacitly 
supporting militancy and incitement of violence and is seeking secession of J & K 
from the UOI and that from the cogent and irrefutable evidences, which have 
emerged till now, that JKIM is continuously encouraging a veiled armed insurgency 
and is openly advocating and inciting people to bring about a secession of a part of 
the territory of India from the Union and that it is also established that the activities 
of JKIM are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by 
promoting feeling of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and the 
members of JKIM are indulging and acting in a manner prejudicial to the territorial 
integrity and sovereignty of the India. 

26. He further deposed that from the above, it is evident that JKIM is indulging 
in anti-national activities posing a serious threat to the sovereignty and integrity of 
India and if the JKIM is not banned, the activists and sympathizers of JKIM will 
pose a serious threat to the communal harmony, internal security & integrity of the 
country. 

27. He lastly deposed that in view of the submissions made herein above, the 
declaration made by the Central Government vide Notification No. $.0.4 (E) 
dated l" March, 2025 may please be confirmed and upheld in public interest as 
well as national interest. 

28. Mr. Ibrahim Hussain Wani, learned counsel for the association cross 
examined PW-4 on 28.07.2025. The same is reproduced hereunder: 


“T have been working in my present assignment since 25, //.2024, It is 
correct that my deposition is entirely based on the records and no part 


54 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of it, is based on my personal knowledge. 

It is correct that the Association with regard to which I am deposing 
has been in existence since /962. 

The record produced by me alongwith my affidavit pertains to the 
activities of Association since its inception. 

Question: Whether prior to issuance of the Notification, banning the 
Association, had there been any action ever taken against the 
Association at any point of time in the past? 

Answer: I cannot reply. 

Suggestion: I put it to you that your inability to answer the above 
question is on account of the fact that there are no records available 
revealing any unlawful activities of the Association in the past? What 
do you have to say? 

Answer: It is incorrect to suggest. 

Question: Can you elaborate: What is the “material received from the 
central intelligence agency and Criminal Investigation Department 
(CID) of the Government of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir”, 
as referred to in paragraph 2 of your affidavit and on what date and 
time, this material has been received by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA)? 

Answer: I do not remember the date and time when the said material 
was received by the Ministry of Home Affairs. 

Question: The material which you have received from central 
intelligence agency and Criminal Investigation Department (CID) of 
the Government of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, asreferred 
to in paragraph 2 of your affidavit, whether the same has been duly 
incorporated in your affidavit and the background note (annexed as 
Ex. PW4/2to your affidavit) ? 

Answer: I state that the information received from central intelligence 
agency and CID, J& K has already been reflected in my affidavit and 
the background note (annexed as Ex. PW4/2 to my affidavit), except 
the information which was sensitive in nature and which has 
consequently been left out. 

Question: In Paragraph 3 of your affidavit, you have mentioned that a 
note was prepared for the consideration of the Cabinet Committee on 
security. Has that note been submitted before this Tribunal in the sealed 
cover submitted by you today? 

Answer: Yes. 

Question: Whether the draft notification as referred to in Paragraph 3 
of your affidavit, has also been submitted before this Tribunal in the 
sealed cover submitted by you today? 

Answer: Yes. 

Question: Were you a part of the process of drafting the draft 
notification referred to in Paragraph 3 of your affidavit? 

Answer: Yes. 

Question: Was there any material in support of the draft notification 
that you perused personally? 

Answer: Yes. 

Question: Have you made any mention in your affidavit about the 
nature of the material on the basis of which the draft notification was 
prepared? 

Answer: The draft notification was prepared on the basis of the 
material received from the central intelligence agency and Criminal 
Investigation Department (CID) of the Government of Union Territory 


[भाग Il—€avs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


55 


of Jammu and Kashmir as mentioned in Paragraph 2 of my affidavit. 
Due to sensitive nature of the information which forms basis fordrafting 
the draft notification, specific reference thereto has not been made in 
my affidavit. 
Question: Whether the material/finformation as referred to in 
Paragraph 
5 of your affidavit, was duly referred to in the background note 
(annexed as Ex. PW4/2 to your affidavit) or not? 
Answer: As I mentioned earlier, the sensitive material/information 
isnot referred to in the background note. However, the non-sensitive 
material/jinformation has duly been referred to in the background 
note. 

I do not remember how many cases have been registered against the 
JKIM or its Chairman. 

It is incorrect to suggest that since the inception of the Association, no 
case has ever been registered against the Association itself. 

Question: Can you refer to even a single case registered against the 
JKIM eversince its inception? 
Answer: There are cases which have been lodged against the 
Chairman/Members of the Association. 

Question: How many cases have been registered against the Chairman 
of the Association? 
Answer: The background note refers to four (4) cases registered 
against Late Molvi Abbas Ansari and Molvi Masroor Abbas Ansari. 
Suggestion: I put it to you that no case has ever been registered where 
the Association itself is an accused of any offence? What do you have 
to say? 
Answer: I can only say that as per background note, four (4) cases have 
been registered against the Chairman of the Association. 
I do not remember the cases registered against the Chairman and the 
members of the Association under the Terrorist and Disruptive 
Activities (Prevention) Act, /987 (TADA) as referred to in Paragraph 
7 of my affidavit. 

Question: To which period, did the intelligence inputs referred to in 
Paragraph & of your affidavit pertain to? 
Answer: Since the inception of the Association. 
In Paragraph § of my affidavit, the reference to “JKIM is continuously 
indulging in activities of separation of Jammu and Kashmir” is on the 
basis of the inputs received prior to the banning notification. 
Question: Is it correct to say that even as per your record, JKIM has 
lakhs of members? 
Answer: I cannot say. 

Question: How many FIRs have been registered against the members 
of Association? 
Answer: I cannot name any member of the Association. 
As regards the objectionable activities of the members of the 
Association, the same has been referred to in the background note. 
I cannot say as to what percentage of population of Union Territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir comprises of Shia Muslims. 
Suggestion: I suggest to you that 4 to 4.5% of the entire population of 


56 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


India comprises of Shia Muslims? What do you have to say? 

Answer: I am not aware. 

Question: Can you mention the number of people/extent of population 
which has been brainwashed and indoctrinated as referred to in 
Paragraph 9 of your affidavit? 

Answer: I cannot say. 

Question: Can you mention names of any 5 people who have been 
brainwashed or indoctrinated? 

Answer: No, I cannot say. 

Question: As per the information available with you, how many 
persons from Shia Muslim population have been charged or convicted 
of terrorism related activities ? 

Answer: I cannot say. 

Suggestion: I put it to you that no youth belonging to Shia Muslim 
Community has been charged or convicted or involved in terrorism 
related activities? 

Answer: It is incorrect to suggest. 

Question: Can you name any person of youth population of Shia 
Muslim Community who has been involved in terrorism relating cases? 
Answer: I cannot take any particular name. 

Question: Can you name any person belonging to Shia Muslim 
Community who has beenindoctrinated by JKIM and/or who has got 
involved in spreading communal disharmony ? 

Answer: I cannot take any particular name. 

Suggestion: Is it correct that the background note is in essence 
summary of all the material/reports/iinputs referred to in Paragraph 
09 of your affidavit? 

Answer: It is incorrect to suggest. (Vol.) The background note is based 
on the most of the material/information received from the central 
intelligence agency and Criminal Investigation Department of the 
Government of Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir, except sensitive 
information. 

Question: Can you cite any instance in support of the assertions made 
by you in Paragraph /3 of your affidavit? 

Answer: I cannot cite any specific instance. 

Question: What is “cogent and irrefutable evidences” referred to 
in Paragraph 760 of your affidavit? 

Answer: The evidence is sensitive in nature. Therefore, I cannot give 
any specific details. 

Question: Can you cite any specific instance in support of your 
assertionsmade in Paragraph 76 of your affidavit that the activities of 
JKIM are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and disharmony? 
Answer: I cannot cite any specific instance. 

The statement made in Paragraph I7 of my affidavit is based on my 
belief. 

Question: What is the proof in support of the assertions made in 
Paragraph 77 of your affidavit that the activists and sympathizers of 
JKIM will pose a serious threat to the communal harmony, internal 
security and integrity of the country? 

Answer: The relevant proof has been submitted before this Tribunal in 
the sealed cover (Ex. PW4/3). 

Question: Are you aware that in the deposition of the witnesses on 
behalf of Association who have adduced evidence before this Tribunal, 
it has been categorically stated by them that Jammu & Kashmir is an 


[भाग II—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


57 


integral and inseparable part of India. 

Answer: Yes, Iam aware of their depositions. 

Question: What are the “various agencies” referred to in Paragraph 
7 your affidavit? 

Answer: I cannot name the agencies referred to in Paragraph 77 of 
my affidavit due to confidentiality. 

Question: Can you name the parentage of the members of Association 
referred to in Paragraph 5 of the background note ? 

Answer: No. I cannot say. 

Question: Are you aware of any cases being registered against the 
seven (7) persons mentioned in the table of Paragraph 5 of the 
background note? 

Answer: I cannot say. 

Question: Have you gone through the constitution of the JKIM? 
Answer: Yes, I have partly gone through it. 

Question: Is there anything in the constitution of the JKIM which is 
objectionable ? 

Answer: In fact, I have not read the constitution of the JKIM. 
Question: Can you cite any specific document in support of the 
assertions made in Paragraph 6 of the background note to the effect 
that the people associated with the Association have been glorifying 
terrorists, providing background support to terrorist outfits, 
propagating false narrative among masses, boycotting elections and 
inciting youth for violent activities ? 

Answer: As I mentioned earlier, the background note has been 
prepared on the basis of the information received from the intelligence 
agencies. 

Suggestion: Is it correct to say that JKIM has always taken part in 
democratic elections conducted under the aegis of Election 
Commission of India in Jammu & Kashmir? 

Answer: I cannot say. 

Question: Are you aware that JKIM had participated in the recently 
held Parliamentary and Assembly elections? 

Answer: I cannot say. 

Question: Are you aware that in the recently concluded 
Parliamentary elections in the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir 
and Ladakh, 2 out of the 4 elected candidates belong to Shia Muslim 
Community ? 

Answer: I am not aware. 

Question: Are you aware that the aforesaid elected candidates were 
supported by the JKIM? 

Answer: I cannot say. 

Question: On what basis, it has been stated in Paragraphs 6 and 7 of 
the background note that JKIM and/or its members have been 
boycotting elections ? 

Answer: It is on the basis of information received from intelligence 
agencies. 

Question: Are you aware of any statement of Molvi Masroor Abbas 
Ansari stating that the said person or the Association is desirous of 
boycotting elections ? 


58 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Answer: I cannot say. 

Question: Whether any FIR has been registered against the Association 
or its members for boycotting elections? 

Answer: I cannot say. 

Question: Can you elaborate as to what is the methodology adopted by 
the JKIM to allegedly engage in anti-India or secessionist 
propaganda through media channels as referred to in Paragraph 9 of 
the background note? 

Answer: This paragraph as well as the other paragraphs of the 
background note has been drafted based on the inputs received from 
intelligence agencies. 

Question: Can you say: who created the mechanism for the alleged 
anti-India or secessionist propaganda? 

Answer: I cannot give any specific details. 

I cannot say whether any exercise was carried out to verify the 
statements made in Paragraph 9 of the background note. 

Question: Is it possible that the videos referred to in the background 
note, particularly in Paragraphs 9 and ॥9, can be morphed or deep- 
faked? 

Answer: The agencies would have verified the same and that is why 
reference has been made in Paragraphs 9 and l0 of the background 
note. 

Suggestion: I put it to you that the statement made in Paragraph 9 of 
the background is contrary to the stand of the JKIM that the entire 
Kashmir including so called Azad Kashmir-Gilgit-Baltistanis an 
integral part of Jammu and Kashmir and is part of Union of India? 
What do you have to say? 

Answer: The assertions made in Paragraph 9 of the background note 
are based on the credible reports of the intelligence agencies. 
Question: Is FIR No. /23//967 referred to in the table atParagraph 
Il of the background note is subjudice/under trial before the 
concerned Court? 

Answer: Yes. 

Suggestion: I suggest to you that it is incorrect to say that the said FIR 
No. /23//96/ is subject matter of any pending proceedings before any 
Court. 

Answer: The statement made is based on the information received by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs from the intelligence agencies. 
Suggestion: I suggest to you that upon entering the details of FIR No. 
/23/796/ on the e-Court Website, the same reveals “no record 
present”. Are you aware of the same? 

Answer: I cannot say. 

Suggestion: I suggest to you that FIR No. 3/2/7996 referred to in the 
table at Paragraph 77 of the background note is not under trial and 
contrary to what has been stated in the table, instead the said FIR has 
been disposed of, rather proceedings before the trial court has been 
disposed of. 

Answer: I cannot say. As I have stated that the contents of the 
background note are based on the inputs received from the 
intelligence agencies. 

Suggestion: I suggest to you that FIR No. 6I/2000 referred to at Sl. No. 
3 in the table at Paragraph ॥7 of the background note is also not 
under trial and this fact is evident from the deposition of PW2- 
Dheeraj Kumar, SDPO, Shaheed Gunj, Srinagar, Kashmir? 


[भाग II—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 59 


Answer: I cannot say about the deposition of PW2-Dheeraj Kumar. 
Suggestion: I suggest to you that in FIR No. 99/20]], all the accused 
persons have been acquitted long back and yet the background 
note refers to this FIR being under trial? What do you have to say? 
Answer: I am not aware about the acquittal of the accused persons in 
the said FIR. 

Question: Are you aware that the Government of India invited Late 
Molvi Abbas Ansari for a dialogue? 

Answer: I am not aware. 

Question: Are you aware about any meeting that took place between 
Late Molvi Abbas Ansari and Late Prime Minister Atal Vihari Bajpai 
or Late Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh? 

Answer: I cannot say. 

Question: Are you aware that Late Molvi Abbas Ansari was provided 
‘Y-category’ security upto his demise? 

Answer: I am not aware. 

Suggestion: Is it correct to say that you have prepared the 
background note mechanically, based on the inputs received from the 
intelligence agencies without independently applying your mind? 
Answer: The background note is not only based on the inputs received 

from the intelligence agencies but also based on the independent 
application of mind by me and other officials in Ministry of Home 
Affairs. 

Question: Are you aware that JKIM has been a victim of militancy in 
Jammu and Kashmir? 

Answer: I cannot say. 

Suggestion: Is it correct to suggest that the contents of the background 
note are incorrect? 

Answer: It is incorrect to suggest. 

Suggestion: I suggest to you that the contents of your affidavit are also 
incorrect? 

Answer: The suggestion is denied. 

Cross-examination concluded. 

Re-examination by Ms. Poornima Singh, Advocate on behalf of 
UOI: 

“Question: Were you a part of the official team which was involved in 
drafting the background note for consideration of the Cabinet 
Committee on Security regarding banning of the JKIM? 

Answer: Yes. 

Tribunal Question: Who were the other members of the said official 
team who were involved in drafting the note? 

Answer: The Joint Secretary, CTCR, myself and other officials in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs were members of the said team.” 


60 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


VUI. EVIDENCE ADDUCED BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL ON BEHALF OF 
THE JKIM INCLUDING CROSS EXAMINATION OF THE 
CONCERNED WITNESSES 


RW-I 


29.  Masroor Abbass Ansari (RW-l) tendered his affidavit as Ex.RW-/A and 
deposed that immediately before declaration of the Organisation as ‘Unlawful’, he 
was the acting President of Jammu and Kashmir Ittehadul Muslimeen (JKIM). He 
deposed that in addition to what he has stated in his affidavit, he would like to add 
that this year, he participated in a procession on 04.07.2025, on the occasion of 
Moharram (which corresponds to 8" Moharram). Lakhs of people participated in the 
said procession. The Government had duly given permission for the same. The 
procession was also attended by many police officials and political leaders. Certain 
other processions were also held around the same period in which also he actively 
participated. Again, many Government officials and political leaders also attended 
the said processions. All these processions were religious in nature and had nothing 
to do with any political activity; all these were widely attended. He deposed that he 
is involved in largely religious work and that his association and bond with the 
people is on account of the fact that heendeavours to provide religious and spiritual 
guidance to the people. 

30. In his affidavit, २५७४] -३5४०० Abbas Ansari reiterated the facts which have 
been enumerated in the reply to the background note filed on behalf of the 
association. It is also stated that the detailed reply has been filed before this Tribunal 
and the same may be treated as part and parcel of his deposition. No documents 
were filed along with the affidavit. However, it is stated that the documentary proof 
as regards the facts mentioned in the affidavit are annexed with the reply/objections 
submitted by the association. 

3l. Ms. Poornima Singh, advocate on behalf of UOI cross-examined RW-! on 
2.07.2025. the same is reproduced hereunder: 


“T Joined JKIM in 2004. When I joined JKIM, I did not join as office 
bearer, I was only an ordinary worker. My father used to be the Chief 
Patron of JKIM. I decided to join JKIM after completing my religious 
studies from Iran. In 2008, I became an office bearer of JKIM. After 
the banning of the JKIM, there is no existence of JKIM but I 
personify JKIM. 

After banning of JKIM, it was sought to be disseminated to the worker/ 
members of the JKIM that the said association has been banned and 
therefore, would no longer be in existence. This news was spread 


[भाग II—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


6] 


through word of mouth and also through social media. In fact, the 
decision to dissolve JKIM was taken as far back as in September, 2023. 
The decision was taken because JKIM did not have any political space. 
Apart from JKIM, I am not a member of any other organisation or 
association. 

Tam familiar with Al Abbas Relief Trust. The said Trust has nothing to 
do with JKIM. The said Trust was constituted by my father and it is 
engaged in educational and humanitarian activities. I am not a trustee 
or amember of that Trust. 

I have not personally participated or contested in any election, 
however, at the level of panchayat and DDC, members of JKIM have, 
in the past, contested elections as independent candidates. Some of 
them have succeeded also and occupied positions of Sarpanch and 
DDC Members etc. 

APHC was a forum of which JKIM was a part. 

In my affidavit, I have referred to the fact that in January, 2004, Moulvi 
Abbas Ansari led a five member Hurriyat Delegation to New Delhi to 
meet the then Deputy Prime Minister Shri. L. K. Advani. Since I was 
not actively involved in the affairs of JKIM, nor an office bearer at that 
point of time, I am not personally aware of the agenda of the 
meeting, however, I have gathered that the purpose of the meeting was 
to have peace talks and generally engage in discussions with the 
Government of India for improving the conditions in Jammu and 
Kashmir. JKIM has always believed in peace and engaged in 
discussions/ peace talks with the Central Government. 

Suggestion: I put to you that Moulvi Abbas Ansari was a separatist 
leader. 

Answer: I deny that Moulvi Abbas Ansari was a separatist leader. 


Question: Are you aware of the social media platforms where JKIM 


has _a presence or which are used by the JKIM? 
Answer: JKIM had a page on facebook and also a youtube channel. 


I have attended many meetings or seminars where late Moulvi 
Mohammad Abbas Ansari gave speeches. 

T have seen the affidavit of PW-3. From the perusal of the transcripts of 
the speeches attached with the affidavit of the PW-3, I say that the 
speeches which are alleged to be mine are actually not so; it appears 
that they have been tampered. 

Question: Do you know who is Burhan Wani? 

Answer: I know who is Burhan Wani. Although, he was perceived to 
be a terrorist since he was engaged in militancy, he had some support 
amongst the locals. Neither I nor JKIM ever subscribed to his ideology 
and never had any close association or terms with him. He belongs to 
an organisation (Hizbul Mujahideen) which gave many threats to my 
father. I believe that Burhan Wani was a Martyr. I did not participate 
in the procession that was taken out on the occasion of the demise of 
Burhan Wani. 

A survey was conducted sometimes in 20]4-20I5 in which it transpired 
that there may have been I lakh members of JKIM. JKIM is not 
statutorily registered under the Societies Registration Act or under 
any other statute. (Vol.) It is a religious organisation. 


62 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Earlier we used to maintain data of membership. However, currently 
there is no such data since JKIM stands dissolved. 

I have never been arrested in any criminal case. 

Suggestion: I suggest to you that you have been arrested several 
times in the past few years in Jammu and Kashmir for anti-national 
activities. 

Answer: I deny the suggestion. It is true that I have been arrested but 
the same was in connection with the Muharram processions that I 
tried to participate in, from time to time. 

I have never been to Pakistan. (Vol.) Again said: I went once to 
Pakistan in /9995, may be in the year 7994, because some of my 
relations are there. I have relatives both on the paternal and maternal 
side in Pakistan (Chacha and Mama). 

Question. Does JKIM pledges its allegiance to the Constitution of 
India? 

Answer: Yes. 

Question: Does JKIM believe in the idea of plebiscite in Jammu and 
Kashmir? 

Answer: No. 


Tribunal Question: Do you believe that Jammu and Kashmir is an 
integral and inseparable part of India? 
Answer: Yes. 
Tribunal Question: Do you believe in the supremacy of the Indian 
Constitution ? 
Answer: Yes. 
Suggestion: I suggest to you that in your affidavit you have made false 
averments and you have not deposed truthfully. 
Answer: The suggestion is denied.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 

RW-2 


32. Ghulam Hassan Ganai (RW-2) tendered his affidavit as Ex.RW-2/A and 
deposed that he was democratically elected as General Secretary of the Association 
way back in April 20I5 and remained as such till April 208. 

33. It is stated that during his tenure as Secretary in the organisation or prior to 
it and thereafter, the organisation has never indulged in any anti-national or 
illegal/unlawful activities and that the basic purpose of the association was/is clearly 
mentioned in the Constitution of the Association. The Association has been taking 
steps for distribution of knowledge through books, speeches, literature etc. It has 
also been highlighting socio-economic and political problems faced by the minority 
community. It has been taking part in all democratic exercises of the country from 
the date of its inception till date. In case of any natural disaster, organisation’s 
members would extend all help to needy people/population. Several workers of the 
organisation have been killed by militants during last 35 years for taking stand 


against militancy and for participating in democratic activities. 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 63 


34. That none of the erstwhile members of the organisation or its present acting 
president has any link or connection with anti-national or secessionist activities. No 
FIRs have been registered against the association, for any anti-national or 
secessionist or any other illegal activities. 

35. That even during peak of militancy Late M.A. Ansari has raised voice against 
violence and that even religious verdict (Fatwa) was pronounced against stone 
pelting and militancy activities. He was moderate voice and was always treated as 
main bridge in connecting the Government with common masses of the Kashmir. 
In case of any emergency, the Government of India and State Government would 
approach him for defusing the situation. He held meeting with top leadership of the 
country including then Prime Minister of Country Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Prime 
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, Home Minister Shri L.K. Advani and other high 
ranking political figures/politicians for bringing/establishing peace and tranquility 
in the then State of J & K. It is also stated that the Government of India allowed him 
to visit Pakistan for strengthening the relationship between the two neighboring 
countries. All these activities cannot by any stretch of imagination be said to be 
antinational or anti India or illegal activities. That whatever allegations have been 
labeled/mentioned in the background note and the notification no. S.O. l4(E) 
dated |.03.2025 are totally irrelevant, unsubstantiated, thus devoid of any merit or 
substance/material much less sufficient material. 

36. It is stated that all activities of the organisation have been within 
constitutional limits/ parameters and in conformity with laws of the land. Declaring 
the organisation as unlawful is in violation of laws of land and without any basis. 
During last more than six decades the organisation has been functioning without 
any objections from the authorities; Labelling the organisation unlawful has huge 
impact on religious, social and political activities of organisation. 

37. Mr. Ketan Palon, Advocate on behalf of UOI cross examined RW-2 on 
2.07.2025. The same is reproduced hereunder: 


“T have been associated with JKIM since childhood. My father was also 
a member of JKIM. I became an office bearer of JKIM in the year 2075, 
when I was elected as General Secretary. As General Secretary, I 
used to communicate with the members and the officer bearers of the 
JKIM. I am not familiar with any social media/ internet presence of 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


JKIM. When I was the General Secretary of JKIM, JKIM did not 

organise any procession or public meeting etc., except religious 

processions. 

I do not have any personal knowledge as regards the aspects referred 

to in Para 4 of my affidavit. The same are based on my conversation 

with Late Maulvi Abbas Ansari. 

I developed close and intimate personal relations with Lt. Maulvi Abbas 

Ansari after the demise of my father in the year 20]2. 

JKIM was earlier a part of the APHC. 

Tribunal Question: Did JKIM believe in the ideology of any militant 

constituents of APHC? 

Answer: JKIM had differences with those members of APHC which 

had political or militant agenda. 

4 am not aware of any FIRs being registered against the members of 

JKIM. 

In 20/4/2045, when a membership survey was conducted, it transpired 

that the number of members of JKIM was in the range of around one 

lakh. This survey was conducted immediately after the flood in Jammu 

and Kashmir in 20]4. 

I ceased to be a member of JKIM after 2076, I do not know whether 

JKIM remained active after 2076, I am not aware whether JKIM had 

any links with any external agencies or countries after 20I8. 

Whatever I have deposed in my affidavit is with regard to the state of 

affairs of JKIM till 2074, I am not aware of the status of the JKIM and 

its activities after 20]8. 

I state that JKIM did not organise any procession in favour of Burhan 

Wani. (Vol.) I state that after the death of Burhan Wani, Lt. Maulvi 

Abbas Ansari issued a Fatwa against stone pelting in Jammu and 

Kashmir; as a result of which, his own house was subjected to stone 

pelting and his effigies were also burnt. 

I cannot say whether Burhan Wani was a martyr or not. 

I believe in the supremacy of the Constitution of India. (Vol.) JKIM has 

actively participated in the electoral process in Jammu and Kashmir. 

In the year 207/4, one member of JKIM stood as an independent 

candidate from Baramulla in parliamentary elections. 

JKIM has also actively participated in the electoral process at the 

level of local government (Panchayat), etc. On many occasions, 

members of JKIM were elected to various posts. 

I have never been to Pakistan. None of my family members went to 

Pakistan. None of myfamily members has ever been involved in 

incidents of armed violence. 

Suggestion: I suggest to you that in your affidavit you have made false 

averments and you have not deposed truthfully. 

Answer: The suggestion is denied.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 

RW-3 


38. Syed Muzaffar Rizvi (RW-3) tendered his affidavit as Ex.RW-3/A and 
deposed that he was democratically elected as Secretary of the Association way 
back in the year April 2000 and remained Secretary till September, 2023, when the 


organisation was dissolved. It is stated that thereafter, RW3 joined political party- 


“Apni Party” as Vice President. 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 65 


39. It is stated that during his tenure as Secretary in the organisation or prior to 
it and thereafter, the organisation has never indulged in any antinational or 
illegal/unlawful activities and that the basic purpose of the association was/is clearly 
mentioned in the Constitution of the Association. The Association has been taking 
steps for distribution of knowledge through books, speeches, literature etc. It has 
also been highlighting socio-economic and political problems faced by the minority 
community. It has been taking part in all democratic exercises of the country from 
the date of its inception till date. It is stated that the association fielded its candidates 
in Parliamentary Elections and in DDC elections and also supported the regional 
party. 

40. It is stated that none of the erstwhile members of the association or its present 
acting president has any link or connection with antinational or secessionist 
activities. Neither any FIRs have been registered against the association, for any 
antinational/ secessionist or any other illegal activities nor any member of the 
association has ever been detained under preventive detention laws. It is further 
stated that so many members of the organisation have lost their lives for opposing 
militancy and for taking part in elections. 

4l. ‘It is further stated that even during peak of militancy Late M.A. Ansari has 
raised voice against violence and that even religious verdict (Fatwa) was 
pronounced against stone pelting and militancy activities. He was moderate voice 
and was always treated as main bridge in connecting the Government with common 
masses of the Kashmir. In case of any emergency, the Government of India and 
State Government would approach him for defusing the situation. He held meeting 
with top leadership of the country including then Prime Minister of Country-Shri 
Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, Home Minister Shri 
L.K. Advani and other high ranking political figures / politicians for bringing / 
establishing peace and tranquility in the then State of J & K. It is also stated that the 
Government of India allowed him to visit Pakistan for strengthening the 
relationship between the two neighboring countries. All these activities cannot by 
any stretch of imagination be said to be antinational or anti India or illegal activities. 


That whatever allegations have been labeled / mentioned in the background note and 


66 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


the notification no. S.O. lll4(E) dated .03.2025 are totally irrelevant, 
unsubstantiated, thus devoid of any merit or substance/material much less sufficient 
material. 

42. It is stated that all activities of the association have been within constitutional 
limits/parameters and in conformity with laws of the land. Declaring the 
organisation as unlawful is in violation of laws of land and without any basis. 
During last more than six decades the organisation has been functioning without 
any objections from the authorities.; Labelling the organisation unlawful has huge 
impact on religious, social and political activities of organisation. 

43. Mr. Arkaj Kumar, Advocate on behalf of UOI cross examined RW-3 on 
2.07.2025. The same is reproduced hereunder: 


“I was Secretary of JKIM during the period from April 2000 till 
September 2023. I took membership of JKIM in 2000. Soon after I 
became a member, I was elected as Secretary of the JKIM. Perhaps this 
was on account of recognition of my abilities by Late Mohd. Abbas 
Ansari. In September 2023, JKIM was dissolved by its then President 
i.e. Masroor Abbas Ansari. In September 2023, I resigned as 
Secretary to join main stream politics (Apni Party). The JKIM got 
dissolved soon after my resignation. It is incorrect to say that Apni 
Party is close to JKIM. 

While I was Secretary of JKIM, I was not handling the social media 
activities of JKIM. The same were directly being handled by the 
President of JKIM. 

I was familiar with the social media posts of JKIM on facebook as I 
used to check the same for any discrepancies in the language, etc. 
However, I was not directly handling the same. 

The President himself used to upload the relevant posts on facebook. 
Till September 2023, there was no YouTube channel of JKIM. 

I have not seen the video links which have been referred to in the 
background note submitted before this Tribunal. I say that there was 
no difference between me and Late Mohd. Abbas Ansari as far as 
religious ideology and philosophy is concerned. Broadly, I agreed with 
his political views. 

The minor differences that I had with Late Mohd. Abbas Ansari was as 
regards the association with APHC. It is wrong to say that JKIM 
believes that Kashmir is allegedly a ‘disputed territory’ between India 
and Pakistan. 

I have never ever participated in any procession or rally which has 
propagated independence or cessation of J&K. 

I do not personally know Burhan Wani. I am aware that he was fairly 
well known in J&K. I believe Burhan Wani does not qualify to be a 
martyr (shaheed). 

Suggestion: I put it to you that Burhan Wani was a terrorist. 

Answer: I can neither declare Burhan Wani a shaheed nor a terrorist. 
Suggestion: I put it to you that Kashmir is an integral and inseparable 
part of India. 

Answer: I agree. 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 67 


Suggestion: I put it to you that the Constitution of India is supreme in 
India including Kashmir 
Answer: I agree. 
Tam not awareabout the membership of JKIM as on date. (Vol.) When 
I was a member of JKIM, membership of JKIM comprised of several 
lakhs of members/followers. 
Suggestion: I suggest to you that in your affidavit you have made false 
averments and you have not deposed truthfully. 
Answer: The suggestion is denied.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 


RW-4 


44._ Haji Mohammad Shafi Ganai (RW-4) tendered his affidavit as Ex.RW- 
4/A and deposed that he was democratically elected as President of the Association 
way back in the year 2006 and remained President till 2008. 

45. It is stated that during his tenure as Secretary in the organisation or prior to 
it and thereafter, the organisation has never indulged in any anti national or 
illegal/unlawful activities and that the basic purpose of the association was/is clearly 
mentioned in the Constitution of the Association. The Association has been taking 
steps for distribution of knowledge through books, speeches, literature etc. It has 
also been highlighting socio-economic and political problems faced by the minority 
community. It has been taking part in all democratic exercises of the country from 
the date of its inception till date. 

46. It is further stated that none of the members of the association or its present 
acting president has any link or connection with anti national or secessionist 
activities. No FIRs have been registered against the association, for any anti-national 
or secessionist or any other illegal activities. 

47. That even during peak of militancy Late M.A. Ansari has raised voice against 
violence and that even religious verdict (Fatwa) was pronounced against stone 
pelting and militancy activities. He was moderate voice and was always treated as 
main bridge in connecting the Government with common masses of the Kashmir. 
In case of any emergency, the Government of India and State Government would 
approach him for defusing the situation. He held meeting with top leadership of the 
country including then Prime Minister of Country-Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Prime 


Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, Home Minister Shri L.K. Advani and other high 


68 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


ranking political figures/politicians for bringing/establishing peace and tranquility 
in the then State of J & K. It is also stated that the Government of India allowed him 
to visit Pakistan for strengthening the relationship between the two neighboring 
countries. All these activities cannot by any stretch of imagination be said to be 
antinational or anti India or illegal activities. That whatever allegations have been 
labeled/mentioned in the background note and the notification no. S.O. l4(E) 
dated |.03.2025 are totally irrelevant, unsubstantiated, thus devoid of any merit or 
substance/material much less sufficient material. 

48. It is stated that all activities of the association have been within constitutional 
limits/parameters and in conformity with laws of the land. Declaring the 
organisation as unlawful is in violation of laws of land. It is stated that during last 
more than six decades the organisation has been functioning without any objections 
from the authorities. Labelling the organisation unlawful has huge impact on 
religious, social and political activities of organisation. 

49. It is also stated that the association has been taking part in all democratic 
exercises of the country from the date of its inception till date and it also fielded its 
candidates in Parliamentary Elections and in DDC elections and supported the 
regional party. It is stated that several workers of the party were targeted for taking 
part in these activities and have suffered loss of property at the hands of hooligans 
and undemocratic elements. 

50. Mr. Sharath Nambiar, Advocate on behalf of UOI cross examined RW-2 on 
2.07.2025. The same is reproduced hereunder: 


“Prior to my becoming the President of JKIM in 2006, I was not holding 
any position in JKIM nor was I an office bearer of JKIM. I was an 
ordinary member of this association during the period prior to my 
becoming the President. I was elected as a President of JKIM by the 
General Body. 

After I demitted the office as President, to the best of my recollection, 
one Mr. Gulam Mohammad became the President of JKIM. At the time 
when I was the President, there was no social medial channel being 
used by JKIM. 

Although I have heard the name of Burhan Wani, I do not know him 
personally. 

During the period when I was President of JKIM, we did not hold any 
political Hartal or rally. (Vol.) The organisation is purely a religious 
organisation. 

JKIM was a part of the APHC. 

Tribunal Question: What kind of organisation or forum was APHC? 
Answer: APHC was a platform having a mix of religious and political 
organisations. 

Question: Does JKIM believe that Jammu &Kashmir is an inseparable 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 69 


part of India. 

Answer: Yes. 

Suggestion: I suggest to you that in your affidavit you have made false 
averments and you have not deposed truthfully. 

Answer: The suggestion is denied. 

Cross-examination concluded Re-Examination: 

Question: During which period was JKIM a part of APHC? 

Answer: I can say that JKIM was definitely a constituent of APHC till 
2005. However, later on, APHC led by Syed Ali Shah Geelani 
removed JKIM from APHC. I do not remember the year. Thereafter, 
JKIM ceased to be a part of APHC.”’ 


5l. 24 public witnesses have filed their affidavits in support of the association 
and against the ban imposed on the association. As already noted, contents of all the 
affidavits are same which read as under: 


“That this Hon'ble Tribunal vide Public Notice dated 07.07.2025, has 
directed the interested persons to give evidence as regards non- 
involvement of JKIM, which organization has been declared as 
unlawful by the Central Government vide Notification No. S.O. 7//4(7) 
dated 777 March 2025. Being one of the well-wisher and having faith 
in Shia Sect of Islam and having affiliation with the said Organization, 
I hereby state on oath that the organization being the religious 
organization and having faith to remain loyal with the motherland since 
the date of its inception by its founder namely Late Moulana Abbass 
Ansari till date has never indulged in any antinational or 
illegal/unlawful activities and that the basic purpose of the association 
was/is clearly mentioned in the Constitution of the Association. 

4 am aware of the fact that the Association has been taking steps for 
distribution of knowledge through books, speeches, literature etc. It 
has also been highlighting socio-economic and political problems faced 
by the minority community. It has been taking part in all democratic 
exercises of the country from the date of its inception till date. 

That I am also aware of the fact that none of the members of the 
organization or its present acting president has any link or connection 
with antinational or secessionist activities. No FIRs have been 
registered against the association, for any antinational or secessionist 
or any other illegal activities. 

That as far as my personal knowledge whatever allegations have been 
labeled/mentioned in the Background Note and the Notification No. 
S.O. 77742) dated IIth March 2025 are totally irrelevant, 
unsubstantiated, thus devoid of any merit or substance/material much 
less sufficient material. 

I hereby state that all activities of the Organization have been within 
constitutional limits/parameters and in conformity with laws of the 
land. Declaring the organization as unlawful is in violation of 
constitution and laws of the land. During last more than six decades the 
organization has been functioning without any objections from the 
authorities. Labeling the organization unlawful has huge impact on 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


religious, social and political activities of organization. Further it is 
submitted that several workers/ members of party were targeted for 
taking part in these activities and have suffered loss of property at the 
hands of hooligans and undemocratic elements. Hence this Witness 


Affidavit.” 
52. On the directions of this Tribunal, the aforesaid 24 public witnesses have 


filed their supplementary affidavit stating as follows:- 


7) That I have been associated with Late Molvi Mohammad Abass 
Ansari (ra), from my childhood as follower (mureed). I have not been 
member of JKIM. However, as follower of Late Moulvi Abass Ansari, I 
had associated with organization as a common person. My association 
with Late Molvi Abass Ansari and after his death with Molvi Masroor 
Abass Ansari has been in religious affairs as follower/disciple 
(mureed). 

2) That I had no connection with JKIM or its office bearers, except 
as mentioned in para I of this Affidavit. 

3) That I have been disciple/follower (mureed) of religious leader 
Late Molvi Abass Ansari and thereafter his death Molvi Masroor 
Abass Ansari and have not been involved in activities of JKIM. 

4) I have been receiving guidance from religious leader Late 
Molvi Abass Ansari and thereafter from Molvi Masroor Abass Ansari 
in religious affairs and have been receiving such guidance throughout 
my life in accordance with Shia sect Islam.” 


IX. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE UOI 


53. Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG of India, appearing on behalf of the 
Central Government, submitted, at the outset, that the ban imposed by the central 
government on the instant proscribed association i.e. JKIM is liable to be confirmed 
for the following reasons:- 

(i) The assertions and allegation made by the central government in the 
‘Background Note’ submitted before this Tribunal; the material adduced 
in support of the said “Background Note” has remained uncontroverted 
and has not been disproved by the proscribed association; 

(ii) The proscribed association in its response to the express charge of 
indulging into secessionist activities has not made any positive assertion 
or statement and has not expressly declared that JKIM or its members 
and office bearers Honour the Constitution of India, do not advocate 
separation of territory of Kashmir from the UOI or merger of territory of 


Kashmir with Pakistan or declaration of it as an Independent State; 


[भाग II—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण हक 


54. 


i 


55. 


(iii) 


(iv) 


(v) 


(vi) 


(vil) 


There was overwhelming evidence/material with the central government 
at the time of declaring JKIM as proscribed association under the 
provisions of UAPA; 

The factum of existence and relevancy of the material on the basis of 
which central government had declared JKIM as a proscribed association 
has not been disproved by the proscribed association; 

The afore-referred material which was available with the central 
government has been duly adduced before this Tribunal, on oath; 

The authenticity, veracity, existence and relevancy of the afore-referred 
material, which is nature of FIRs registered against the members and 
office bearers of the proscribed association for indulging in secessionist 
activities in the territory of Kashmir, has been duly testified on oath by 
the respective competent officers of the various investigating agencies; 
The proscribed association has not been able to disprove the authenticity, 
veracity, existence and relevancy of respective FIRs which has been 
relied upon by the Central Government to ban JKIM under the provisions 


of UAPA; 


(viii) Evidence adduced by the proscribed association before this Tribunal in 


(ix) 


support of non-confirmation of ban cannot be said to outweigh the 
material/evidence adduced by the Central Government manifesting 
sufficient cause to declare JKIM as an “Unlawful Association’; 

In fact, no cause has been shown by the proscribed association or its 
members or office bearers as per section 4(3) of UAPA which can be 
legally adjudicated to decide that there was no sufficient cause for 


declaring JKIM as an unlawful association. 


Learned ASG, therefore, argued that for the aforesaid reasons and grounds, 
the ban imposed on the instant association i.e. JKIM is liable to be confirmed. 
Besides above, she founded her arguments on the following points:- 


Reasoning given in the Background Note for declaring JKIM as an 
Unlawful Association 


It is submitted that elaborate reasons and incidents have been narrated in the 


background note for declaring JKIM as an Unlawful Association. It is submitted 


72 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


that prior to issuance of the aforesaid Notification, all the relevant records including 
information received from J&K investigating agency and the inputs received from 
intelligence agencies regarding unlawful activities of JKIM were compiled and, 
thereupon, a note was prepared for the consideration of the Cabinet Committee on 
Security. It is further submitted that a draft notification was also annexed to the 
said note and sent to the Cabinet. Thereafter, the Cabinet Committee took the 
decision and approved the proposal contained in the above note. It is submitted that 
the background note submitted to this Tribunal in terms of Rule 5 of the Unlawful 
Activities Prevention Rules 968, vide letter dated 8" April, 2025 contained the 
material/information as contained in the note for the Cabinet Committee on 
Security. 


ii. Analysis of the evidence and material on record 


A. Unlawful Activities in the Background note and Evidence against the 
Organisation 

56. It is stated that the complicity of JKIM cadres in criminal and anti-national 
activitiesis is evident from the criminal cases that stand registered against them and 
the secessionist activities are cogently evident from their website content and the 
provocative speeches of its leaders. Details of few cases registered against the 
JKIM Chairman/ members provide clinching evidence regarding their involvement 


in various unlawful activities are given which is as under: 


Sr. Name of Cases registered before the Ban of JKIM 
No. the on .03.2025 
Accused 
Li Abbas Ansari FIR No. ३7/998 dated 25.02.998 
(founder of u/s 32-B of J & K Representotion of People 
JKIM) Act, 957, Section | of Criminal Law 
Amendment Act, and Section 3 of UA(P) Act, 
967 
2. Abbas Ansari FIR No. 6/2000 dated 23.06.2000 
u/s 53A/20B/ and 2(B) of RPC. 


57. It was submitted by the learned ASG that the authenticity, veracity, existence 
and relevancy of the aforereferred material, which is in the nature of FIRs registered 
against the members and office bearers of the proscribed organisation for indulging 
in secessionist activities in the territory of Kashmir and the hatred 


Speeches/Interviews or anti-national propaganda adopted by the Organisation 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 73 


through its official website and social media platforms, has been duly testified on 
oath by the respective competent officers of the Jammu & Kashmir investigating 
agency and Intelligent inputs received through various sources. The details of the 
same are annexed as the Evidence Chart of the Prosecution witnesses establishing 


the same as Appendix A. 


B. Admitted Facts by the Proscribed Organisation in their Statements before 
the Ld. Tribunal 


58. It is submitted that the Organisation through its Chairman and other members 
have admitted in their reply dated 30.05.2025 and depositions before the Ld. 
Tribunal that JKIM has been a core member of APHC and Maulana Ansari (the 
founding chairman of JKIM) was one of the founding member of APHC. It is 
stated that out of 26 parties that formed the conglomerate of APHC, 2 member 
organisations have been banned by the Central Organisation vide separate 
notifications under UAPA which have already been upheld by the respective 
Tribunals notified from time to time. The main objective of several member 
organisations joining APHC was to further the separatist approach and to fulfil the 
agenda of generating hatred and disaffection against India and to severe Jammu & 
Kashmir from the UOI. Attention was invited to Exhibit P-6 in affidavit produced 
by PW-03 to show that JKIM strongly believed while associating with APHC that 
The Kashmiri leadership have formed a united front, the APHC (Unlawful 
Association), which represents the alleged combined political will of the Kashmiri 
people seeking a peaceful and negotiated settlement through a tripartite agreement. 
(Inclusion of Pakistan). It was further submitted that therefore, it shall be correct to 
submit that JKIM, originated with the above said ideology and continued to hold 
the same till its ban on !.03.2025 by the Central Government should also be 
banned under UAA for advocating cessionist and secessionist activities in the 
Kashmir Valley. 

59. Further, it was submitted that all the respondent’s witnesses have admitted 
to the political ideology of the Organisation by stating that many of its members 
including the present Chairman had actively participated in the local level election 


processes. Moreover, JKIM has admitted to be a constituent member of APHC. 


74 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


However, it is pertinent to note that APHC when formed, was never a religious 
organisation. It was further stated that PW-03 vide Exhibit 06 @ Pg 20 of his 
affidavit had deposed to the effect of the speeches and interview of Maulana Abbas 
Ansari, the founding chairman of JKIM who believed that religion and politics are 
inseparable and for a clean politics Islam provides the best teachings. Maulana was 


among the founder members of the “State Plebiscite Front”. It was stated that it 


was he who vehemently opposed the holding state political convention in 967-68 
and described it as deviation from the path of truth and reminded the participants 
that real solution to Kashmir Problem is in the right of self-determination. 
Therefore, it is stated, the stand taken by JKIM now in its reply dated 30.05.2025 
and the deposition of RW-0l that JKIM has only been a religious Organisation is 
clearly erroneous and devoid of any merit and an afterthought. 

60. 78 submitted that the RW-0] and RW-02 in their statements deposed before 
the Ld. Tribunal have admitted to subscription of around one lakh members of JKIM 
till the last survey conducted by the Organisation way back in 204-20I5. It was 
stated that as per the statement of RW-l, no record or data of membership was 
maintained by JKIM ever since it informally dissolved in 2023. Therefore, it was 
submitted that such huge number of members of JKIM could be actively involved 
in number of anti- national activities till date throughout the Kashmir valley and 
therefore there cannot be a bare denial of no cases being registered against the 
members of the Organisation. Learned ASG also submitted that instead of 
controverting and disproving the allegation mentioned in the background note, the 
Chairman of the proscribed organisation, in its reply dated 30.05.2025 and during 
his examination before the Ld. Tribunal dated |.07.2025 at Srinagar had expressly 
admitted to believe Burhan Wani (a terrorist of Hizbul Mujhahideen) as a martyr 
and stated that though JKIM had been dissolved informally by him in 2023 but he 
still personifies JKIM till date. It was further stated that the Chairman in his 
deposition could not refute to incriminating and anti-national speeches delivered by 
him being uploaded on his website and produced as evidence by the UOI before the 
Tribunal. He admitted to personally operate and supervise the Social media handle 
of the Organisation which has around one lakh followers. 

6l. Further, that the Chairman and other members of the proscribed organisation 
in their depositions before the Ld. Tribunal in response to the express charge of 


indulging into secessionist activities have not made any positive assertion or 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 75 


statement and have not expressly declared that the proscribed organisation i.e. JKIM 
or its members and office bearers do not advocate for declaration of J & K as an 
Independent State. It has been argued that all of the witnesses on behalf of the 
association accepted that JKIM being an integral part of APHC which advocated 
for separatist approach 

62. It was submitted that the RW-| had deposed to the fact the JKIM was a Shia 
religious organisation before its informal dissolution in 2023. However, the UOI 
produced clinching evidence through the affidavit of PW-3 wherein the official 
website of JKIM on the contrary shows that JIKM had always advocated for an 
‘Independent Kashmir’ separate from India and had never advocated for allegiance 
to the Constitution of India. It was stated that PW- 3 in his Affidavit vide Exhibit — 
P6 had produced before the Ld. Tribunal the BASIC PRINCIPLES OF JKIM 
which read as under: 


“7. Religion_and politics are_inseparable_and_ for clean _ politics 


islam provides the best teachings. 


its Definite goal of JKIM is a strong and united Muslim 
community as we believe that freedom requires unity of all masses and 
a support of all classes. We have made it a main purpose of our struggle 
to bring Muslims on a single platform. 


ii. __ The freedom struggle of the State of Jammu and Kashmir is a 
religion-based peaceful and non-violent national liberation struggle. By 
describing it a non- religious or secular movement or any type of 
communal agitation means ...sentiments of the majority of the State. 
Qur_party considers the freedom struggle in the Stateas people's 
struggle for freedom against the foreign occupants and in contravention 


of international principles. That the people of the state only, as sole 


masters_of their motherland are competent to determine the future 


status of the state. “ 


63. Learned ASG inviting attention to the evidence adduced by the association 
submitted that the admissions made by the witnesses produced by the association 
prove the secessionist and cessionist ideology of the banned assocation. A chart to 
the same effect has been annexed with the written submission. The same is 


reproduced as under: 


76 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


SI. No. 


Name of Defense 
Witness 


Statement deposed 


RW-I 
Masoor 
Ansari, 
JKIM 


Abbass 
President 


l. The Witness stated that the News of JKIM 
being banned was disseminated to its workers/ 
members through word of mouth and Social 
Media. (Page 26) 

2. The Witness admitted that JKIM has a page 
on Facebook and a Channel on YouTube (Page 
27) 

3. The Witness asserted that Burhan Wani, was 
a martyr (Page 27) 

4.The Witness stated that a survey was 
conducted sometimes in 204-205 in which it 
transpired that there may have been | lakh 
members of JKIM. JKIM is not statutorily 
registered under the Societies Registration Act 
or under any other statute. (Vol.) It is a religious 
organisation. 

5. The Witness first stated that he had never 
been to Pakistan and then volunteered a 
completely contrary assertion, stating that he had 
family in Pakistan and had previously visited 
Pakistan. (Page 28) 

6. JKIM was a part of APHC. 

7. The Witness personifies JKIM 


RW-2 

Master Ghulam 
Hassan Ganai 
Elected 

General Secretary of 
the Association from 
205 to 20I8 


l. The Witness Stated that JKIM was part of 
APHC (Page 30) 

2. The Witness Stated that I ceased to be a 

member of JKIM after 20l8. I do not know 

whether JKIM remained active after 208. I am 

not aware whether JKIM had any links with any 

external agencies or countries after 208. (Page 

30) 

3. The Witness Stated that I cannot say whether 

Burhan Wani was a martyr or not. (Page 30) 

4. The Witness could not state whether JKIM has 

any relations with foreign states post 208 

(Page 30) 


RW-3 

Syed Muzaffar Rizvi 
Currently, Vice 
President of Political 
Party, “Apni Party” 
Elected Secretary of 
the Assocationfrom 


l. The Witness served as Secretary of JKIM 
from 2000 to 2023 and he was handpicked for 
this role by the Late Moulvi in recognition of his 
abilities (Page 32) 

2.The Witness stated that he resigned from 
JKIM to join mainstream politics in (Apni 
Party).(Page 32) 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 77 


2000 to 2023. 3.The Witness stated that the Social Media 
Activities during his tenure as secretary, were 
being directly handled by the President of the 
Organisation. (Page 33) 

4. The Witness stated that while he was familiar 
with such social media posts and would check 
the posts for discrepancies in language, the 
uploading of such posts was done directly by the 
President (Page 33) 

5. Till September 2023, there was no You-Tube 
channel of JKIM. (Page 33) 

6. The Witness stated that his only point of 
ideological difference with the Late Moulvi, was 
as regards the association of JKIM with APHC. 
(Page 33) 

7.The Witness refused to agree with the 
suggestion that Burhan Wani is a Terrorist 
(Page 33) 

8.I am not aware about the membership of 
JKIM as on date. (Vol.) When I was a member 
of JKIM, membership of JKIM comprised of 
several lakhs of 

members/followers. (Page 34) 


7 RW4- Haji l. Witness deposed that while he was president o 
Mohammad Shafi association from 2006 to 2008 there was no 
Ganai Elected social media presence. (Page 35) 
President of JKIM 2. JKIM was part of APHC (Page 36) 
from 206 to 3. APHC was a platform having a mix of 
2008 religious and political organisations. (Page 36) 


64. It was stated that the opportunity to lead material has been misused by the 
organisation. The organisation has instead used the said opportunity, by using the 
forum of present Tribunal, to conduct a mini trial. It was submitted that the cross- 
examination of the public witnesses was not done to refute the authenticity and the 
veracity of the FIRs filed by the Investigating agency but only an unwarranted 
attempt to take the Tribunal to look into the merits of the case which is not under 
the jurisdiction and domain of proceedings before this Tribunal. 

65. It was submitted that therefore, none of these individuals has provided any 
details of their association with or knowledge of JKIM and no material has been 


placed by these individuals in respect of the judicial threshold required to be met in 


78 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


order to adjudicate the present matter under Section 4(l) UAPA. It was stated that 
in view of the lack of any locus, the suspicious nature of the affidavits in being 
identically worded and notarized by the same notary public on the same day, and 
being entirely vague and irrelevant in the statements made therein, the 24 affidavits 
submitted by members of the public do not deserve any consideration by this 


Tribunal and ought to be disregarded in its entirety. 


C. Material not refuted by the Organisation in Defense 


66. Learned ASG stated that that there was overwhelming evidence/material 
with the Central government at the time of declaring JKIM as proscribed 
organisation under the provisions of UAPA; the material adduced as evidence by 
PW-3 in his Affidavit and deposition on oath before the Ld. Tribunal forms inter- 
alia a part on the basis of which Central government had declared JKIM as 
Proscribed organisation which could not be repelled or controverted by the 
proscribed organisation in rebuttal. A chart has been enclosed with the written 
submission of UOI as Appendix B being the extracts from the affidavit of PW-03, 
which as per the UOI is relevant and cogent material to show that JKIM since its 
inception till the date of banning by the Central Government has been engaged in 


unlawful activities in the Kashmir Valley. The same is reproduced as under: 


SL. Name of Police Particulars 
No. Officer & Police 
Station 
l. T l. SPEECHES AND 
pies sion INTERVIEW 
ALI, INSPECTOR, CID, A. EXHIBIT P2-— @Pg. 8 
SRINAGAR i) Video l — Plebiscite was favored in 
the video 


ii) Video 2 — Kashmir neither remains 
with India nor Pakistan. 

iii) Video 3 — GeoTv (Pakistan 
Channel) Interview — Kashmiris of 
both sides i.e. J&K and POK need 


to co-ordinate and don’t need to 


[भाग [avs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


79 


follow the road maps of India 


Pakistan. 


370 — India had promised the Rig 


or 


iv) Video 4 — On Abrogation of Art. 


ht 


of Plebiscite and until it is not 


realized the “RESISTANCE 


MOVEMENT?’ will continue. 


B.EXHIBIT P4 - @Pg. 0 
i) The people of Kashmir 


“MAZLOOMS”. 
i) “YAHAN KYA CHALAYGA 


NIZAME MUSTAFA” 
meaning THE LAND WILL 
ONLY BE RULED UNDER 
SHARIA LAW. 


ili) Praising the Kashmiri militants 
as martyrs of the freedom 
struggle. 


iv) Burhan Wani was a martyr 
v) Not to succumb before the 


oppressors (Government) even 
if his head is removed from his 
shoulders. 

vi) Told the public that they are 
ready to die for Islam and 
Freedom. 

vii)The mothers have raised their 
sons like Lions who do not 
surrender but prefer 
martyrdom. 

Viil) The chairman of JKIM 


wants to replicate the model 


are 


80 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


adopted by Ayatullah Khomeni to 
forward the cause of freedom 


struggle. (872. 3 


. EXHIBIT P5 - @PG. 4 (BBC 


INTERVIEW OF ABBAS 


ANSARI (founding chairman of 
JKIM as Hurriyat Chief) 
i. Pg. 6 — When asked by the 


interviewer about Ansari levelling 


charges of electoral malpractices. 


Had he participated, didn’t he think 


that his support would have been 


known worldwide? 
[| To which he answered that it 


would have been hypocritical on 


his part that on one hand he would 


had_accepted_an Oath declaring 


Kashmir_as_an_integral_part_of 


India_and_on_the other hand_they 


are fighting for it’s independence. 
They represent the wishes of the 


people and they would only 


participate if when candidates are 


not required to sign an oath in this 


regard. They do not adopt a dual 
policy on this matter and they are 
clear on this issue. 


ii. A listener from Jaipur posed 8 


question to Ansari that he is talking 
about the independence of Kashmir 
from India, “why don’t you 


demand independence of Kashmir 


which is under the control of 


[भाग Il—vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 8] 


Pakistan?** @Pg.l6 


(| To which Ansari responded, 
that is what he is saying that Indian 
Kashmir is referred to as heaven 
on earth, so is the IVDEPENDENT 
KASHMIR: 


3. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF JKIM 
A. EXHIBIT - 26 @Pg. 8 


i. _—Religion __and____politics _are 
inseparable _and_ for clean _ politics 


islam provides the best teachings. 


ii. Definite goal of JKIM is a strong 


and_united Muslim community _as_we 


believe that freedom requires unity of 
all masses and a support of all classes. 
We have made it a main purpose of our 
struggle to bring Muslims on a single 
platform. 

iti. The freedom struggle of the State of 


Jammu and Kashmir is a religion-based 


peaceful and non- violent national 
liberation struggle. By describing it a 
non- religious or secular movement or 
any type of communal agitation means 
..sentiments of the majority of the 


State. Our party considers the freedom 


struggle inthe State as people's 


struggle for freedom __against _ the 
foreign occupants and in contravention 


of international principles. 


82 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


v. That the people of the state only, as 
sole_masters of their_motherland_are 


competent to determine the future 


status of the state. But the govt. of 


India and Pakistan, even without 


having any locus stand in the matter of 
determining the future status of the 
state, do in view of the geo-political 
realities prevailing, practically emerge 
as parties involved and effected by the 
problem and thereby their concurrence 
becomes necessary for a_ practical, 
peaceful and lasting political settlement 
of the future status of the state. In_no 


case however can the J&K problem are 


deemed to be a border dispute between 


the two or more countries of this region. 


The_interpretation of "azaadi" is that 


the forcible occupation of the State is 


to 2८ resisted by the people of all the 
five_units of the State by organizing 


civil disobedience —movement वादे 


demonstration of public power_based 
on the principle of non-violence and 
through democratic process. The State 


is_to_be liberated from occupational 


forces कब व society based _on_the 
concept of peoples power _is to 2८ 
established in which 

(a) every man and woman will have 
the freedom to pursue his or her 
economic, religious and political beliefs 
(b) the governing system will be based 


on the principles of democratic justice 


[भाग [avs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 83 


and religious harmony and tolerance 
(c) the state will be responsible for 
providing the people their basic needs, 
education, sustenance and medical 
facilities (d) no person belonging to the 
State will be forcibly deprived of his 
right to life and residence on the basis of 
his religious beliefs, ethnicity, caste, 
creed or language. 

vi. Patriotism means faithfulness 
towards one's country, towards its 
people, towards the history and culture 
of the community and safety and 
security of its borders and preservation 


of its sovereignty. Anybody or any 


party rejecting the _ internationally 


accepted interpretation of patriotism is 
not 6 patriot from our party's point of 
view. 

4. (FREEDOM STRUGGLE) 
EXHIBIT - 26 @Pg. 9 


i.The freedom struggle of Kashmir 


involves the principle of the_right of 


self-determination. They want to be free 


of military occupation _and_to decide 
their future by a democratic vote, 
impartially supervised (Third party 
intervention). 

i. According to them India pursues a 
policy of terror_and the Kashmiri 
people and their leadership hopes for 


84 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


peace. 
iii. The Kashmiri __ leadership _ have 
formed_a_united_ front, the APHC 
(Unlawful___ Association), which 


represents the combined political will 


of the Kashmiri people seeking a 


peaceful__and__ negotiated _ settlement 


through __a___tripartite agreement. 


(Unclusion of Pakistan). 


iv. The solution of Kashmir is urgent 


and vital. It has far more populous and 
strategic area than other trouble spots in 


the world. The arson and mass human 


rights violations by the Indian 


occupation forces are __no___less 


humiliating in Kashmir that in Bosnia. 


The torture and imprisonment in India- 


occupied Kashmir is no less intense as 


it is in Burma. The pain, suffering and 


humiliation in Kashmir is_intensified 


because_the people of Kashmir_have 


been under Indian Occupation _for 


nearly half a century. 


5. (LEADER PROFILE) 
EXHIBIT - 26 @ Pg. 20 
i. It states that the people (Kashmiris) 


are being hunted, hounded and 
humiliated in their own land by the 
Indian security forces, Indiscriminate 
killings, Torture, Rape, Molestation, 
Plunder, Arson, Custodial killings 
besides illegal and unlawful arrests, 
have become the order of the day over 


since January 990 when people of 


[भाग Il—vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 85 


Kashmir started an open revolt against 
India to press their demand for the 
achievement of the right of self- 
determination. 

ii. The Indian occupation continues 
and Indian authorities continue to 
brutalize the people of Jammu & 
Kashmir. 

ii. JKIM also worked for the political, 
Social and economic welfare of the 
Muslims and demanded a UN 
supervised plebiscite in Kashmir. 


iv. Maulana Abbas _ believes _ that 


religion and politics are inseparable and 


for a clean politics Islam provides the 
best teachings. 


v. Maulana was among the founder 


members of the “State  Plebiscite 
Front”. It was he who vehemently 
opposed the holding state political 
convention in 967- 68 and described it 
as deviation from the path of truth and 
reminded the participants that real 
solution to Kashmir Problem is in the 
right of self-determination. State 
political convention was called at 
Mujahid Manzil, Srinagar to deliberate 
the future of Jammu & Kashmir. 


vi. Abbas Ansari__led many _ public 


gatherings in which he promoted Anti- 
India sentiment _in_the _people_and 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


encouraged the armed terrorists. 


vii. Abbas Ansari established Muslim 
United Front (MUF) with a clear stance 
that Kashmir was occupied by fraud 


and brute force and its people were yet 


to__ exercise their right to _ self- 


determination. 
viii. Abbas Ansari held a_ press 
conference in Srinagar in which he said 


that_the State of J&K is disputed 


territory and_has_ been occupied by 
force _and_they are fighting against 


alien domination. 


ix. According to Abbas Ansari he was 
fighting for the 

Independence Movement of Kashmir. 

x. After the Kargil War in 


September,l999 Ansari with other 
leaders of APHC were arrested and 
sent to prison. They were released after 
8 months, following which Ansari 


visited various countries like U.K., Iran 


and Saudi Arabia in attempt to garner 
support for his stand _on the Kashmir 


issue_as_ to repression caused by_the 


Indian security forces and the struggles 


of the people of Kashmir. 


xi. Ansari met erstwhile President of 
Pakistan, Musharraf when he visited 
India to discuss the Kashmir issue 


despite strong objections from the UOI. 


[भाग [avs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 87 


6. CALENDAR 
EXHIBIT - P6 @Pg. 2[&22 


i. 49% March—- Martyrdom 
Anniversary of Shabir Siddique- 


Shabir Siddique was a leader of a 
faction of JKLF who was neutralized 
by the Indian Army in an operation 
conducted at the Headquarters of the 
faction after the militants led_by 
Siddique opened fired at the forces 
when asked to surrender. This date as 
per the Calendar issued by JKIM has 
been marked to observe full day 
mourning in support of this person. 


Same date — 

Martyrdom of S Hameed of 
People League 

S. Hameed was another militant for 


whom JKIM observes mourning on the 
said date for the full day. 


ii. 2377 March - PAKISTAN DAY 
As_ the date suggests this date is 


जजों 
=a 


marked in the calendar issued by 


JKIM for celebrating PAKISTAN 
DAY. 


iii, 30 March — Martyrdom of 
Ishfaq Majeed Ishfaqg Majeed @ 
Ashfaq Majeed Wani was the First 


ommander-in-Chief of JKLF who was 


involved in the kidnapping of Rubiya 
ayed daughter of late Mufti 


88 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Mohammed Sayeed the then Home 


Minister _of India. This date has been 
marked as martyrdom day of this 
militant in calendar issue by JKIM. It is 
pertinent to note that Yaseen Malik 
succeeded him after he was killed in the 
encounter. 

iv. 26" January- INDIAN REPUBLIC 
DAY (BLACKDAY) 


iv. 27 October —INDIAN 
INVASION OF KASHMIR 
(BLACK DAY) 


On this date, Indian Army landed in 
Kashmir to secure the borders and fight 
the Pashtuns who were invading the 
territories of Jammu & Kashmir. This 
date has been marked as Black Day in 
the calendar issued by JKIM. 


67. It is submitted that no substantive or concrete material/ evidence has been 
adduced by the proscribed organisation before this Tribunal to rebut the clinching 
evidences produced by the UOI and to support their case of non-confirmation of 
ban which can be said to outweigh the material/evidence adduced by the Central 
Government manifesting sufficient cause to declare JKIM as unlawful association. 

68. It was hence submitted that for the aforesaid reasons and grounds; the ban 


imposed on the instant association i.e. JKIM is liable to be confirmed. 


D. Intelligence Reports Produced before the Ld. Tribunal in Sealed Cover 


69. ‘It was stated that the sealed cover documents produced as Exhibit PW-4/4 
before the Ld Tribunal establishes the fact that JKIM through its Chairman and other 
members have been indulging in radicalizing and brainwashing the minds, 
indoctrinating the people of Jammu & Kashmir through provocative speeches for 
separation of J & K from UOI; the inputs received from various intel reports will 
prove that the stand of JKIM has always been secessionist since inception and 


continues to carry forward its anti-India ideology through its varied activities 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 89 


throughout all these years in the valley of Kashmir; the Intel report will further 
establish that JKIM has always been advocating for the establishment of 
‘Independent Kashmir” which has also been established through the deposition of 
its chairman and other members before the Ld. Tribunal. 

70. It was also submitted that the witness of the Central Government authorized 
to depose on behalf of the Ministry of Home Affairs i.e. PW-4 who notified the 
banning of the said Organisation is a competent officer who has been involved in 


the drafting of the said notification no. SO !4(E) dated .03.2025 based on the 


various Intel inputs received to the Central Government from time to time and was personally 
involved in the making and movement of the draft notification and background note for the 


Cabinet Security meeting on the said issue. 
ili, The Relevance of the Public Witnesses who are not part of the Proscribed 


Organisation. 
7l. It was stated that this Tribunal vide order dated 0.07.2025 directed the 


issuance of a public notice calling upon persons interested/ willing to participate in 
the inquiry, to file their affidavits with the Registrar of this Tribunal before the next 
date of hearing held in Srinagar on !.07.2025. It was submitted that the above 
direction called upon interested / willing persons to participate in the inquiry being 
held by this Tribunal by way of the present reference under Section 4(), UAPA. 
Reliance was made on Section 4 (l) of UAPA, which reads as under:- 


“4. Reference to Tribunal — (7) Where any association has been declared 
unlawful by a notification issued under sub-section (/) of section 3, the 
Central Government shall, within thirty days from the date of the 
publication of the notification under the said sub-section, refer the 
notification to the Tribunal for the purpose of adjudicating whether or not 
there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” 


72. Relying upon Section 4(.) of UAPA Act, it was submitted that the scope 
of inquiry before this Tribunal under the above provision is only to adjudicate 
whether there is ‘sufficient cause’ for declaring JKIM an unlawful association 
under Section 3 UAPA. 

73. It was stated that in furtherance of order dated 0.07.2025, 24 individuals 
had filed affidavits in support of the association before this Tribunal but none of 


these 24 individuals is a member of the association or has provided any other 


90 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


details of their association / affiliation with JKIM; all 24 affidavits are identical in 
their content, are notarized by the same notary public on the same day, ie. 
09.07.2025 and appear to be planted testimonies which merely give vague 
statements in support of the association. It was further stated that the affidavits are 
entirely bereft of any personal details of the individuals themselves and do not 
explain the locus of these individuals in filing affidavits in support of the 
association. 

74. It was submitted that the assertions and averments of 24 pubic witnesses 
even otherwise specifically states that they are not and had never been members of 
the association. It was submitted that in that view of the matter, their knowledge 
of the functioning and ideology of the Association can at best be a truncated 
outside view bereft of any comprehensive knowledge and the affinity and motive 
of so called public witnesses also has not been established before this tribunal and 
therefore, their affidavits have no relevance to the determination of sufficient cause 
as to the unlawful activity of the Organisation. A table enumerating these public 
witnesses has been enclosed with the written submission as Appendix C which is 


reproduced as under: 


“PUBLIC WITNESSES 
9. NAME FACTS STATED 
N 


O 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9] 


Mohammad 
Akbar Dar 


Being one of the well-wisher and having 
faith in Shia Sect of Islam and having 
affiliation with the said Organisation 
(Para | @pg l). 

That I am also aware of the fact that none 
of the members of the organisation or its 
present acting president has any link 
or connection with antinational or 
secessionist activities. No FIRs have 
been registered against the association, 
for any antinational or secessionist or 
any other illegal activities. 

(Para 3 @pgl). 


92 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


2, ZawarMohd. —+|_:‘-------------- ले नल मल ला os 
MUSUESOM 000 | nn mmr ne moe en ns 

3, Ghulam Hassan =|: ------------- ae a a an रहे 
SO Wi eee eee ae oe 

4. Hakim Mohd. |: ------------- 30% She ASHP तक 
9) st ccc | rc oe a 

5. Zahid Hussain =—s«d|:s«------------- MOPAR See कक 
4h | | ___________ ________ै_ै_ै_ै_ै_ ee 

‘| Hakim sds = = == === == ---- 52809 eas an ae 
जिणाव,शव्रवठ004... | ____________________ 

7. Nasir AliDar न किम 5335 लत 2 नल पतली 

a ; Ishfaq Hussain = =s-'|_:‘ ------------- doFSsaS pss shesse oes 
शा... ute a oe tate ee we tee we te 

i | HajiMohd. =|: ------------- ५3484 es act 
AmeenAshraf fe 

0. Mohammad | ------------- dos Satta लाल लक seit: 
MOUSUED ars | _____________________________ 

Ii | -Ghitlam’Mohd..- |, ------------- eee cae cee 
JOO _____________ ____ __ै_ै_ै_ _ै_ै_ै_ै_ _ै_] 

(2: Inaam Hussain 

3. | HajiGhulam  —sis«—-------------- do Sea San 20:03 70 sean 


[भाग Il—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 93 


MohuddinSofi 


4. 


Mohd. 
MohsinSofi 


5. 


Mohammad 
AbassParray 


6. 


Anyjad Ali 
Malik 


Ly. 


Mohammad 
Qasim Dar 


8. 


Ghulam 
Mustafa Bhat 


Py: 


Ali Mohammad 
Malik 


20. 


Shabir Hussain 
Dar 


PAE 


Ghulam Hassan 
Dar 

(different name 
on notarised 


stamp) 


22. 


Mudasir Ahmad 
Sofi 


2; 


Hakim Masood 
Ul Hassan 


24. 


Shabeer 
Hussain Bhat 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


iv. The Definition of Unlawful Activity under UAPA 


75. Relying upon the definition of ‘Unlawful Activity’ given under the UAPA, 
it was submitted that the objection behind the enactment of UAPA is as under: 


“An Act to provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlawful 
activities of individuals and associations, [and for dealing with 
terrorist activities,] and for matters connected therewith.” 


76. It was submitted that the provisions of the aforesaid Act came for 
consideration before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Arup Bhuyan 7. State of Assam, 
(2023) 8 SCC 745 wherein the Supreme Court held as under: 


“86. Now let us consider the Preamble to the UAPA, 7967. As per 
Preamble, the UAPA has been enacted to provide for the more effective 
prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and associations 
and dealing with terrorist activities and for matters connected therewith. 
Therefore the aim and object of enactment of the UAPA is also to provide 
for more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities. That is why 
and to achieve the said object and purpose of effective prevention of 
certain unlawful activities Parliament in its wisdom has provided that 
where an association is declared unlawful by a notification issued under 
Section 3, a person, who is and continues to be a member of such 
association shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to 2 years, and shall also be liable to fine. Therefore, Parliament in its 
wisdom had thought it fit that once an association is declared unlawful after 
following due procedure as required under Section 3 and subject to the 
approval by the Tribunal still a person continues to be a member of such 
association is liable to be punished/penalise. ” 

(Emphasis Supplied) 


77. Reliance was placed on the following definitions/provisions as contemplated 
under UAPA: 


“Definitions.—(l) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “association” means any combination or body of individuals; 
(b) “cession of a part of the territory of India” includes admission of 
the claim of any foreign country to any such part; xxx 
XXX XXX 

(i) “secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union” includes 
the assertion of any claim to determine whether such part will remain a part 
of the territory of India; 

XXX XXX XX 


(०) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or association, means 
any action taken by such individual or association (whether by committing 


[भाग व---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 95 


an act or by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible 
representation or otherwise),— 

(i) which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any 
ground whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India or 
the secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union, or 
which incites any individual or group of individuals to bring about 
such cession or secession; or 
(ti) which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt 
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India; or 
(tii) which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against 
India; 

(p) “unlawful association” means any association,— (i) which has for its 
object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aidspersons to 
undertake any unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such 
activity; or 

(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable under 
section I53A (45 of 76609) or section ॥3378 of the Indian Penal 
Code, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any such 
activity, or of which the members undertake any such activity: 
Provided that nothing contained in sub-clause (ii) shall apply to the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir; * 

XXX XXX XXX 
3. Declaration of an association as unlawful. — (2) If the Central 
Government is of opinion that any association is, or has become, an 
unlawful association, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare such association to be unlawful. 
(2) Every such notification shall specify the grounds on which it is issued 
and such other particulars as the Central Government may consider 
necessary: Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall require the 
Central Government to disclose any fact which it considers to be against the 
public interest to disclose. 
(3) No such notification shall have effect until the Tribunal has, by an 
order made under section 4, confirmed the declaration made therein and 
the order is published in the Official Gazette: 
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances 
exist which render it necessary for that Government to declare an 
association to be unlawful with immediate effect, it may, for reasons to be 
stated in writing, direct that the notification shall,subject to any order 
that may be made under section 4, have effect from the date of its 
publication in the Official Gazette...... ” 


78. Relying upon the aforesaid provisions, it was submitted that the declaration 
of an association to be ‘unlawful’ by the Central Government under Section 3 of the 


said Act is after forming of the opinion that the said association is, or has become 


96 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


unlawful. Such a declaration can be issued in respect of an association which is 
already unlawful or in respect of an association which, initially being lawful, has 
become unlawful. It was further stated that the definition of an ‘unlawful 
association’ in section 2()(p) of the UAPA is in two parts viz. an association being 
involved in ‘unlawful activity’ and / or an association involved in activity / offences 
punishable under section 53A or section 53B of the IPC. It was stated that the 
provisions of the Central legislation UAPA had now been made applicable in toto 
to the UT of J & K vide Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Removal of 
Difficulties) Order, 209 dated 30.0.20l9 which is reproduced as under: 


“2. Removal of difficulties.—The difficulties arising in giving effect to the 
provisions of the principal Act have been removed in the following manner, 
namely: - 

(3) The Judges of the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir for the existing State 
of Jammu and Kashmir holding office immediately before the appointed day 
shall be deemed to have been appointed under article 277 of the 
Constitution and they shall be deemed to have taken oath or affirmation 
under article 2/9 of the Constitution and shall continue to function as 
Judges of common High Court of the Union Territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir and the Union Territory of Ladakh from the appointed day. 


(5) All those Central laws, Ordinance and rules which are applicable to the 
whole of India except the existing State of Jammu and Kashmir 


immediately before the appointed day, shall now be applicable to the Union 


Territory of Jammu_and Kashmir_and_the Union Territory of Ladakh in 


addition to the Central laws specified in TABLE -7 of the of Fifth Schedule 
to the principal Act; 


a” 


79. It was submitted that the association for the purposes of UAPA can be termed 
as ‘unlawful association’ in case either of the situations comprises of three 
categories i.e. 


a. where the association has for its object any such unlawful activities, 
b. or the association encourages or aids persons to undertake any of such 


unlawful activities or 

८. where the members of such association undertake such unlawful 
activities. 

And, if the activities of any association fall in any of these three categories, 


such an association will be liable to be declared as an unlawful association. 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 97 


80. It was submitted that the ‘activity’ by an unlawful association can be termed 
as ‘unlawful’ as defined under Section 2()(0) if either of the ingredients under the 
given definition meets the objective satisfaction of the Tribunal. The use of the word 
‘or’ makes it explicit that the intention of the legislature is that if an individual or 
association who commits any act by word either spoken or written or by sign or 
visible representation, any of such acts is sufficient to bring that activity within the 
sphere of unlawful activity. It was submitted that the Ld. Tribunal presided by 
Hon’ble Justice Dinesh Kumar Sharma in the matter of declaring Popular Front of 
India (PF) as unlawful Association vide its judgment dated 2]*' March, 2023 held 
that “The concept of ‘sovereignty’, ‘territorial integrity’ of a country and 
‘dissatisfaction’ are very subjective terms.”’. Reliance is placed on para 336-337 of 


said judgment. 


y. Nature of proceedings and standard of proof before the UAPA Tribunal for 
declaring as association as unlawful 
8l. In this regard, it was submitted that the standard of proof in civil and criminal 
proceedings is entirely different, i.e., of the preponderance of the probability and 
proof beyond reasonable doubt, respectively. Reference can be made to the case of 
Iqbal Singh Marwah vs. Meenakshi Marwah, (2005) 4 SCC 370, wherein it was 
inter alia held as under:- 


“32. Coming to the last contention that an effort should be made to avoid 
conflict of findings between the civil and criminal Courts, it is necessary to 
point out that the standard of proof required in the two proceedings are 
entirely different. Civil cases are decided on the basis of preponderance of 
evidence while in a criminal case the entire burden lies on the prosecution 
and proof beyond reasonable doubt has to be given. There is neither any 
statutory provision nor any legal principle that the findings recorded in 
one proceeding may be treated as final or binding in the other, as both the 
cases have to be decided on the basis of the evidence adduced therein.” 


82. The nature of the present proceedings and the scope of inquiry in the present 
proceedings have been laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jamaat-e- 


Islami Hind (Supra) in the specific context of the provisions of the UAPA. 


98 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


83. It was further submitted that the Supreme Court emphasized that Section 4 
(l) uses the expression “for the purpose of adjudicating whether or not there is 
sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful”. Reference was made to 
Section 4 (2) which requires issue of notice in writing to show cause to the 
association and sub-section (3) which mandates inquiry in the manner specified in 
Section 9 after calling for such information as may be necessary from Central 
Government or from office bearers or members of the association. The Tribunal 
under Section 4(3) is required to adjudicate and make an order, as it may deem fit, 
either confirming the declaration made in the notification or cancelling the same. 
After interpreting the said provisions of the Act, it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra) as under:- 


“I].... The entire procedure contemplates an objective determination made 
on the basis of material placed before the Hon’ble Tribunal by the two 
sides; and the inquiry is in the nature of adjudication of a lis between two 
parties, the outcome of which depends on the weight of the material 
produced by them. Credibility of the material should, ordinarily, be 
capable of objective assessment. The decision to be made by the Hon’ble 
Tribunal is “whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the 
Association unlawful”. Such a determination requires the Hon’ble 
Tribunal to reach the conclusion that the material _to support the 


declaration outweighs the material against it and_the additional weight to 
support the declaration is sufficient to sustain it. The_test of greater 


probability appears to be the pragmatic test application in the context.” 


84. It was submitted by Learned ASG that the aforesaid ratio was affirmed after 
making reference to Section 5, which stipulates that the Tribunal shall be headed by 
a Judge of the High Court and proceedings will be deemed to be judicial proceedings 
and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purpose specified. It was 
accordingly held that the opinion given by the Tribunal under Section 5 has binding 
effect and has been given a characteristic of judicial determination as distinguished 
from an opinion of an Advisory Board under the preventive detention laws. Section 
4 of the Act requires issue of notice by giving opportunity to show cause to the 
association. Accordingly, the Supreme Court held that the objective findings by the 
Tribunal must be based upon materials required to support the judicial 


determination. It was submitted that while deciding the reference, the Tribunal does 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 99 


not act or exercise power of judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution of 
India on whether or not declaration under Section 3() should have been made but 
goes into the factual existence of the grounds by objective determination of the Jis 
between the Government and the association. 

85. Learned ASG pointed out that after referring to the nature of evidence and 
the procedure which a Tribunal should adopt it was held by the Supreme Court that 
the minimum requirements of natural justice must be satisfied to ensure that there is 
meaningful adjudication. However, the requirements of natural justice have to be 
tailored to safeguard public interest which must outweigh every lesser interest. In 
this connection, reference was made to Section 3 (2) of the Act and Rule 3 (2) and 
proviso to Rule 5 of UAP Rules for withholding/non-disclosure of facts which the 
Central Government considers against public interest, and non-disclosure of 
confidential documents and information which the Government considers against 
public interest to disclose. 

86. On the question of nature and type of evidence, which can be relied upon by 
the Tribunal, the Supreme Court referred to Rule 3(l) which stipulates that the 
Tribunal subject to sub-rule (2) shall follow, as far as practicable, the rules of 
evidence laid down in Indian Evidence Act. Therefore, the rules of evidence as far 
as practicable as laid down in the Evidence Act, should be followed. In this regard, 
reference was made by the Learned ASG to the following observations in Jamaat- 
e-Islami Hind (Supra):- 


“22. ... The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the 
strict sense. Such a procedure would ensure that the decision of the 
Hon’ble Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in controversy 
after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without 
abdicating its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central 
Government. Such a course would satisfy the minimum requirement of 
natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, while 
protecting the rights of the association and its members, without 
jeopardizing the public interest. This would also ensure that the process of 
adjudication is not denuded to its content and the decision ultimately 
rendered by the Hon’ble Tribunal is reached by it on all points in 
controversy after adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion 
already formed by the Central Government. 


00 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


23. In John J. Morrisey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer, the 
United States Supreme Court, in a case of parole revocation, indicated the 
minimum requirements to be followed, as under: 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of 
due process. They include (a) written notice of the claimed 
violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of evidence 
against him; (c ) opportunity to be heard in person and to 
present witnesses and documentary evidence; (d) the right to 
confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses (Unless the 
hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing 
confrontation); (e) a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body 
such as a traditional parole board, members of which need 
not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement 
by the fact finders as to the evidence relied on and reasons 
for revoking parole. We emphasize there is no thought to 
equate this second stage of parole revocation to a criminal 
prosecution in any sense. It is anarrow inquiry; the process 
should be flexible enough to consider evidence including 
letters, affidavits, and other material that would not be 
admissible in n adversary criminal trial”. 
24 खाट XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
25° WRG XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
26.....The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a show- 
cause notice of existence of sufficient cause to justify the declaration must 
necessarily imply and import into the inquiry, the minimum requirement of 
natural justice to ensure that the decision of the Hon’ble Tribunal is its own 
opinion, formed on the entire available material, and not a mere 
imprimatur of the Hon’ble Tribunal affixed to the opinion of the Central 
Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a fair procedure to prevent the 
vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure in a given 
case, would depend on the materials constituting the factual foundation of 
the notification and the manner in which the Hon’ble Tribunal can assess 


its true worth._This_has_to be determined by the Hon’ble_ Tribunal 
keeping in view the nature of its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of 
natural justice, the fact that_the_materials_in_such_matters_are_not 
confined to legal evidence in the strict, sense, and that the scrutiny is not 
a criminal trial. The Hon’ble Tribunal should form its opinion on all the 
points in controversy after assessing for itself the credibility of the 
material relating to it, even though it may not be disclosed to the 
association, if the public interest so requires.” 
(Emphasis Supplied) 


87. Learned ASG submitted that a reading of Section 9 of the Act read with 
Section 3(l) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, !967 makes it clear that 


the Tribunal shall follow the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 0] 


for investigations of the claims before it and that the opinion formed by the Tribunal 
will be governed by the principles applicable to Civil Law and accordingly, the 
principles of preponderance of probabilities apply and not proof beyond reasonable 
doubt. 
88. By referring to the decision of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind 
(Supra), learned ASG submitted that the Supreme Court has observed that the test 
of greater probability as given below will apply:- 
i) the proceedings before the Tribunal are in the nature of a /is between two 
parties; 
il) the proceedings are governed by the Code of Civil Procedure and the 
principles are applicable to civil cases; 
iii) the Tribunal is to adopt a procedure conforming to minimum requirement 
of natural justice; 
iv) the Tribunal shall follow, as far as practicable, the rules laid down in the 
Evidence Act. However, the material need not be confined to legal 


evidence in strict sense. 


89. It was further submitted by learned ASG that the ingredients of ‘unlawful 
activity’ as defined under Section 2(0) of the said Act requires the objective 
consideration of the Tribunal to reach at the conclusion of declaring an association 
as “unlawful’ under the UAPA Act. Reference was again made to the Supreme 
Court decision in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra) to the following effect:- 


“9, — Clauses (f) and (g) of Section 2 contain definitions of “unlawful 
activity” and “unlawful association” respectively. An 
“unlawfulactivity”’, defined in clause (f), means “any action taken” of the 
kind specified therein and having the consequence mentioned. In other 
words, “any action taken” by such individual or association constituting 
an “unlawful activity” must have the potential specified in the definition. 
Determination of these facts constitutes the foundation for declaring an 
association to be unlawful under sub- section (7) of Section 3 of the Act. 
Clause (g) defines “unlawful association” with reference to “unlawful 
activity” in sub-clause (i) thereof, and in sub-clause (ii) the reference is to 
the offences punishable under Section 7/33-4 or Section 7353-98 of the Penal 


02 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Code, 76609. In sub-clause (ii), the objective determination is with 
reference to the offences punishable under Section 7/53-4 or Section 753-8 
of the IPC while in sub-clause (i) it is with reference to “unlawful 
activity” as defined in clause (f). These definitions make it clear that the 
determination of the question whether any association is, or has become, 
an unlawful association to justify such declaration under sub-section (7) 
of Section 3 must be based on an objective decision; and the 
determination should be that “any action taken” by such association 
constitutes an “unlawful activity” which is the object of the association 
or the object is any activity punishable under Section 453-4 or Section 
453-8 IPC. It is only on the conclusion so reached in an objective 
determination that a declaration can be made by the Central 
Government under sub-section (7) of Section 3.” 


90. ‘It was further submitted by the learned ASG that the Tribunals constituted 
under the UAPA, [967 for the declaration of several organisations as unlawful 
association have decided over the nature of proceedings and admissibility of 
statements under Section 6l CrPC under the Evidence Act and are mentioned as 
under:- 
A. Paragraph Nos.24 to 65 of Judgment (Report) of Hon’ble Justice 
Sanjiv Khanna in SIMI Matter are relevant. (Internal Page Nos. 96 to 
48), 


3. Paragraph No.336 of Judgments of Hon’ble Justice Sanjiv Khanna is 
relevant; 


(2 


. Paragraph Nos.7.! (Part-VII Legal issues) to 7.30 (internal page Nos. 
42 to 55) of Judgment (Report) of Hon’ble Justice Mukta Gupta in 
SIMI Matter; 

D. Paragraph Nos.27] to 325 (internal page nos 64 to 83) of Judgment of 

Hon’ble Justice Dinesh Kumar Sharma in PFI MATTER. (paragraph 

Nos.285, 288, 32, 33 & 3I5 are more relevant). 


9!. Accordingly, it was submitted that the decision of the Central Government 
to declare JKIM as ‘unlawful association’ is entirely on the documentary evidences 
and testimonies of the witnesses/protected witnesses filed during the course of 


investigation by different Investigating Agencies as stated in the above paragraphs. 


[भागवा---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 03 


vii. Claim of privilege for producing documents in sealed cover 


92. 9. Atul Kumar Shahi (PW-4), Commandant (CT) (Counter Terrorism CR) 
Division, MHA was examined on behalf of the UOI on 28.07.2025. Besides his 
examination and cross-examination conducted by learned counsel for the 
association, this witness had produced original files containing the central 
intelligence reports/inputs in a sealed cover for the perusal of this Tribunal. 

93. Learned ASG for the UOI, while arguing for claiming privilege for 
producing documents in sealed cover, had referred to Section 23 of the Evidence 
Act/ Section 29 of the Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 read with Section 3(2) 
of the UAP Rules, 968, which are reproduced as under:- 


INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 7822 

“423, Evidence as to affairs of State — No one shall be permitted to give 
any evidence derived from unpublished official records relating to any 
affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer at the head of the 
department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he 
thinks fit.” 


BHARTIYA SAKSHYA ADHINIYAM, 2023 

“Section 29.Evidence as to affairs of State.-No one shall be permitted to 
give any evidence derived from unpublished official records relating to any 
affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer at the head of the 


department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he 
thinks fit.” 


THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) RULES, /966 


3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence (२) In holding 
an inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 4 or disposing of any application 
under sub-section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section 8, the 
Tribunal or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall, subject to the 
provisions of sub-rule (2), follow, as far as practicable, the rules of evidence 
laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, /672 (। of 7622... 

[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 76/2 
(/ of 76722), where any books of account or other documents have been 
produced before the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge by the 
Central Government and such books of account or other documents are 
claimed by that Government to be of a confidential nature then, the Tribunal 
or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall not, - 

(a) make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of 
the proceedings before it; or 


04 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(b) allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, 
such books of account or other documents by or to any person other than a 
party to the proceedings before it.]”’ 


“5. Documents which should accompany a reference to the Tribunal— 
Every reference made to the Tribunal under sub-section (/) of section 4 shall 
be accompanied by— 

(i) a copy of the notification mod e undr sub-section (/) of section 3, and 
(ii) all the facts on which the grounds specified in the said notification are 
based: 

Provided that nothing In this rue shall require the Central Government to 
disclose any fact to the Tribunal which that Government considers against 
the public interest to disclose.” 


(Emphasis Supplied) 


It was submitted that from a bare reading of the aforesaid provisions the 


following propositions emerge:- 


(i) Rule 3(2) read with Rule 5 provides that the Tribunal shall not make 
the documents etc. part of the proceedings or allow inspection if the said 
documents are claimed to be of confidential nature; [this tribunal being a 
creature of statute would therefore would be bound by the mandate of 
Rule 3(2) which are expressly tailor made for the purpose of functioning of 
the tribunal] 

(ii) Rule is silent as to in what manner and format or content said claim 
of confidentiality is to be made; 

(iii) In absence of any format prescribed under the UAPA and the Rules 
framed thereunder reference will have to be made to the general civil law; 
(iv) Claim of privilege under the general civil law is provided under 
Section 23 of the Evidence Act. 

(v) Section 23 of the Evidence Act provides that claim of privilege i.r.o 
unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State has to be made 
with the permission of the officer at the head of the department concerned. 
[Note:-Section 23 does not mandate that the claim of privilege is to be 
made by the head of the department but only provides for his/her 


permission. ] 


[भाग Il—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 05 


95:; 


(vi) Rule 3(/) provides that the tribunal shall follow the rules of evidence 
laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, |872 as far as practicable; 

(vii) Thus, the procedural vigour of form and content of Evidence Act will 
not be applicable in the proceedings before the tribunal — The principles 
analogous to the Evidence Act or for that matter CPC will be applicable; 
(viii) Analogical principle underlining section 23 of the Evidence Act is 
that the claim of privilege should be made with the permission of the head 
of the department. The head of the department should examine the 
document, apply his mind and then mark the documents disclosure of 
which would not be in public interest; 

(ix) Once the evidence comes on record that the head of the department 
has examined the document, applied his mind and then has marked the 
documents for claiming privilege, any direction issued by him to any 
officer subordinate to him to move the claim of privilege will be sufficient 
compliance of Section 23 r/w Rule 3 () & (2). 


Reliance in this regard was placed on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme 


Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra) wherein it has been held as under: 


#॥9, ...the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Act itself permits 
the Central Government to withhold the disclosure of acts which it 
considers to be against the public interest to disclose. Similarly, Rule 3(2) 
and the proviso to Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 
4966 also permit nondisclosure of confidential documents and information 
which the Government considers against the public interest to disclose... 


20... 


24... It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite 
often be clandestine in nature and, therefore, the source of evidence of the 
unlawful activities may require continued confidentiality in public interest. 
In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such information, and, may 
be, also full particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. 
The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules 
framed thereunder provide for maintenance of confidentiality, whenever 
required in public interest. However, the non-disclosure of sensitive 
information and evidence to the association and its office-bearers, 
whenever justified in public interest, does not necessarily imply its non- 


06 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


disclosure to the Tribunal as well. In such cases where the Tribunal is 
satisfied that non-disclosure of such information to the association or its 
office- bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non- disclosure to the 
association or its office-bearers, but in order to perform its task of 
adjudication as required by the Act, the Tribunal can look into the same 
for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and 
satisfying itself that it can safely act on the same. In such a situation, the 
Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure whereby it can itself examine 
and test the credibility of such material before it decides to accept the 
same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the 
association to be unlawful. The materials need not be confined only to 
legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a procedure would ensure that the 
decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in 
controversy after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to 
accept, without abdicating its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of 
the Central Government. Such a course would satisfy the minimum 
requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each 
case, while protecting the rights of the association and its members, 
without jeopardising the public interest. This would also ensure that the 
process of adjudication is not denuded of its content and the decision 
ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by it on all points in 
controversy after adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion 
already formed by the Central Government. 


24. — In Paul Ivan Birzon ए. Edward S. King[469 F 2d 7247, 7/244- 45 
(l972)] placing reliance on Morrissey [408 US 47] : 33 L Ed 2d 484 
(l972)] , while dealing with a similar situation, when confidential 
information had to be acted on, it was indicated that the credibility issue 
could be resolved by the Board retaining confidentiality of the information 
but assessing the credibility itself, and a modified procedure was indicated 
as under: 
“.. the board was required to decide whether it would believe the 
informants or the parolee and his witnesses. The infirmity that we see 
in the hearing and determination by the parole board is that it 
resolved the credibility issue solely on the basis of the State report, 
without itself taking the statements from the informants. Thus the 
board had no way of knowing how reliable the informants were and 
had no real basis on which to resolve the credibility issue against the 
parolee... 


We do not mean to intimate that the board should have taken testimony 
from the informants at the hearing and given the parolee the opportunity 
to cross-examine. What we do mean is that the board should have received 
the information directly from the informants (although not necessarily in 
the presence of the parolee), instead of relying solely on the State report. 
The board could then have reached its own conclusions about the relative 
reliability of the informants’ statements and those of the parolee and his 


[भाग व---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 07 


witnesses. 


Similarly, the board could then have made its own decision about how 
realistic were the claims of potential danger to the informants or to State 
parole officers if their identity was disclosed, instead of placing exclusive 
reliance on the State report. Thus, we hold that, in relying exclusively on 
the written synopsis in the State report, which was the only evidence of a 
parole violation, in the face of the parolee's denial and his presentation 
of the testimony of other witnesses, the revocation of Satz's parole 
was fundamentally unfair to him and was 

a denial of due process of law.” 


25. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such 

information and its source, in public interest, also enables the 

adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the confidential information 

for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the conflicting 

evidence of the other side. This modified procedure satisfies the minimum 

requirements of natural justice and also retains the basic element of an 

adjudicatory process which involves objective determination of the factual 

basis of the action taken." 
96. It was submitted that a bare perusal of the aforesaid judgment which 
interprets the provisions of UAPA manifests that there is neither any form or content 
for claiming privilege for. The said judgment instead provides for a modified 
procedure and holds that in cases of privilege, the tribunal has to itself look into the 
content and satisfy itself that that non-disclosure of such information to the 
association or its office-bearers is in public interest. The said judgment further 
mandates that for this purpose the “Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure 
whereby it can itself examine and test the credibility of such material before it 
decides to accept the same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for 
declaring the association to be unlawful.” 
97. Thus, it was argued that as per the provisions of UAPA and the rules framed 
thereunder, there is no set format in which claim of privilege is to made and further 
as per Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra), this Tribunal can device its own procedure 
to look into the documents on which privilege is claimed and adjudicate whether it 


falls within a class of documents disclosure of which will not be in public interest. 


It was further submitted that the claim of privilege by the UOI for the documents 


08 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


placed is made as the documents are also of such a nature that the non-disclosure of 
which are in public interest. 

98. Reliance was placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of U.P. 
v. Raj Narain, (/975) 4 SCC 428, wherein the Constitutional Bench of the Supreme 
Court had upheld the claim of privilege by the Government while holding as under: 


ढ47, The several decisions to which reference has already been made 
establish that the foundation of the law behind Sections /23 and /62 of the 
Evidence Act is the same as in English law. It is that injury to public interest 
is the reason for the exclusion from disclosure of documents whose contents 
if disclosed would injure public and national interest. Public interest which 
demands _that evidence be withheld is to_be weighed against the public 
interest in the administration of justice that courts_should have the fullest 
possible access to all relevant materials. When public interest outweighs the 
latter, the evidence cannot be admitted. The Court will proprio motu exclude 
evidence the production of which is contrary to public interest. It is in public 
interest that confidentiality shall_be safeguarded. The reason is that such 
documents become_subject_to privilege by reason _of their contents. 
Confidentiality is not_a_head of privilege. It is a consideration to bear in 
mind. It is_not that_the contents contain _material_which_it would_be 
damaging to the national interest to divulge but rather that the documents 
would be of class which demand protection. (See Rogers v. Home Secretary 
at p. 405). To illustrate the class of documents would embrace Cabinet 
papers, Foreign Office despatches, papers regarding the security of the State 
and high level inter-departmental minutes. In the ultimate analysis the 
contents of the document are so described that it could be seen at once that 
in the public interest the documents are to be withheld. (See Merricks v. Nott 
Bower /((/964) / AER 777/ ).” 


(Emphasis Supplied) 


99. Learned counsel for the UOI submitted that the claim of privilege by the UOI 
for the documents placed is made as the documents are of such a nature that the 
non-disclosure of which would be in the interest of the public. It was submitted that 
this concept of public interest is taken into account even in the criminal proceedings 
qua the accused, whereas in juxtaposition, the present matter stands at a much 
higher pedestal and involves the issue of sovereignty and integrity of the country 
and that in the cases concerning national security, sovereignty and integrity, the 
tribunal has to interpret and analyse the material differently. It must also take into 
account the fact that the decisions taken by the Central Government in such manner 


are based on highly sensitive information and inputs. The effects of such decisions 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 09 


are not confined to the boundaries of the nation. In fact, in the present scenario when 


the terr 


become meaningless. The insurgency in a State or activities of any association 


which 
itself. 
200. 
Singh 


orist activities and national insurgency is on rise, the global boundaries have 


is suspected to be unlawful has bearing effect on the credibility of the nation 


Reliance was placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Raj Kumar 


vs. State of Bihar, (7/966) 4 SCC 407 in a case of preventive detention 


wherein the Supreme Court inter alia held as under: 


20I. 


Ltd. 9. 


under: 


“The executive authority is not the sole judge of what is required for 
national security or public order. But the court cannot substitute its decision 
if the executive authority or the appropriate authority acts on proper 
materials and reasonably and rationally comes to that conclusion even 
though a conclusion with which the court might not be in agreement. It is 
not for the court to put itself in the position of the detaining authority and 
to satisfy itself that untested facts reveal a path of crime provided these facts 
are relevant. See in this connection the observations of O. Chinnappa 
Reddy, J. in Vijay Narain Singh case ((/984) 3 SCC 74 : /964 SCC (Cri) 367 
४ AIR /964 SC ॥334 : (॥/984) 3 

SCR 435] at p. 440 and 447. (SCC p. /9, para /) 346. Similarly, in the case 
of Union of India vs. Rajasthan High Court, (20772) 2 SCC 599: 20I6 SCC 
Online /466 —. It was not for the Court in the exercise of 

its power of judicial review to suggest a policy which it considered fit. The 
formulation of suggestions by the High Court for framing a National 
Security Policy travelled far beyond the legitimate domain of judicial 
review. Formulation of such a policy is based on information and inputs 
which are not available to the court. The court is not an expert in such 
matters. Judicial review is concerned with the legality of executive action 
and the court can interfere only where there is a breach of law or a 
violation of the Constitution.” 


Reliance was also placed upon Ex-Armymen's Protection Services (P) 


Union of India, (2074) 5 SCC 409, wherein it has been inter alia held as 


# 5, It is difficult to define in exact terms as to what is “national 
security”. However, the same would generally include socio-political 
stability, territorial integrity, economic solidarity and strength, ecological 
balance, cultural cohesiveness, external peace, etc. 76, What is in the 
interest of national security is not a question of law. It is a matter of policy. 
It is not for the court to decide whether something is in the interest of the 
State or not. It should be left to the executive. 


0 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


202. It was submitted that the Supreme Court in Digi Cable Network (India) (P) 
Ltd. v. Union of India, (2079) 4 SCC 457 had also strongly relied upon Ex- 
Armymen’s (Supra) and held as under: 


“75. In somewhat similar circumstances, this Court while repelling this 
submission laid down the following principles of law in Ex-Armymen's 
Protection Services (P) Ltd. v. Union of India [Ex-Armymen's Protection 
Services (2) Ltd. v. Union of India, (2074) 5 SCC 409] in paras 76 and 77 
which read as under: (SCC p. 476) 
“॥6, What is in the interest of national security is not a question of 
law. It is a matter of policy. It is not for the court to decide whether 
something is in the interest of the State or not. It should be left to the 
executive. To quote Lord Hoffman in Secy. of State for Home 
Deptt. v. Rehman [Secy. of State for Home Deptt. v. Rehman, 
(2003) I AC ॥53 : (2007) 3 WLR 877 (HL)] 
2 (AC p. /9०2८१ 
‘50. ... [in the matter] of national security is not a question of 
law. It is a matter of judgment and policy. Under the 
Constitution of the United Kingdom and most other countries, 
decisions as to whether something is or is not in the interests 
of national security are not a matter for judicial decision. 
They are entrusted to the executive.’ 
47. Thus, in a situation of national security, a party cannot insist 
for the strict observance of the principles of natural justice. In such 
cases, it is the duty of the court to read into and provide for statutory 
exclusion, if not expressly provided in the rules governing the field. 
Depending on the facts of the particular case, it will however be 
open to the court to satisfy itself whether there were justifiable 
facts, and in that regard, the court is entitled to call for the files 
and see whether it is a case where the interest of national security 
is involved. Once the State is of the stand that the issue involves 
national security, 
the court shall not disclose the reasons to the affected party.” 


203. It was submitted that the documents for which claim of privilege, by their 
very nature, are confidential and sensitive in nature and, therefore, cannot be 
supplied as a public document. It was further submitted that the document forms 
part of the evidence collected by the intelligence agencies which pertains to 
secessionist and unlawful activities of the Banned Organisations and those 
associated with it. The said documents are confidential and secret in nature and the 
same can be verified by the Tribunal only. 


204. It was submitted that the rigors of Madhayamam Broadcasting Ltd. ४. 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण ll] 


Union of India 2023 SCC Online 366 “as claimed and relied upon by the 
Objectors” cannot be strictly applied in the present case as the facts and 
circumstances for the constitution of the present Tribunal is different from the issue 
that emerged in aforesaid cases; therefore the claim of privilege sought by the 
Union in the present case cannot be denied keeping in view the nature of sensitive 
information contained in the intel reports, the disclosure of which could affect the 
larger public interest of the nation by jeopardizing the safety and sovereignty of the 
country. 

205. Further, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Madhayamam (Supra) while 
balancing the right of the execution claiming privileged of sealed documents on one 
hand and the principle of natural justice on the other, had held as under: 


“ 84. The contention of the respondent that the judgment of this Court in Ex- 
Armymen's Protection Services (supra) held that the principles of natural 


justice shall be excluded when concerns of national security are involved is 


erroneous.The_ principle _that_was_ expounded in that _case was _that_the 
principles of natural justice may be excluded when on the facts of the case, 


national security concerns outweigh the duty of fairness. Thus, national 
security is one of the few grounds _on_which_the right _to_a_ reasonable 
procedural guarantee may be restricted. The mere involvement of issues 
concerning national security would not preclude the state's duty to act 
fairly. If the State discards its duty to act fairly, then it must be justified 
before the court on the facts of the case. Firstly, the State must satisfy the 
Court that national security concerns are involved. Secondly, the State must 
satisfy the court that an abrogation of the principle(s) of natural justice is 
justified. These two standards that have emerged from the jurisprudence 
abroad resemble the proportionality standard. The first test resembles the 
legitimate aim prong, and the second test of justification resembles the 
necessity and the balancing prongs.” 


(emphasis supplied) 


206. It was further submitted that decision of the previous Tribunals constituted 
under section 4 of the UAPA in which the claim of privilege by the Central Govt 
had been allowed holding that the same satisfied the requirement of Section 23 of 
the Evidence Act have persuasive precedential value before this Tribunal in view of 


the provisions of Section 5(7) of the UAPA which provide that the proceedings 


2 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


before this Tribunal are judicial proceedings. The UOI therefore places reliance on 
the following: - 


l. Part- VIII of Judgment of Hon’ble Justice Mukta Gupta Para No. 8.] to 8.2 
(Internal Page Nos. 55 to 58) in SIMI MATTER. 

2. Paragraphs no. 326 to 330 of Judgment of Hon’ble Justice Dinesh Kumar 
Sharma in PFI MATTER. 

3. Paragraphs no. 325 of Judgment in MLJK MATTER. 


207. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances it was submitted that the 
notification No. S.O. 4 (5); dated !.03.2025, issued by the Central Government 


declaring JKIM as an unlawful association is liable to be confirmed as there is 


sufficient evidence/cause on record justifying the ban on JKIM. 


X. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE ASSOCIATION 


208. The Learned Counsel for the association made reference to following 
definitions and provisions of UAPA: 


“2. Definitions—(l) In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires,— 


(a) —“association” means any combination or body of individuals; 
XXX XXX HX 


(0) “unlawful activity", in relation to an individual or association, 
means any action taken by such individual or association (whether by 
committing an act or by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or 
by visible representation or otherwise ),— 


(0) which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any 
ground whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India 
or the secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union, 
or which incites any individual or group of individuals to bring 
about such cession or secession; or 


(ii) which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to 
disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India; or 


(iii) which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against 
India; 


[भाग व---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


(p) “unlawful association” means any association — 


(i) which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which 
encourages or aids persons to undertake any unlawful activity, or 
of which the members undertake such activity; or 


(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable 
under section I53A (45 of 78609) or section 73537 of the Indian 
Penal Code, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any 
such activity, or of which the members undertake any such 
activity: Provided that nothing contained in sub-clause (ti) shall 
apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir; 


(4) words and expressions used but not defined in thig Act and 
defined in the Code shall have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them in the Code. 


(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof 

shall, in relation to an area in which such enactment or such provision 

is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law 

or the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in 

that area.” 
209. It was submitted that bare perusal of the definition of ‘unlawful activity’ and 
‘unlawful association’ makes it evident and clear that certain actions as defined are 
‘unlawful activities' can be distinguished from definition of ‘unlawful assembly’ 
provided under Criminal Procedure Code/Bhartiya Nargrik Suraksha Sanhita 
(BNSS). 

I. Applicability of CPC and Evidence Act 


20. It was further submitted that so far as scheme of the UAPA is concerned, 
after definition clause in Section 2, Chapter II and Chapter III of the Act deal with 
‘Unlawful Association’ and ‘punishment’ thereof. Chapter II deals with declaration 
of an organization as ‘Unlawful’, constitution of ‘Tribunal’, reference to the 
Tribunal and adjudication by the Tribunal. It was submitted that adjudication by the 
Tribunal is for all purposes civil in nature which is different from adjudication of 


complaint or adjudication in criminal cases and hence, provisions of CPC will 


apply. 


4 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


2ll. Reference in this regard was made to Section 5(6), Section 9 of the UAPA 
and Rule 5 of the UAP Rules which are as under:- 


(6) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under 
this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 7906, (5 of 79०98) while trying a suit, in 
respect of the following matters, namely: 


(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and 
examining him on oath; 

(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material 
object producible as evidence; 

(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 

(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or office; 
(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses.” 


“9- Procedure to be followed in the disposal of Applications under 
this Act—Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, the 
procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding any inquiry 
under sub-section (3) of section 4 or by a Court of the District Judge 
in disposing of any application under sub-section (4) of section 7 or 
sub- section (8) of section § shall, so far as may be, be the 
procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, /9086 (5 
of 7906), for the investigation Of claims and the decision of the 
Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall 
be final.” 


ढ“ 35, Other Provisions of Civil Procedure Code 79096, to 
apply.— The provisions of the Civil Procedure Code, 7908 (5 of 
9096), shall, insofar as they relate to any other matter with regard to 
the service of summons, shall, as far as may be, apply to the 
service of any summons issued by any Tribunal or District Judge 
under the Act.” 


22. It was contended that a conjoint reading of provisions of Section 5(6), 
Section 9 of UAPA and Rule 5 of UAP Rules makes it evident and manifest that 
provisions of CPC will apply to all proceedings under Chapter II of UAPA. Hence, 
this Tribunal has to apply the various provisions of CPC for disposal of the civil suit 
which are applicable for disposal of inquiry for ascertaining as to whether there is 
‘sufficient cause’ for declaring the organisation as ‘unlawful association’. 

23. It was further contended that there is elaborate procedure in CPC to decide 


a civil suit i.e. from the stage of institution of suit till its disposal. It was stated that 


[भाग Ive 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


the procedure, not in a strict form but in a broader sense, as contained in CPC has to 
be applied for inquiry by the Ld. Tribunal. 

24. In this context it was submitted that reference to the Tribunal by the Central 
Government and the detailed reasons for making reference have to be treated 
similar/ equal to a plaint; the procedure for notice is prescribed under section 5(6) 
of the Act and thereafter, reply is to be filed as in the case of written statement. 
However, timeline is fixed in the Chapter for making reference, for filing the reply, 
by association, for confirming the declaration or cancelling the same. 

25. It was further submitted that the legal position that the provisions of CPC will 
apply is also evident from perusal of Section 5(7) of the Act which is as under:- 


“5. Tribunal .... 

(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections /93 and 228 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 7860) and the Tribunal shall be deemed 
to be a civil court for the purposes of section /93 and Chapter 
XXVI of the Code.” 


ii. Non-existence of sufficient cause for immediate action 


26. It was submitted by the learned counsel for the association that the question 
before this Tribunal is as to whether on the date of notification declaring the 
association as unlawful there was sufficient cause or not for taking such immediate 
urgent action. 

27. It was contended that the normal course for declaring the organisation as 
unlawful is to issue notification in the official gazette, make reference to the 
Tribunal under Section 4 and wait for decision of the Tribunal for confirmation of 
declaration. However, imposition of immediate ban is needed under extraordinary 
circumstances in case of grave emergency. 

28. It was contended that in the instant case, the organisation was not created in 
near past but has been in existence and functional for last 63 years right from 962 
and during these 63 years, at no point of time any restriction or ban or declaration for 


declaring the organisation as unlawful was ever made. 


6 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


29. It was further submitted that the notification in question does not give any 
special reasons for imposing immediate ban and that the immediate ban has been 
imposed without giving any opportunity to the organisation and without there being 


any urgency. The same is to be considered by this Tribunal. 


ili. Infringement of right guaranteed under A. 9 of the Constitution. 


220. It was submitted that as per Shia Figa/school of thought, the common shia 
population has to follow their learned scholars/Ullamas. 

22l. It was submitted that this ban will effect lakhs of members/followers and 
well-wishers of the religious leader which is a serious case where constitutional 
guarantee under Article 9 of the Constitution of lakhs of members/ followers of 
the Shia leader are being infringed. 

222. It was contended that JKIM is not a political organisation of 0 or l00 or 
000 members/ followers. There are lakhs of followers of the present chairman of 
the organisation namely Moulana Masroor Abass Ansari. It is claimed that this fact 


has been admitted by witnesses produced by the UOI i.e. 7४७४७-। to PW-3. 


iv. Objections regarding material placed before the Tribunal 


223. Learned counsel for the association submitted that material against the 
association before this Tribunal is contained in two forms i.e. Background Note and 
Notification dated !.03.2025. The contents of the Background Note are the sum 
and substance of all material which is against the organisation. It is only the 
Background Note which was supplied to the Organisation on the directions of this 
Tribunal. 

224. It was contended that when the contents of the Background Note is 
examined, so far the acts done by the Chairman of the Organisation for last 63 years 
are concerned, for those alleged illegal acts, 4 FIRs have been registered as 
mentioned in para 5 of the Background Note. Rest of the allegations in the 
Background Note which have led to the passing of order are words spoken/ 
published through different modes or uploaded on social platform like Instagram, 


Facebook, YouTube channels etc. 


[भाग Ive 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण ]]7 


225. Learned counsel for the association submitted in this regard that first of all, 
the FIRs which have led to the passing of ban are concerned, whether sufficient 
material is in these FIRs or whether these FIRs constitute sufficient cause for 
declaring the organisation as unlawful has to be discussed. Out of 4 FIRs, 3 FIRs Le. 
FIR Nos.23/l987, 37/996 and 6/2000 are all against ex-chairman who had died 
in October, 2022. 

226. Learned Counsel for the Association submitted that FIR ॥४०.2३3/987, is 
stated to be under trial in the Court of Additional TADA Court Srinagar. It was 
submitted that the record on National Judicial Data Grid and E-Court record shows 
that “no record found” neither pending nor disposed of. It was argued that this case 
is 37 years old and even till date, no challan was produced. It was stated that ex- 
chairman Molvi Abass Ansari is now dead, therefore, this case which is 37 years old 
cannot form basis or material for declaring the organisation as unlawful in the year 
2025. Even no record of this case produced before this Tribunal, E-Courts record is 
annexed as Annexure-PI. 

227. It was submitted that as regards case FIR No. 37/ 998 is concerned, 
during proceedings before this Tribunal no evidence or record was produced by the 
UOI or UT of J & K in respect of this FIR, no oral or documentary evidence was 
produced with regard to contents, Status or pendency of the present FIR. This FIR 
was registered on 25.02.998. It was stated that ?५७४-] in his evidence has stated that 
record of the case was destroyed in floods of September, 20l4 and is yet to be 
reconstructed. Further, the record on judicial data grid and E-Courts record shows 
that “no record found” in this case also, neither pending nor disposed of. It was stated 
that the SHO could not produce even a single document to prove about the pendency 
of the case before any Court of Law. It was stated that this case too has been 
registered 27 years ago and is presently non-existent on record. Even if it would 
have been pending or under trial, the alleged accused Molvi Abas Ansari is now 
dead. After his demise and after the period of 27 years whether this case be made 


basis for declaring the Organisation as unlawful, is to be considered by this 


8 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Tribunal. E-court record is annexed with the submissions as Annexure-P2. 

228. Learned counsel for the association submitted that 37 case FIR No. 
6/2000 pertains to year 2000 which remained under investigation for a period of 
more than 22 years; the Chargesheet was not presented during the lifetime of the 
alleged accused Molvi Abass Ansari. In this regard, reliance was placed on the 
evidence of Dy. SP Dheeraj Kumar to the effect that the case is more than 25 years 
old and was not presented during the lifetime of Molvi Abass Ansari, the alleged 
accused. Whether it forms material or basis for declaring the organisation as 
unlawful is to be examined by this Tribunal. 

229. It was further submitted that with respect to FIR No. 99 of 20 registered 
under Section 48, 49, 336, 88, I52 RPC stated to be under trial, it was 
submitted that there is total non-application of mind by the concerned authorities, 
who have stated that this case is under trial. It was stated that this case has been 
finally disposed of and accused persons acquitted by the Ld. Court of 4th 
Additional Sessions Judge Srinagar vide Judgment and Order dated 2!.06.208. 
Certified copy of the Judgment and Order is annexed with the Reply/Objections as 
Folio AB. Certified copy is annexed with the submissions as Annexure-P3. 

230. The learned counsel for the association further submitted that even if this 
case would not have been finally disposed of, the question before this Tribunal 
would be whether the case which is 4 years old can form basis or is relevant for 
declaring the organisation as unlawful. 

23l. — It was stated that these cases which are 37 years, 27 years, 25 years and 4 
years old respectively, cannot form basis for declaring the organisation as unlawful. 
It was argued that the Supreme Court in Mohammad Jafar v. UOI, 7994 AIR SCW 
2839, has dealt with this issue; cases which were instituted two years before the 
notification were found stale and it was held that these cannot justify imposition of 
the immediate ban. Reliance was placed on para 4 of the Judgment which is 


reproduced hereunder:- 


ce 


4. The notification in question admittedly does not give any reasons for 
the immediate ban in exercise of the power under the proviso to Section 


[भाग व---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9 


3(3). The reasons given as stated above are the same as are meant for 
imposing ban under sub-section (7) of Section 3. Those reasons, as 
quoted above, are (a) that Shri Sirajul Hasan, Amir of Jamaat-e-Islami 
Hind declared in a meeting at Delhi held on the 277 May, 7990 that the 
separation of Kashmir from India was inevitable, (b) that Shri Abdul 
Aziz, Naib Amir of JEIH, addressing a meeting at Malerkotla on the Ist 
August, /997, observed that the Government of India should hold 
plebiscite on Kashmir, (c) that the JEIH has been disclaiming and 
questioning the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India, and (d) 
other facts and materials in the possession of the Central Government 
which it considers to be against the public interest to disclose. As 
regards the first two grounds, they are obviously stale — one of 
27.35.7990 and the other of 7.6.7997 and they cannot justify 
immediately on 79.72./992 when the impugned notification was issued. 
The language of the third ground shows that the association has been 
indulging in the acts stated therein publicly from its inception or at least 
for a long time which again negatives the need for immediate ban. As 
for the last ground, viz. other facts and material in the possession of the 
association which the Central Government considers to be against the 
public interest to disclose, no privilege is claimed before us, against 
such other facts and material. If it was claimed, the Court would have 
looked into them and decided the question of privilege.” 


232. It was submitted that PW-l and PW-2 are witnesses in case FIR 
No.37/l998 and 6/2000. Their evidence, therefore, loses significance in so far 
these FIRS are concerned. Regarding other two remaining FIRS no witness has been 
produced by UOI. 

y. Submission regarding material in the form of speeches and interviews 


233. Learned Counsel for the association submitted that the third witness in this 
case is Inspector Liyakat Ali, who is witness in respect of downloading of the 
contents of the speeches and interviews downloaded from different digital 
platforms whose evidence needs close scrutiny. It was stated that he himself has not 
heard any such speeches or interviews and has simply downloaded these speeches 
and interviews from these platforms. It is submitted that the said statement is clear 
to the extent that he is neither a computer expert nor a forensic expert. He has not 
been appointed or designated as expert by any authority, He has only downloaded 


the speeches and interviews from media platforms. He has not himself recorded any 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of these speeches, videos or interviews. As to admissibility of his evidence, 
reference was made to Section 79A of Information Technology Act 2000 which 


provides as under:- 


“Section 79 A of Information Technology Act, 2000 
79A. Central Government to notify Examiner of Electronic Evidence.- 


The Central Government may, for the purposes of providing expert 
opinion on electronic form evidence before any court or other authority 
specify, by notification in the Official Gazette, any Department, body or 
agency of the Central Government or a State Government as an 
Examiner of Electronic Evidence. 

Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, —electronic form 
evidence means any information of probative value that is either stored 
or transmitted in electronic form and includes computer evidence, 
digital audio, digital video, cell phones, digital fax machines. 


234. Learned Counsel for the association submitted that the electronic evidence 
is manipulated and fabricated and no forensic examination of such evidence has 
been produced, therefore, no reliance can be placed on such material. Learned 
Counsel for the association further submitted that Electronic Evidence produced in 
the case is not legally admissible under the Evidence Act. Reliance was placed on 
para 59 of judgment of the Supreme Court in Ajrun Pandit Rao case, 2020 SCC 
Online SC 577 which is reproduced hereunder: 


“59. We may reiterate, therefore, that the certificate required under 
Section 65B (4) is a condition precedent to the admissibility of 
evidence by way of electronic record, as correctly held in Anvar P.V. 
(Supra), and incorrectly “clarified” in Shaffi Mohammad (Supra). Oral 
evidence in the place of such certificate cannot possibly suffice as Section 
65B(4) is a mandatory requirement of the law. Indeed, the hallowed 
principle in Taylor v. Taylor (676) 7 Ch.D 426, which has been followed 
in a number of the judgments of this Court, can also be applied. Section 
65% (4) of the Evidence Act clearly states that secondary evidence is 
admissible only if lead in the manner stated and not otherwise. To hold 
otherwise would render Section 65B(4) otiose. 


a” 


235. Learned Counsel for the association submitted that in the light of Judgment 
of Supreme Court, it becomes evident that the statement of Liyaqat Ali (PW-3), 
Inspector who is not authorized examiner of Electronic Evidence is not admissible. 


Moreover, Certificate required under Section 65-B (4) of Evidence Act having not 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 2] 


been produced, the whole electronic evidence becomes inadmissible. In case UOI 
would have produced admissible evidence, the organisation would have in that case 
gone through the evidence produced to show that no offensive material is in the 


electronic record. 


vi. Absence of sufficient cause/material/evidence to impose ban 


236. It was further submitted that this Tribunal has to consider whether the 
declaration was a necessary or proportionate measure, and whether the evidence 
produced by the Government constitutes ‘sufficient cause’ for declaring the 
organisation as unlawful. From the material on record in the form of statement of 
witnesses of both sides it is evident that the association is lawful and its objectives 
are also lawful. He further submits that the activities are lawfully transparent and 
purely for welfare of Society and the organisation from time to time has issued 
public statement condemning violence. Documents evidencing the said fact are part 
of reply filed by the association before this Tribunal. 

237. Learned Counsel for the association submitted that there is no evidence of 
any unauthorized activity of any individual member as is evident from the 
examination and cross examination of the witnesses produced before this Tribunal. 
In the present case there was no pre-declaration notice. It was contended that the 
fact that ‘punishment’ by way of declaring the organisation as unlawful was 
imposed and thereafter show cause notice was issued to the Organisation; this 
resort to immediate ban against the association which is functional since last 63 years is 
uncalled for and without any basis. 

238. Learned Counsel for the association submitted that the ban appears to be 
retaliatory for criticizing against the policies/actions of the Government of J & K; 
the organisation has been cooperating with the Government for last 63 years and 
there has been positive and constructive approach between the Government and the 
Organisation for easing out the tensions from time to time. 


Learned Counsel for the association submitted that there was no material which 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


would indicate about ongoing threat and no past activity can be remotely 
connected or linked to the ban imposed. It was contended that the Government 
has resorted to ‘collective punishment’. There has been no occasion for the 
Government even to resort to individual prosecution of any member of the 
organisation, not to speak of collective prosecution of the Organisation. No 
written document or any material of the organisation has been produced by the 
Government which would come under ‘unlawful activities’. Learned Counsel 
for the association submitted that Government has sought to rely upon un- 
verified intelligence or information from anonymous sources which are vague, 
irrelevant and comprise of un-substantiated allegations. Evidence produced in 
sealed cover lacks cross-examination and such un-verified information cannot be 
relied upon and cannot form “sufficient cause” for declaring the organisation 
unlawful. Reliance is placed on following authorities of Hon'ble Supreme 
Court:- 


i. AK. Koul v. Union of India, \995 (4) SCC 73 
ii. Peoples Union for Civil Liberties Vs. Union of India, 2004 (2) SCC 476 
ii. Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra), Para 27 & 30. 


vii. Of Ties with the Hurriyat Conference 


239. Learned Counsel for the association submitted that evidence of witness 
PW-4 Atul Kumar Shahi in cross-examination may be considered in its entirety. It 
was contended that All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC) was declared 
unlawful in January 2023. Late Molvi Abass Ansari ceased to be its member in 
203 when he was expelled from APHC. This allegation of being the member of 
APHC before 2 years is not in any way “sufficient cause” to declare JKIM as 
unlawful organisation. Allegations that the organisation is part of APHC is 
denied. Learned Counsel for the association submitted that from a perusal of the 
material produced by the Government, the organisation is sought to be declared 
unlawful on three counts. 


(i) Act done as mentioned in four FIRS. 


[भाग व---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 23 


(ii) | The posts made or speeches delivered or interview given on social 
media platforms. 
(iii) | Vague, unrelated, unsubstantiated, routine other charges which have 
been made in the notification and in the Background note. 
240. He submitted that the allegations of these all three counts stands explained 
by the Organisation and are not proved. Hence, there was no reason, cause or 
occasion for the Government to issue the declaration made under Section 3 of 


UAPA. 


viii, Apprehension regarding impact on religious activities 


24. Learned Counsel for the association submitted that the Organisation would 
request this Tribunal to take notice of consequences of continuation of declaration. 
It is contended that this organisation is Shia Muslim Organisation which has got 
genesis or basis in Shia School of thought/jurisprudence (Figa). It has already come 
from the evidence, even produced by the Government that this organisation has 
lakhs of members (followers). As a religious leader i.e. Aalim Din, people remain 
associated with Late Molvi Abass Ansari and are now associated with present 
acting president Molvi Masroor Abass Ansari. It is submitted that People are bound 
under religious doctrine to associate with religious leaders. Learned Counsel for the 
association has submitted that tomorrow, when people come in contact with present 
chairman Molvi Masroor Abass Ansari, in connection with day-to-day religious 
activities, it will give freehand to the Government to label such members of Shia 
Society as being associated with an “unlawful association” and take action against 
them under Chapter Ill of UAPA. The consequences would be serious and 
unimaginable; it would create havoc and chaos in the Shia School of thought. 
Needful to mention here that every year during Muharram and other religious 
gatherings/occasions, processions and gatherings are organized where people 
participate as per their religious faith. Continuation of ban would otherwise deprive 


the common masses from performing their essential religious rituals and functions. 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


242. Learned Counsel for the association has further submitted that this is the first 
occasion since the independence of the country that any Shia Organisation has been 
declared as unlawful. The contention that ban will not affect religious activities/ 
functions is also not correct. In recent past, two orders have been passed by District 


Magistrates wherein religious functions conducted by the organisation was banned. 


ix. Regarding existence of ‘sufficient cause’ for ban 


243. Learned Counsel for the association has submitted that Under UAPA, for 
declaration of the organisation as unlawful there must be “Sufficient Cause”. 
Sufficient cause requires cogent cause, specific evidence and not evidence of 
generalization character. The requirement is that State has to present tangible and 
credible evidence. To demonstrate that the organisation is unlawful, it must show 
that the organisation engages/abets unlawful acts. There must be evidence that the 
organisation possesses real and imminent danger/threat to security of the State or 
public order. “Sufficient cause” is more than suspicion. As to what constitutes 
“sufficient cause”, the law is laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the 
following authorities: 


i.Kedarnath Singh v. State of Bihar. \962 SCC OnLIne SC 6 
ii.Balwant Singh v. State of Punjab, ((995) 3 SCC 24 
ii.Union of India y. Association of Democratic Reforms, 2002 (5) SCC 
294 
iv.Shreya Singhal 7. Union of India , (20!5) 5 SCC I 


244. Learned Counsel for the association accordingly submitted that this Tribunal, 
while taking holistic view of all facts and circumstances, considering the case of the 
Government in its entirety and the defence submitted by the Organisation and the 
legal precedents, may set aside the impugned Notification and issue orders for 
cancellation of the ban imposed on the peaceful organisation under Section 4(3) of 


the UAPA. 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 25 


XU. ADDITIONAL AFFIDAVIT OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE 
ASSOCIATION REGARDING DELETION OF CONTENT 


245. It is noteworthy that during the course of rejoinder arguments in this matter, 
the learned counsel for the UOI had sought to refer to the videos sought to be relied 
upon on behalf of the UOI and and an attempt was made (during the hearing itself) 
to access the same from the “YouTube channel” purportedly belonging to the 
association/ chairperson. While doing that it was found that the video/s in question 
had been deleted by the association. A query was put to the learned counsel for the 
association in this regard and pursuant to the same, an additional affidavit of 
Masroor Abbas Ansari, the chairperson of the association was filed with the 
following averments: 


I) That this Hon’ble Tribunal has passed directions for filing 
Supplementary Affidavit regarding deletion of video from the Utube 
Channel of the deponent, 

2) That it is submitted that the said video of my late father 
namely Molvi Mohammad Abass Ansari was recorded way back 
on 72.09.2006 and remained uploaded on the U-tube channel. 
Considering the fact that the video was about I7 years old and not 
relevant, and was deleted from the U-tube channel only on 
22.08.2025. 

3) That the deletion of the said video was in routine manner 
and was not with any oblique motive or purpose. The said video is 
already part of the record of this Hon’ble Tribunal in sealed pen- 
drive. (Exhibit Pl) submitted by the witness namely Inspector 
Liyakat Ali. Its English translated version is also before this 
Hon’ble Tribunal in first para of Exibit-P2. The English 
translation however is not true and correct version of the interview 
of Late Molvi Abass Ansari. 

4) That it is however, submitted that the deletion of the video 
was not intended to remove or destroy any evidence, as hard copy 
of the said video is already part of the record of this Hon’ble 
Tribunal as Exhibit Pl & P2 with the witness affidavit of Inspector 
Liyakat Ali. 

5) That I solemnly declare that the deletion of the said video 
on 22.08.2025 was not intentional or for any oblique motive or 
purpose. Moreover, there was no order from this Hon’ble 
Tribunal or from any authority for not deleting the said video 
from my U-tube channel. 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


6) That in order to remove any misconception, the deponent 
have again uploaded the said video on my U-tube channel 
immediately on very next day i.e. 23.08.2025. 
7) It is further submitted that all videos on the channel which 
are subject matter of enquiry will remain on the channel subject to 
any orders from this Hon’ble Tribunal. 
Hence, this Supplementary Affidavit for and on behalf of the 
deponent above named in compliance with the Order of this 
Hon’ble Tribunal.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 


XI. ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE ASSOCIATION 


246. Additional written submissions were filed on behalf of the association on 
26.08.2025. It is submitted therein that the statement of PW-3 Inspector Liyakat 
Ali, when perused as a whole, makes it evident and manifest that he has acted as 
prosecutor, jury and judge. He has only downloaded the video of the interview. He 
has also translated it into English, however, the translation is not true and correct, as 
he has omitted the part of electronic documents which were favouring the 
organisation for proving that no sufficient cause exists for declaring the organisation 
as “unlawful association”. 

247. Learned Counsel for the association has submitted that on directions of this 
Tribunal, he enquired from the acting Chairman Molvi Masroor Abass Ansari as to 
whether any video stands deleted from the YouTube channel of Molvi Abbas 
Ansari on 22.08.2025. It was submitted that one video of Late Molvi Abbas Ansari 
dated 2.09.2008 was deleted in routine manner as this video was more than 47 
years old and was thus obsolete. This video was in Urdu language on Hard-disk in 
the form of Pen-drive and its translation into English is already available on file 
with the statement of Inspector Liyakat Ali as Exhibit Pl — P2. However, the 
translation is not true and correct. The word ‘Plebiscite’ mentioned in first para of 
Exhibit P-2 is non-existing in the original video. Similarly other contents of English 
version of translation from Urdu to English are from Kashmiri language to English 
are devoid of actual and correct meaning. 


248. Learned Counsel for the association has submitted that PW No.3, Inspector 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 27 


Liyakat Ali in his statement has deposed that he is not a certified and trained 
translator. He is neither computer expert nor forensic expert. His translation from 
Urdu to English or Kashmiri to English are not true and correct versions of original 
videos. True and correct version of translation from Urdu or Kashmiri to English 
can be made by certified or trained translator and not by ordinary language speaking 
person. It is further submitted that Section 63(4) of THE BHARATIYA SAKSHYA 
ADHINIY AM, 2023, provides as under:- 


“ce S 


ection 63-(4): In any proceeding where it is desired to give a 
statement in evidence by virtue of this section, a certificate doing any 
of the following things shall be submitted along with the electronic 
record at each instance where it is being submitted for admission, 
namely:— 

(a) identifying the electronic record containing the statement and 
describing the manner in which it was produced; 

(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production 
of that electronic record as may be appropriate for the purpose of 
showing that the electronic record was produced by a computer or a 
communication device referred to in clauses 

(a) to (e) of sub-section (3); 

(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned 
in sub-section (2) relate, and purporting to be signed by a person in 
charge of the computer or communication device or the management 
of the relevant activities (whichever is appropriate) and an expert 
shall be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate; and for the 
purposes of this sub-section it shall be sufficient for a matter to be 
stated to the best of theknowledge and belief of the person stating it 
in the certificate specified in the Schedule.” 


249. Learned Counsel for the association has submitted that bare perusal of the said 
Section 63(4) makes it evident that the deposition of the said Inspector Liyaqat Ali 
(PW-3) is to the extent that he was incharge of the Computer on which electronic 
documents were downloaded. He is not an expert. He cannot testify to the 
authenticity of the video. He is at the best a person who has testified as to when and 
where he found the videos and the steps he has taken. It is only a digital forensic 
expert who can examine videos metadata, creation date, Hash-value, edit story to 
opine on its authenticity and whether it has been altered. 


250. Learned Counsel for the association has submitted that Inspector Liyakat Ali 


28 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


is not the Government approved examiner of electronic record. He has no degree in 
computer science and as such is not computer expert. He is not forensic expert. 
Hence, he cannot confirm the date integrity or authenticity and integrity of records. 
25l. Learned Counsel for the association has further submitted that Respondent 
Witness No.l, Molvi Masroor Abass Ansari has clearly stated that these videos are 
doctored. No expert witness as required under Section 63 of BSA, 2023 has been 
produced before this Tribunal, therefore, in absence of expert evidence, the 
evidence of this witness becomes inadmissible. 

252. It is further submitted that the Central Government has already notified the 
agencies under Section 79A of Information Technology Act. These agencies are 
Indian Computer Response Team (CERT), State Forensic Laboratory (SFL), 
Central Forensic Laboratory, Cyber Crime Cells and Law Enforcement Agencies. 
Witness Liyakat Ali (Inspector) does not fall within any of the notified agencies. 
His evidence regarding downloading of documents may be considered but his 
evidence claiming to be an expert is inadmissible. 

253. Itis further submitted that even if these videos are considered, they pertain to 
year 2005, 2008, 207, 20i8 and 20I9. These videos being obsolete at the material 
point in time and not relevant there is no such current activity. There is no cogent 
and specific proof. There is no tangible or credible evidence. Whether the same 
constitutes sufficient cause? The speeches made before 20 year, I5 years, or 0 
years without any link of any current activity will not form sufficient cause within 
the meaning and contemplation of ‘unlawful activity’. Hence, the organisation does 


not possess the real and imminent threat/danger to security of State or public order. 


XII. REJOINDER ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE CENTRAL 
GOVERNMENT 

254. Learned ASG while making rejoinder arguments stated that JKIM objected 

to the electronic evidence produced before this Tribunal by way of the evidence by 

way of affidavit dated 9.06.2025 by Mr. Liyagat Ali (PW-3), Inspector, Crime 


Investigation Department, J & K Police on two grounds, viz. (0) the electronic 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 29 


evidence was not supported by an expert witness such as an Examiner of Electronic 
Evidence under Section 79A of the Information Technology Act 2000 (‘IT Act’), 
and (ii) the electronic evidence is doctored. 

255. Learned ASG submitted that while this Tribunal is guided by the general 
principles of civil procedure, in terms of Sections 5(5) and 9 UAP Act 967 r/w 
Rule 5 of UAP Rules 968, the strict rigours of the same are inapplicable and this 
Tribunal has the power to regulate its own procedure in the discharge of its 
functions. Accordingly, the admissibility of the electronic evidence produced before 
this Tribunal ought to be considered on the general principles of procedure and 
evidence enshrined in relevant laws. Reliance was placed on the following sections 
of the BSA which read as under: 


#64, Electronic or digital record - Nothing in this Adhiniyam shall apply to 
deny the admissibility of an electronic or digital record in the evidence on 
the ground that it is an electronic or digital record and such record shall, 
subject to section 63, have the same legal effect, validity and enforceability 
as other document.” 

“62. Special provisions as to evidence relating to electronic record - he 
contents of electronic records may be proved in accordance with the 
provisions of section 63.” 

“63. Admissibility of electronic records - (7) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Adhiniyam, any information contained in an electronic 
record which is printed on paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or 
magnetic media or semiconductor memory which is produced by a computer 
or any communication device or otherwise stored, recorded or copied in any 
electronic form (hereinafter referred to as the computer output) shall be 
deemed to be also a document, if the conditions mentioned in this section 
are satisfied in relation to the information and computer in question and 
shall be admissible in any proceedings, without further proof or 
production of the original, as evidence or any contents of the original or of 
any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would be admissible. 


(4) In any proceeding where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by 
virtue of this section, a certificate doing any of the following things shall be 
submitted along with the electronic record at each instance where it is being 
submitted for admission, namely:- 
(a) identifying the electronic record containing the statement and 
describing the manner in which it was produced; 
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of 
that electronic record as may be appropriate for the purpose of 
showing that the electronic record was produced by a computer or a 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


communication device referred to in clauses (a) to (e) of sub- section 
(3); 
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned 
in sub-section (2) relate, 
and purporting to be signed by a person in charge of the computer or 
communication device or the management of the relevant activities 
(whichever is appropriate) and an expert shall be evidence of any matter 
stated in the certificate; and for the purposes of this subsection it shall be 
sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of 
the person stating it in the certificate specified in the Schedule.” 
256. It was further stated that if electronic evidence is produced as primary 
evidence, the above provisions are not applicable, and such evidence, if produced 
in original before this Tribunal, will be proved in terms of Sections 56 and 57 BSA 
which state as under: 


“56. Proof of contents of documents - The contents of documents may 
be proved either by primary or by secondary evidence.” 


“57. Primary evidence - Primary evidence means the document itself produced 
for the inspection of the Court. 


Explanation 6 - Where a video recording is simultaneously stored in 
electronic form and transmitted or broadcast or transferred to another, 
each of the stored recordings is primary evidence.” 


i. Electronic evidence in the present case 


257. It was submitted that the affidavit of PW-3 produced electronic evidence 
before this Tribunal and in terms of Section 63 BSA, the same is admissible as 
secondary evidence. A certificate in terms of Section 63(4) BSA has been submitted 
before this Tribunal which constitutes substantial compliance of this provision. It 
was further submitted that on 23.08.2025, the electronic evidence was directly 
produced for inspection by this Tribunal, in the presence of the parties. The details 
of the electronic evidence produced for direct inspection before this is annexed to 
additional written submission as Annexure A-I. 

258. It was submitted that the electronic evidence mentioned in Annexure A-], 
while also produced by way of the affidavit by PW-3 as secondary evidence, was 
directly inspected by this Tribunal on 23.08.2025 on the computer device of the 


Tribunal and thus, forms primary evidence in terms of Section 57 BSA. As such, 


[भाग Il—€vs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3] 


under Sections 56 and 57 of BSA, the above electronic evidence produced before 
this Tribunal, being primary evidence produced before this Tribunal, stands proved 
without the need for any additional statutory requirements. Reliance was placed on 
the judgment of the Supreme Court in Anvar PV v. PK Basheer, (2074) 70 SCC 


473 which, upon a discussion of similar provisions of the then applicable Indian 


Evidence Act 872, held as under: 


259. 
Bench of Hon’ble Supreme Court in Arjun Panditrao Khotkar yv. Kailash 


“24. The situation would have been different had the appellant adduced 

primary evidence, by making available in evidence, the CDs used for 
announcement and songs. Had those CDs used for objectionable songs 
or announcements been duly got seized through the police or Election 
Commission and had the same been used as primary evidence, the High 
Court could have played the same in court to see whether the 
allegations were true. That is not the situation in this case. The 
speeches, songs and announcements were recorded using other 
instruments and by feeding them into a computer, CDs were made 
therefrom which were produced in court, without due certification. 
Those CDs cannot be admitted in evidence since the mandatory 
requirements of Section 65B of the Evidence Act are not satisfied. It is 
clarified that notwithstanding what we have stated herein in the 
preceding paragraphs on the secondary evidence on electronic record 
with reference to Section 59, 654 and 65B of the Evidence Act, if an 
electronic record as such is used as primary evidence under Section 62 
of the Evidence Act, the same is admissible in evidence, without 
compliance of the conditions in Section 65B of the Evidence Act.” 


It was submitted that this position was further clarified by a three Judges 


Kushanrao Gorantyal, (2020) 7 SCC व as under: 


“34. Quite obviously, the requisite certificate in sub-section (4) is 
unnecessary if the original document itself is produced. This can be done 
by the owner of a laptop computer, a computer tablet or even a mobile 
phone, by stepping into the witness box and proving that the concerned 
device, on which the original information is Girst stored, is owned and/or 
operated by him. In cases where “the computer”, as defined, happens to be 
a part of a “computer system” or “computer network” (as defined in the 
Information Technology Act, 2000) and it becomes impossible to physically 
bring such network or system to the Court, then the only means of proving 
information contained in such electronic record can be in accordance with 
Section 638(7), together with the requisite certificate under Section 65B(4). 
This being the case, it is necessary to clarify what is contained in the last 
sentence in paragraph 24 of Anvar P.V. (supra) which reads as “...if an 


32 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


electronic record as such is used as primary evidence under Section 62 of 

the Evidence Act...”.. This may more appropriately be read without the 

words “under Section 62 of the Evidence Act,...”. With this minor 

clarification, the law stated in paragraph 24 of Anvar P.V. (supra) does not 

need to be revisited.” 
260. Thus, it was stated that as the electronic evidence detailed in Annexure १ -। 
has been produced before this Tribunal as primary evidence, no further statutory 
requirements are required to be met. Moreover, most of the electronic evidence 
produced in the affidavit of PW-3 is from publicly available links of the JKIM 
website and the official YouTube channel of JKIM President/Chairman. In such 
circumstances, this evidence cannot be rejected as its genuineness can always be 
checked. It was argued that under similar circumstances, the High Court of Delhi in 
Excitel Pvt. Ltd. v. Registrar of Trade Marks, 2022 SCC OnLine Del 2097, held 
as under: 


+॥4, This Court is of the opinion that rejecting the evidence extracted 
hereinabove, on the ground that it does not constitute primary evidence 
would be an incorrect approach inasmuch as the genuineness of the printout 
can be easily checked by the examiner by accessing the internet at the time of 
hearing. Moreover, if there is any doubt in respect of printouts that have 
been filed by the Appellant, at best, the examiner can call for an 
affidavit under Section 65B of the Information Technology Act, 2000, 
(hereinafter “IT Act”). Simply rejecting the website printouts would be 
contrary to law as the law permits reliance on website printouts, so long as 
they can be they can be accompanied with a certificate under Section 65B of 
the IT Act.” 


26l. Additionally, it is stated, the electronic evidence produced as secondary 
evidence in the affidavit is supported by a certificate in terms of Section 63(4) BSA 
and the same is admissible in terms of Sections 6, 62 and 63 BSA. 

262. The learned ASG strongly refuted the contention on behalf of the JKIM 
that for the electronic evidence to be admissible, it ought to be supported with an 
opinion of an expert witness such as an Examiner of Electronic Evidence under 
Section 79A of the IT Act 2000. 

263. It was stated that the provision for an Examiner of Electronic Evidence under 
Section 79A of the IT Act 2000 is relatable to Section 39(2) BSA which reads as 


under: 


[भाग व---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 33 


“39. Opinions of experts - 


(2) When in a proceeding, the court has to form an opinion on any 
matter relating to any information transmitted or stored in any 
computer resource or any other electronic or digital form, the opinion of the 
Examiner of Electronic Evidence referred to in section 79A of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 (27 of 2000), is a relevant fact. 
Explanation.--For the purposes of this sub-section, an Examiner of 
Electronic Evidence shall be an expert.” 
264. It was stated that under the above provision, the opinion of the Examiner of 
Electronic Evidence referred to in Section 79A of the IT Act 2000 is deemed to be 
a relevant fact when a court is called upon to form an opinion on any electronic 
evidence. This provision does not relate to the admissibility of the electronic 
evidence produced by a party, nor forms a condition precedent for the production of 
the same before this Tribunal. In essence, while forming an opinion on any 
electronic evidence, this provision provides that if an opinion is produced by an 
Examiner of Electronic Evidence under Section 79A of the IT Act 2000 by the 
parties or if the court warrants the opinion of such an expert, such opinion shall be 
a relevant fact. It does not preclude the court from forming an opinion on electronic 
evidence without the aid of such an opinion, nor does the lack of such opinion render 
the evidence inadmissible. 
265. Section 63 BSA does not require an expert witness to be produced before the 
Tribunal as contended by JKIM. The requirement of an ‘expert’ to provide a 
certificate under Section 63(4) BSA should also be construed in light of Section 
39(2) BSA as one that may be produced if the opinion of an expert is warranted. 
The certificate required to be produced by the person in charge of the 
computer/device which has been used to produce the electronic record under 
Section 63(4) BSA, i.e. PW-03 Mr. Liyagat Ali, has already been submitted before 
this Tribunal and accordingly, there is substantial compliance with this provision. 
Moreover, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami (Supra) in Para |7-8 
had emphasised on the need of only objective determination of the points in 


controversy in a judicial scrutiny conducted by a Tribunal constituted under the Act. 


34 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


266. Further, the contention advanced by JKIM on the electronic evidence being 
doctored is a bald assertion, without any positive evidence led to support such a 
claim. As such, having substantially complied with the statutory framework 
governing electronic evidence, it is submitted that the electronic evidence produced 
in the Affidavit is admissible and ought to be considered by this Tribunal. 

267. It was stated that in respect of the first video in Exhibit I to the affidavit, 
JKIM has in its additional written submission (served upon the UOI vide email 
dated 26.08.2025) has admitted specifically to deleting the said video from its 
YouTube channel on 22.08.2025 and upon the same being pointed out at the hearing 
of the present matter on 23.08.2025, the said video was re-uploaded on 23.08.2025. 
268. It is submitted that the above conduct makes it evident that JKIM is making 
efforts to conceal its true secessionist and cessionist ideology and agenda from this 
Tribunal and it is respectfully submitted that such conduct may be considered in 


adjudicating the present matter. 


ii. In re: Impact of the declaration of JKIM as an Unlawful Association on 
religious activity of its members 


269. JKIM contends that the declaration of JKIM as an unlawful association under 
UAPA will result in action against its members in conducting religious activities. 
270. In this regard, it is most respectfully submitted that religious activities which 
are not within the purview of ‘unlawful activity’ under Section 2(0), UAPA are not 
prohibited under UAPA. Members of JKIM who undertake such legitimate 
activities in their personal capacity for religious purposes will not be impacted by 
an order under Section 4 by this Tribunal. 

27l. It may also be noted that Mr. Masroor Abbass Ansari (RW-0), the Chairman 
of banned Organisation JKIM stated in his deposition before this Tribunal that he 
had participated in a procession on 04.07.2025 on the occasion of Moharram in 
which lakhs of people participated and the Government gave due permission for the 
same. He further stated that certain other processions were also held around the 
same period in which he participated. Thus, it is evident that legitimate religious 


activities undertaken by any member of JKIM in their personal capacity are 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 35 


proceeding unhindered by the present action against JKIM under UAPA, 967. As 
such, any apprehension that the declaration of JKIM as an unlawful association will 
impact legitimate religious activities undertaken by its members in their personal 


capacity is unfounded. 


XIV. JUSTIFICATION OF UOI’s CLAIM FOR PRIVILEGE 


272. On .08.2025, when Mr. Atul Kumar Shahi, Commandant (CT), CTCR 
Division, MHA (PW-4) was examined on behalf of the UOI, this witness had 
produced original files containing the central intelligence reports/ inputs in a sealed 
cover for the perusal of this Tribunal (Ex.PW-4/3) and learned counsel for the 
UOI, advanced arguments for claiming privilege for the documents produced in 
sealed cover. 

273. The issue regarding privilege by the Central Government in respect of the 
documents disclosure whereof is injurious to public interest is specifically 
envisaged in the UAP Rules. Rule 3 of the said UAP Rules, is in the following 
terms:- 


“3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence.—(]) In 
holding an enquiry under sub-section (3) of Section 4 or disposing of any 
application under sub-section (4) of Section 7 or sub-section (8) of Section 
8, the Tribunal or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall, subject to 
the provisions of sub-rule (2), follow, as far as practicable, the rules of 
evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 7/872 (7 of 7622, 

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, /6/2 
(/ of 78722), where any books of account or other documents have been 
produced before the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge by the 
Central Government and such books of account or other documents are 
claimed by that Government to be a confidential nature then, the Tribunal 
or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall not, -- 

(a) make such books of account or other documents a part of the records 
of the proceedings before it; or 

(b) allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, 
such books of account or other documents by or to any person other than a 
party to the proceedings before it.” 


36 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


274. 7 can be seen that the Rule 3 (2) starts with a non-obstante clause providing 
that notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 872, where 
any books of account or other documents are sought to be produced by the Central 
Government and these documents are claimed to be of a confidential nature, then 
the Tribunal shall not make such documents a part of the records of the proceedings 
before it or allow inspection of or grant a copy of the same to any person other than 
the parties to the proceedings before it. 

275. Rule 5 of the UAP Rules provides for the documents which should 
accompany a reference to the Tribunal viz. a copy of the notification and all facts 
on which grounds specified in the notification are based, further provides that 
nothing in the said Rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact 
to the Tribunal which it considers against public interest to disclose. The said rule 
is in the following terms:- 


“5. Documents which should accompany a reference to the Tribunal. — 
Every reference made to the Tribunal under sub-section 
(3) of Section 4 shall be accompanied by — 


(i) a copy of the notification made under sub-section (/) of Section 

3, and 

(ii) all the facts on which the grounds specified in the said 

notification are based: 

Provided that nothing in this rule shall require the Central 
Government to disclose any fact to the Tribunal which that Government 
considers against the public interest to disclose.” 


276. The aforementioned provisions and the requirement of maintaining 
confidentiality of certain documents specifically came to be considered by the 
Supreme Court in the case of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra), wherein it was held 
as under:- 


“22. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may 
quite often be clandestine in nature and, therefore, the source of 
evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued 
confidentiality in public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the 
source of such information, and, may be, also full particulars thereof, is 
likely to be against the public interest. The scheme of the Act and the 
procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder 
provide for maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


37 


public interest. However, the non-disclosure of sensitive information 
and evidence to the association and its office-bearers, whenever 
justified in public interest, does not necessarily imply its non- 
disclosure to the Tribunal as well. In such cases where the Tribunal is 
satisfied that non-disclosure of such information to the association or 
its office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non- disclosure 
to the association or its office-bearers, but in order to perform its task 
of adjudication as required by the Act, the Tribunal can look into the 
same for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information 
and satisfying itself that it can safely act on the same. In such a 
situation, the Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure whereby it can 
itself examine and test the credibility of such material before it decides 
to accept the same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for 
declaring the association to be unlawful. The materials need not be 
confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a procedure 
would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication 
made on the points in controversy after assessing the credibility of the 
material it has chosen to accept, without abdicating its function by 
merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a 
course would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice 
tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, while protecting the 
rights of the association and its members, without jeopardising the 
public interest. This would also ensure that the process of adjudication 
is not denuded of its content and the decision ultimately rendered by 
the Tribunal is reached by it on all points in controversy after 
adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion already formed 
by the Central Government. 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer the 
United States Supreme Court, in a case of parole revocation, indicated 
the minimum requirements to be followed, as under: (L Ed pp. 498-99) 
“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of 
due process. They include (a) written notice of the claimed 
violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of evidence 
against him; (2) opportunity to be heard in person and to 
present witnesses and documentary evidence; (d) the right to 
confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses (unless the 
hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing 
confrontation); (e) a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such 
as a traditional parole board, members of which need not be 
judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement by the 
fact finders as to the evidence relied on and reasons for 
revoking parole. We emphasise there is no thought to equate 
this second stage of parole revocation to a criminal prosecution 
in any sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the process should be 
flexible enough to consider evidence including letters, 
affidavits, and other material that would not be admissible in 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


an adversary criminal trial.” 


24. In Paul Ivan Barzun ए. Edward §S. King placing reliance on 
Morrissey, while dealing with a similar situation, when confidential 
information had to be acted on, it was indicated that the credibility 
issue could be resolved by the Board retaining confidentiality of the 
information but assessing the credibility itself, and a modified 
procedure was indicated as under: 
“... the board was required to decide whether it would believe 
the informants or the parolee and his witnesses. The infirmity 
that we see in the hearing and determination by the parole 
board is that it resolved the credibility issue solely on the basis 
of the State report, without itself taking the statements from the 
informants. Thus the board had no way of knowing how 
reliable the informants were and had no real basis on which to 
resolve the credibility issue against the parolee... 


We do not mean to intimate that the board should have taken 
testimony from the informants at the hearing and given the 
parolee the opportunity to cross-examine. What we do mean is 
that the board should have received the information directly 
from the informants (although not necessarily in the 
presence of the parolee), instead of relying solely on the State 
report. The board could then have reached its own conclusions 
about the relative reliability of the informants' statements and 
those of the parolee and his witnesses. 


Similarly, the board could then have made its own decision 
about how realistic were the claims of potential danger to the 
informants or to State parole officers if their identity was 
disclosed, instead of placing exclusive reliance on the State 
report. Thus, we hold that, in relying exclusively on the written 
synopsis in the State report, which was the only evidence of a 
parole violation, in the face of the parolee's denial and his 
presentation of the testimony of other witnesses, the revocation 
of Satz’s parole was fundamentally unfair to him and was a 
denial of due process of law.” 


25. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such 
information and its source, in public interest, also enables the 
adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the confidential 
information for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred 
to the conflicting evidence of the other side. This modified procedure 
satisfies the minimum requirements of natural justice and also retains 
the basic element of an adjudicatory process which involves objective 
determination of the factual basis of the action taken. 


26. An authorised restriction saved by Article 79(4) on the freedom 
conferred by Article /9(7/(०) of the Constitution has to be 


[भाग व---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 39 


reasonable. In this statute, provision is made for the notification 
to become effective on its confirmation by a Tribunal constituted 
by a sitting High Court Judge, on adjudication, after a show- 
cause notice to the association, that sufficient cause exists for 
declaring it to be unlawful. The provision for adjudication by 
judicial scrutiny, after a show-cause notice, of existence of 
sufficient cause to justify the declaration must necessarily imply 
and import into the inquiry, the minimum requirement of natural 
justice to ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is its own 
opinion, formed on the entire available material, and not a mere 
imprimatur of the Tribunal affixed to the opinion of the Central 
Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a fair procedure to prevent 
the vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure 
in a given case, would depend on the materials constituting the 
factual foundation of the notification and the manner in which the 
Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to be determined by 
the Tribunal keeping in view the nature of its scrutiny, the 
minimum requirement of natural justice, the fact that the materials 
in such matters are not confined to legal evidence in the strict 
sense, and that the scrutiny is not a criminal trial. The Tribunal 
should form its opinion on all the points in controversy after 
assessing for itself the credibility of the material relating to it, 
even though it may not be disclosed to the association, if the 
public interest so requires. 


27. It follows that, ordinarily, the material on which the Tribunal can 
place reliance for deciding the existence of sufficient cause to support 
the declaration, must be of the kind which is capable of judicial 
scrutiny. In this context, the claim of privilege on the ground of public 
interest by the Central Government would be permissible and the 
Tribunal is empowered to devise a procedure by which it can satisfy 
itself of the credibility of the material without disclosing the same to 
the association, when public interest so requires. The requirements of 
natural justice can be suitably modified by the Tribunal to examine the 
material itself in the manner it considers appropriate, to assess its 
credibility without disclosing the same to the association. This 
modified procedure would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural 
justice and judicial scrutiny. The decision would then be that of the 
Tribunal itself.” 


277. The High Court of Andhra Pradesh in Deendar Anjuman vs. Government 
of India, 2007 SCC OnLine AP 663 after applying the test laid down in Jamaat-e- 
Islami Hind (Supra) upheld the ban imposed and further held that the entire 
material available on record itself need not be published or made available to the 
aggrieved person but what is required is disclosure of reasons and the grounds. 
Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under:- 


40 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


ढ“॥9, The expression “for reasons to be stated in writing” did not 
necessarily mean that the entire material available on record itself is to be 
published or made available to the aggrieved person. What is required is 
disclosure of reasons. The grounds must be disclosed. The notification 
issued under sub-section (7) of Section 3 alone is required to be referred to 
the Tribunal “for the purpose of adjudicating whether or not there is 
sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” The Tribunal after 
such reference is required to issue notice to the affected association to show 
cause, why the association should not be declared unlawful. The Tribunal is 
required to hold an enquiry in the manner specified in Section 9 and 
after calling for such further information as it may consider necessary 
from the Central Government or from the association and then decide 
whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association to be 
unlawful. The Tribunal is require “to adjudicate whether or not there is 
sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” As held by the 
Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind v. Union of India the Tribunal is 
required to weigh the material on which the notification under sub- section 
(3) of Sec. 3 is issued by the Central Government after taking into account 
the cause shown by the Association in reply to the notice issued to it and by 
taking into consideration such further information which it may call for, to 
decide the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the action to be 
unlawful. The Tribunal is required to objectively determine the points in 
controversy. The Supreme Court further held that subject to non-disclosure 
of information which the Central Government considers to be against the 
public interest to disclose, all information and evidence relied on by the 
Central Government to support the declaration made by it of an association 
to be unlawful, has to be disclosed to the association to enable it to show 
cause against the same. The Tribunal is entitled to ascertain the credibility 
of conflicting evidence relating to the points in controversy. It is observed by 
the Supreme Court: 


“To satisfy the minimum requirements of a_ proper 
adjudication, it is necessary that the Tribunal should have the 
means to ascertain the credibility of conflicting evidence 
relating to the points in controversy. Unless such a means is 
available to the Tribunal to determine the credibility of the 
material before it, it cannot choose 


between conflicting material and decide which one to prefer 
and accept. In such a situation, the only option to it would be 
to accept the opinion of the Central Government, without any 
means to test the credibility of the material on which it is 
based. The adjudication made would cease to be an objective 
determination and be meaningless, equating the process with 
mere acceptance of the ipse dixit of the Central Government. 
The requirement of adjudication by the Tribunal contemplated 
under the Act does not permit abdication of its function by the 
Tribunal to the Central Government providing merely its 
stamp of approval to the opinion of the Central Government. 


[भाग व---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 4] 


The procedure to be followed by the Tribunal must, therefore, 
be such which enables the Tribunal to itself assess the 
credibility of conflicting material on any point in controversy 
and evolve a process by which it can decide whether to accept 
the version of the Central Government or to reject it in the 
light of the other view asserted by the association. The 
difficulty in this sphere is likely to arise in relation to the 
evidence of material in respect of which the Central 
Government claims nondisclosure on the ground of public 
interest.” 


20. It is, therefore, evident that disclosure of all the facts and material 
available on record subject to the claim of any privilege in this regard by 
the Central Government is only after the reference of the notification issued 
under sub-section (7) of Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal for the purpose 
of adjudication whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the 
association unlawful. The material available on record may have to be 
revealed to the association or its members. In a case wherever any privilege 
is claimed, the Tribunal has to examine the material itself in the manner it 
considers appropriate, to assess its credibility without disclosing the same 
to the association. Therefore, there is no requirement to disclose the 
material itself and publish the same in the notification or provide to the 
association along with the notification issued in exercise of the power under 
proviso to sub-section 


(3) of Section 3 declaring the association to be unlawful with immediate 
effect. The requirement is disclosure of additional reasons and grounds and 
not the material. The notification issued in exercise of the power under 
proviso to sub-sec. (3) of Section 3 cannot be set aside on the ground that 
the material relied upon for stating the reasons is not communicated to the 
association concerned declaring it to be an unlawful association with 
immediate effect. Such notification would become vulnerable only when the 
reasons are not notified: The record should contain the reasons in writing 
and the same is required to be revealed and published in the notification or 
communicated to the association concerned. Such reasons are required to 
be distinct and different and cannot be the same for imposing ban under 
Section 3 of the Act. The reasons are required to be communicated but not the 
entire material. Disclosure of the material is only after reference of the 
notification issued under Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal.” 


(Emphasis supplied) 


278. The legal position, that emerges, can be succinctly put in the following 


terms:- 


[भाग व---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 42 


i. The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules 
framed thereunder contemplates maintenance of confidentiality whenever 
required in public interest; 

ii. The Tribunal can look into the confidential material without the same being 
disclosed to the Association or its office-bearers, for the purpose of 
assessing the credibility of the information and satisfying itself that the 
same is reliable; 

iit. The Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure for itself for examining and 
testing the credibility of such material 

iv. The requirement of natural justice can be suitably modified by the Tribunal 
in the manner it considers appropriate for the purpose of 
assessing/examining the confidential material/documents, and arriving at a 
conclusion based on a perusal thereof. 

279. Further, the rigors prescribed by the Supreme Court in the case of S.P. Gupta 
vs. Union of India ((98|) Supp SCC 87 have to be read in the context of the 
provisions of the UAPA and the Rules framed thereunder. In particular, it needs to 
be borne in mind that Rule 3३(]) of the UAP Rules expressly provides that in holding 
any inquiry under Sub-Section (3) of Section 4 of the UAPA, the Tribunal shall 
follow “as far as practicable”, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian 
Evidence Act. Thus, the rigors that have been contemplated in the context of 
Section 29 of the Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 ! (which is in pari materia 
with the erstwhile Section 23 of the Indian Evidence Act), cannot ipso-facto be 
made applicable to these proceedings. The legislative intent was clearly to make the 
provisions of the Evidence Act applicable only “as far as practicable” and the same 
is borne out from the express provisions of the Act and the relevant judicial 
pronouncements (as noticed in the foregoing portion of this report), particularly the 
observations in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). The same reads as under: 


' A reference to the Evidence Act in the UAPA must be necessarily construed as a reference to the Bhartiya 
Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 as well. 


43 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“22. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may 
quite often be clandestine in nature and, therefore, the source of 
evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued 
confidentiality in public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the 
source of such information, and, may be, also full particulars thereof, 
is likely to be against the public interest. The_scheme of the Act and 
the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder 
provide _for_maintenance_of confidentiality, whenever_required in 
public interest. However, the non-disclosure of sensitive information 
and evidence to the association and its office-bearers, whenever 
justified in public interest, does not necessarily imply its non- 
disclosure to the Tribunal as well. In_such cases where the Tribunal is 


satisfied that non-disclosure of such information to the association or 


its office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non-disclosure 
to the association or its office-bearers, but in order to perform its task 
of adjudication as required by the Act, the Tribunal can look into the 
same for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information 
and _ satisfying itself that_it can_safely act_on the same. In such a 
situation, the Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure whereby it can 
itself examine and test the credibility of such material before it 
decides to accept the same for determining the existence of sufficient 
cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. The materials need 
not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a 
procedure would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an 
adjudication made on the points in controversy after assessing the 
credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without abdicating 
its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central 
Government. Such a course would satisfy the minimum requirement of 
natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, while 
protecting the rights of the association and its members, without 
jeopardising the public interest. This would also ensure that the 
process of adjudication is not denuded of its content and the decision 
ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by it on all points in 
controversy after adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the 
opinion already formed by the Central Government.” 


280. On perusal of the documents submitted by the Central Government in a 
sealed cover, it is found that the same contains intelligence reports, details of secret 
information collected from time to time by the investigating and intelligence 
agencies, notes/ memos prepared by the investigating and intelligence agencies, 
information revealed on investigation including information as to the clandestine 
nature of the activities of the concerned association and its office-bearers and 
linkage of the association and its office-bearers with organisations and individuals 
outside of India. 


44 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


28l. This Tribunal finds from the perusal of these documents that the disclosure 
of these documents would be detrimental to the larger public interest and security 
of the State. One of the documents which is contained in the sealed cover, is a note 
prepared for consideration of the cabinet committee on security, which contains 
sensitive information about activities of the Association and its inimical impact on 
national security. Clearly, the nature of these documents is such that it would be in 
public interest and in the interest of the security of the State, to maintain 
confidentiality as regard thereto. 

282. It is also to be noted that the claim for privilege has been expressly stated by 
the concerned witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs (PW-4) to be based on a 
specific approval/ direction of the Union Home Secretary (The head of the 
Department). The said position is also borne out from the relevant official/ noting 
files shared with this Tribunal. 

283. In these circumstances, this Tribunal allows the claim for privilege in respect 
of the documents submitted in a sealed cover by the concerned witness from the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (PW-4). Consequently, the Tribunal has proceeded to 
peruse the said documents, as contemplated in the Judgment of the Supreme Court 
in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra) and to assess the credibility thereof and the 


implications flowing therefrom for the purpose of the present inquiry. 


XV. FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION 


284. It is noticed that the evidence / material relied upon by the Central 
Government in support of the ban comprises of the following: 
(i) evidence in the form of FIRs registered in Jammu & Kashmir against 
members / senior office-bearers of the Association which gives an insight 
into the nature of their activities; 
(ii) the ideology and activities of the Association as revealed from 
material / videos hosted by the chairperson of the Association on his 
“youtube channel” and / or as is evident from various other social media 


posts / videos, inter alia containing videos / speeches of its former president 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 45 


285. 


Moulvi Abbas Ansari and its current president Masroor Abbas Ansari; 
(iii) evidence in the form of intelligence reports / inputs from various 
agencies, both central and local. 


As opposed to the above, learned counsel for the Association has broadly 


contended as under: 


(i) That the banning is based on stale FIRs. It is submitted that even if 
the material / allegations forming the subject matter of the FIRs are 
presumed to be true, the same do not constitute sufficient basis for declaring 
the Association as ‘unlawful’. 

(ii) It is submitted that the evidence as regards the alleged social media 
posts / videos, as referred to in the deposition of PW-3 (Liyakat Ali, 
Inspector, Crime Investigation Department, J & K at Srinagar) is liable to be 
disregarded altogether inasmuch as the same has not been proved in 
accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure / Bharatiya 
Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 and the same is also inadmissible for non- 
compliance with Section 79A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT 
Act). It is submitted that the social media posts / videos do not constitute 
any authentic “data” which can be relied upon for the purpose of these 
proceedings. It has been further emphasized that some of the social media 
posts / videos are of an old vintage, for example, an interview given by its 
former President Moulvi Abbas Ansari to a Pakistani news channel viz. Geo 
TV, as far back as in 2009. 

(iii) It is vehemently emphasized that the Association is primarily 
engaged in religious activities being a socio-religious organization. It is 
emphasized that the Association is a predominantly “Shia Organization” 
canvassing the religious interest of the Shia community in Jammu & 
Kashmir. It is submitted that not a single member of the Association has 
ever been involved in any militant / terrorist activities or in fomenting 


trouble in the region of Jammu & Kashmir. It is submitted that the 


46 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


286. 


Association, although initially a constituent of All Party Hurriyat 
Conference (APHC), is different from the other militants / extremists 
constituents of the APHC inasmuch as it canvasses / professes a moderate 
ideology and has been pursuing dialogue/s with the Government of India; it 
has not carried out any activity which undermines the sovereignty and 
integrity of India nor does it question that Jammu & Kashmir is an integral 
part thereof. 

(iv) It is emphasized that the association has stated on oath that it does not 
have any separatist ideology and the same has also been affirmed by its 
witnesses, who have deposed before this Tribunal. Public witnesses have 
also affirmed that the association is largely a socio-religious organization. 
(v) It is submitted that even if it is assumed that certain views of the 
association have been controversial, the mere factum of holding a 
controversial view cannot entail the extreme measure of declaring the 
Association to be an “unlawful association” in terms of the UAPA. 


Having given my anxious consideration to the material/evidence placed on 


record by the Central Government and by the Association, I find that there exists 


cogent basis for issuing the notification under Section 3() of the UAPA. 


287. 


At the outset, it is noticed that in the reply filed on behalf of the Association, 


there is a tacit admission that the Association has been truly a part of the “separatist 


camp”. The following averments in the reply filed on behalf of the Association are 


instructive in this regard: 


288. 


“In January 2004, M.A. Ansari led a five member Hurriyat 
delegation to New Delhi to meet the then Deputy Prime Minister 
Sh. L.K. Advani, marking the first official meeting between 
‘separatist leaders’ and the Indian _ stage (sic) without 
preconditions.” 

“M.A. Ansari’s moderate approach drew sharp criticism from Syed 
Ali Shah Geelani, causing deep fissures “within ‘the separatist 


9») 


camp’. 


As such, there is a tacit admission that M. A. Ansari, the former president of 


JKIM was a “separatist leader”, and that the association was part of the “separatist 


camp”. Further, the reply also contains the following statement: 


[भाग व---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 47 


“iv. Opposition to Electoral Participation 

Although the Hurriyat had a general policy of boycotting elections, 
Maulana Abbas Ansari consistently called for reviewing this 
stance, especially during his tenure as Chairman. When voices 
within the Hurriyat, including Maulana Abbas Ansari, floated the 
idea of conditional participation in elections as a means to reassert 
political agency, it was again viciously attacked by hardliners at 
the behest of Pakistani establishment.” 


289. Thus, the association’s alleged participation in the electoral/political process 
was hedged with conditions, which betray a lack of faith in the democratic polity. 
290. The fact that the Association seeks to project itself as being “moderate” vis- 
a-vis other constituents of the APHC does not necessarily detract from its separatist 
ideology. 

29l. A perusal of the statutory definition of “unlawful association” under Section 
2(p) of the UAPA reveals that it includes any association which (i) has for its object 
any “unlawful activity” or which encourages or aids person to undertake “unlawful 
activity”, or of which the members undertake such activities. 

292. “Unlawful activity”, as statutorily defined under Section 2(0) refers to any 
action: (i) which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground 
whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India or the secession of a part 
of the territory of India from the Union, or which incites any individual or group of 
individuals to bring about such cession or secession; (ii) which disclaims, 
questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity 
of India; or ॥) which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India. 

293. It can be seen that by statutory definition itself, any action by any 
association, which questions/disrupts or is intending to disrupt the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, amounts to an “unlawful activity”. Any association which has for 
its object any unlawful activity is an unlawful association under Section 2(p) of the 
UAPA. 

294. Thus, in terms of the UAPA, an association would qualify as an “unlawful 


association”, which has its object for any unlawful activity viz. which is supportive 


48 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of any claim to bring about the cession of a part of the territory of India or the 
secession of a part of the territory of India and on which it claims or questions the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. It is not necessary that the association 
should be a “militant organization”. Thus, the emphasis by the association on it 
being a “moderate association” has no bearing on the issue whether it should be 
declared as an unlawful association or not; what is relevant is whether activities of 
the association constitute “unlawful activity” in the statutory sense. 

295. The UAPA was enacted pursuant to the Constitution (Sixteenth 
Amendment) Act,!963 which itself was enacted to impose, by law, reasonable 
restrictions on the rights mention in clauses (2), (3), and (4) of Articlel9 of the 
Constitution of India, in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India. It was 
noticed by Delhi High Court in Union of India v. Satnam Singh, AIR 20I8 Del 72 
that the said Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act was brought about in order 
to combat secessionist agitations by organizations with the purpose to guard against 
the freedom of speech and expression being used to assail the territorial integrity 
and sovereignty of the Union. 

296. The Introduction and the Statement of Objects and Reasons of UAPA 
specifically states as under:- 


“Introduction: 

The National Integration Council appointed a Committee on 
National Integration and Regionalisation to look into, inter alia, 
the aspect of putting reasonable restrictions in the interests of the 
sovereignty and integrity of India. Pursuant to the acceptance of 
recommendations of the Committee the Constitution (Sixteenth 
Amendment) Act, /963 was enacted to impose, by law, reasonable 
restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. 
In order to implement the provisions of 7963 Act the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Bill was introduced in the Parliament. 


Statement of Objects and Reasons.—Pursuant to the acceptance by 
Government of a unanimous recommendation of the Committee on 
National Integration and Regionalism appointed by the National 
Integration Council, the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, /963, 
was enacted empowering Parliament to impose, by law, reasonable 
restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, 
on the— 

(i) Freedom of speech and expression; 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


49 


297. 


(77) Right to assemble peaceably and without दाफाड। काव॑ 
(iii) Right to form associations or unions. 


2: The object of this Bill is to make powers available for 
dealing with activities directed against the integrity and 
sovereignty of India.” 


In Satnam Singh (Supra), it has been observed as under:- 


“74.It thus becomes crucial to determine the meaning of the 
phrase ‘prejudicial to the sovereignty and integrity of India’ used 
in the Act. Apart from the Act, the phrase finds mention in clauses 
(2),(3),and (4) of Article 79 of the Constitution of India,where it 
was added as a ground for restriction on the freedom of expression. 
This was inserted by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 
963, in order to combat secessionist agitation and conduct from 
organizations such as DMK in the South and Plebiscite Front in 
Kashmir, and activities in pursuance thereof which might not 
possibly be brought within the purview of the expression ‘security 
of the State’. It was made to guard the freedom of speech and 
expression being used to assail the territorial integrity and 
sovereignty of the Union. 

I5. It was pointed out that any legislation that is undertaken in 
this behalf, ought to be comprehensive and effective enough to 
check indirect devices to carry on such movements, such as the 
burning of the Constitution of India or the refusal to take the oath 
of allegiance, or the raising of flags in any way simulating the flag 
of a foreign State with a view to encouraging feelings of allegiance 
to such State and gathering people having such allegiance. [Vide 
Question in Parliament re. hoisting of the Plebiscite Front Flag in 
Kashmir (Statements, 7 /./2,64)॥.7/ is to curb the same menace that 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, /967 was subsequently 
enacted which under Section 2(0) provides as follows: 


“(o) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or 
association, means any action taken by such individual or 
association (whether by committing an act or by words, 
either spoken or written, or by signs or by _ visible 
representation or otherwise ),— 
(i) which is intended, or supports any claim, to 
bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the cession of 
a part of the territory of India or the secession of a part 
of the territory of India from the Union,or which incites 
any individual or group of individuals to bring about 
such cession or secession; or 
(ii) which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is 


50 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


intended to disrupt the sovereignty and _ territorial 
integrity of India; or 

(iil) which causes or is intended to cause 
disaffection against India,” 


298. It has been judicially recognized that the sovereignty, unity and territorial 
integrity of India is inviolable and is a basic feature of Indian Constitution. In the 
celebrated judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kesavananda Bharati vs. 
State of Kerala, (973) 4 SCC 225 it has been expressly recognized in one of the 
majority judgments, rendered by J.M. Shelat and A.N. Grover, JJ., that “the unity 
and the integrity of the nation” (which includes territorial integrity) is a basic 
feature of the Indian constitution. The relevant extracts from the said judgment are 
as under:- 


“582. The basic structure of the Constitution is not a vague 
concept and the apprehensions expressed on behalf of the 
respondents that neither the citizen nor the Parliament would be 
able to understand it are unfounded. If the historical background, 
the preamble, the entire scheme of the Constitution, relevant 
provisions thereof including Article 368 are kept in mind there can 
be no difficulty in discerning that the following can be regarded as 
the basic elements of the constitutional structure. (These cannot be 
catalogued but can only be illustrated): 

(4). The supremacy of the Constitution. 

(2) Republican and Democratic form of government and 
sovereignty of the country. 

(3) Secular and federal character of the Constitution. 

(4) Demarcation of power between the Legislature, the executive 
and the judiciary. 

(5) The dignity of the individual secured by the various freedoms 
and basic rights in Part III and the mandate to build a welfare 
State contained in Part IV. 

(6) The unity and the integrity of the Nation.’ 


J 


299. In Arup Bhuyan ys. State of Assam, (2023) 8 SCC 745, the Supreme Court 
has also taken note of the fact that the UAPA was enacted pursuant to the 
amendment brought about in Article 9(2), (3) and (4) vide the Constitution 
(Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 963. It has been noticed therein that the main 
objective of UAPA is to make powers available for dealing with activities directed 
against the integrity and sovereignty of India. The relevant observations in the said 


judgment are as under:- 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


5] 


“80. Thus, the rights guaranteed under Article /97)(०) (right to 
freedom of speech and expression) and under Article /9(7)(2) (Right 
to form association or unions) are not absolute rights, but are subject 
to reasonable restrictions as per Articles 7५2) and /५(4) of the 
Constitution of India. Articles //(2) (3) and (4) have been amended 
vide the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, /963 and the words 
“sovereignty and integrity of India” have been inserted. 


8I. Therefore, as per Articles /9(2) (3) and (4) nothing in sub-clauses 
(a), (0) and (2) of clause (7) of Article /9 shall affect the operation of 
any existing law or prevent the State from making any law insofar as 
such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercises of the right 
conferred by the said sub-clauses in the interests of sovereignty and 
integrity of India, the security of State ..... As per Article /9(4) 
nothing in sub-clause (c) (Right to form Associations or Unions) shall 
affect the operation of any existing law insofar as it imposes, or 
prevents the State from making any law imposing, in the interests 
of sovereignty and integrity of India or public order or morality, 
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the 
said sub-clause. 


82. At this stage the Statement of Objects and Reasons for amending 
Articles 792) (3) and (4) are required to be referred to and 
considered. 


83. The Statements of Objects and Reasons appended to the 
Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Bill, /963 which was enacted as 
the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, /963 reads as under: 


“Statement of Objects and Reasons 


The Committee on National Integration and Regionalism 
appointed by the National Integration Council recommended 
that Article /9 of the Constitution be so amended that adequate 
powers become available for the preservation and maintenance 
of the integrity, and sovereignty of the Union. The Committee 
were further of the view that every candidate for the 
membership of a State Legislature or Parliament, and every 
aspirant to, and incumbent of, public office should pledge 
himself to uphold the Constitution and to preserve the integrity 
and sovereignty of the Union and that forms of oath in the Third 
Schedule to the Constitution should be suitably amended for the 
purpose. It is proposed to give effect to these recommendations 
by amending clauses (2), (3) and (4) of Article 79 for enabling 
the State to make any law imposing reasonable restrictions on 
the exercise of the rights conferred by sub-clauses (a), (b) and 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(c) of clause (7) of that article in the interests of the sovereignty 
and integrity of India.” 


84, The UAPA, 7/96/7 has been enacted in exercise of powers conferred 
under Articles /2(2) and (4) of the Constitution of India. At this stage, 
it is required to be noted that exceptions to the freedom to form 
associations under Article 797) was inserted in the form of 
sovereignty and integrity of India under Article /9(4) after the 
National Integration Council (“NIC”) appointed a Committee on 
National Integration and Regionalisation. The said Committee was to 
look into the aspect of putting reasonable restrictions in the interests 
of the sovereignty and integrity of India. Pursuant to the acceptance of 
the recommendations of the said Committee, the Constitution 
(Sixteenth Amendment) Act, /963 came to be enacted to impose by 
law, reasonable restrictions in the interests of sovereignty and 
integrity of India. In order to implement the provisions of the /963 
Act, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill was introduced in 
Parliament. 


85. The main objective of the UAPA is to make powers available for 
dealing with activities directed against the integrity and sovereignty of 
India. It is also required to be noted that pursuant to the 
recommendation of the Committee on National Integration and 
Regionalisation appointed by the National Integration Council Act on 
whose recommendation the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 
/963 was enacted, UAPA has been enacted. It appears that the 
National Integration Council appointed a Committee on National 
Integration and Regionalisation to look into, inter alia, the aspect of 
putting reasonable restrictions in the interests of sovereignty and 
integrity of India and thereafter the UAPA has been enacted. 
Therefore, the UAPA has been enacted to make powers available for 
dealing with the activities directed against integrity and sovereignty of 
India.” 


300. In Re: Article 370 of the Constitution, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 647, it has 
been specifically noted that on 26 January 950, when the Constitution was 
adopted, the State of J & K became an integral part of the territory of India and this 


was a matter of “permanence and unalterable”. It has been noted as under:- 


४॥53.4 .... 
This is a reiteration of the understanding of the members of the 
Constituent Assembly of Jammu and Kashmir that accession to India 


was complete and that sovereignty was surrendered. 


XXX XXX XXX 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


53 


30I. 
separatist organization which has been fuelling secessionism in Jammu & Kashmir. 
Additionally, it is also alleged that the association has been lending direct and 
indirect support to terrorists activities and for this purpose has also been 


collaborating with inimical elements from across the border. It is in this conspectus 


464, These provisions are significant. The power of amending the State 
Constitution which was entrusted to the Legislative Assembly (subject 
to the assent of the Governor) had thus three’ major 
qualifications: firstly, the position that the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
is and shall be an integral part of the Union of India was 
unamendable; secondly, the executive and legislative domain of the 
State which depended upon the domain entrusted to Parliament under 
the provisions of the Constitution of India over which it would make 
laws for the State of Jammu and Kashmir was unamendable by the 
State Legislative Assembly; and thirdly, the provisions of the 
Constitution of India as applicable in relation to the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir were unamendable by the State Legislative Assembly. 
These_restraints which were imposed on_the amending power of the 
State Legislative Assembly made it abundantly clear that Jammu_and 
Kashmir being an integral part of the Union of India was a matter of 
permanence_and_unalterable. Moreover, any modification in the 
relationship of the State of Jammu and Kashmir with the Union of India 
would have to be brought about within the framework of the 
Constitution of India and that Constitution alone. 


XXX XXX XXX 


332. ७ 26-7/-/950, when _the Constitution was adopted, the State of 


Jammu _and Kashmir became an integral part of the territory of India. 
The mandate of Article | is that “India, that is, Bharat shall be a Union 
of States”. The States and their territories would be those specified in 
Parts_A, 8 and _C of the First Schedule. The State of Jammu_and 
Kashmir_was_a Part B State on the date of the adoption of the 
Constitution. With _the_adoption of the Seventh Amendment _to_the 
Constitution which obliterated the distinction between Parts A, B and C 
States, Jammu_and Kashmir became _a State in the Union of States. In 
other words, Article 370 of the Constitution read together with Article I 
leaves no manner of doubt that the integration of Jammu_and Kashmir 
as_a part of the nation, which in itself was_a Union of States was 


complete. Any interpretation of Article 370 cannot postulate _that_the 


integration of Jammu and Kashmir with India was temporary.” 


The gravamen of the case of the Union of India is that JKIM is essentially a 


that the evidence adduced by the Central Government is to be examined. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


302. 


The evidence concerning the FIRs against the senior members of the 


association formS subject matter of deposition of ?५४४-। and PW-2. The summary of 


the same is as under: 
Incident/ Gist 
of the evidence 


deposed by 
५. 25४ 


Name of 


| # 
the specially 
Sh. Parvaiz | designated 
Ahmed, officer (Kaat-e- 


Station 
House 
officer, Police 
Station 

Nishat, 

Srinagar, 
Kashmir 


Khas) posted in 
PS Nishat went 
to New Theed 
Harwan fo 
observing the 
situation and 
witnessed ॥ 
the Founder of 
JKIM along with 
other separatist 
leaders arrived at 
New — Theed 
Harwan and gave 
speeches urging 
people of the 


atea to boycott 


= 


On 2.02998 


Case Crime 
No. 


FIR ४ 


No 
3॥॥998 
dated 
25.02.998 
u/s 32-B of J 
& K 
Representation 
of People Act, 
957, 


Section | of 
Criminal Law 
Amendment 
Act, 

Section 3 of 
UA?) Act, 
4967 

& Section 88 
of — Ranbir 
Penal Code, 


_ न Material Facts 
Exhibit | | stated in affidavit 

Statement |S c-scmatcsnesern 
PW-I/A- | Statements | Para 3@Pg2- 
Copy of | of JKIM was founded 
affidavit of | witnesses | in |962 by Md. 
evidence. | recorded | Abbas Ansari and 

u/s 6!}was one of the 
PW-l/l- | CrPC. | founding members 
Copy of of APHC. 
FIR No. Para 7@P¢3- 
3॥98 JKIM is a Pak 

backed separatist 

PW-l/2 to org, having 
॥(3- Copies extensive links in 
of Pakistan, where it is 
statements represented by Mir 
of two Tahir Masood. 
a Para9@Po3- FIR 
recorded 3॥908 Founder of 
nee IKIM and other 


Section 64 


CrPC. 


APHC 


separatist leader of 


gave 


Facts stated 
during cross 


examination 
(Pages cited in accordance with 
Compiled Testimonies 


The Witness Stated that he had over 
22 Years of Policing Experience and 
that a part of the Affidavit is based 
upon the knowledge derived by him 
during the course of his service. (Page 
No 3) 


As regards the Statements in the 
Affidavit regarding the activities of the 
organization, the Witness has cited the 
newspapers, books and writings which 
were publicly available. (Page No 3) 


The Witness cited the situation in the 
valley since [988 to assert that it was 
not possible for any member of public 
to file a complaint with regard to 
activities of the association. 


(Page No 3) 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 55 
awe tary sata Pw. speeches urging . 
elections and i poopie to boycott | ‘The Witness in response to a direct 
take action to ० je नह meat — during cross 
sto} th 5 examination | stat: under oa 
tae tiles oa it la Para वाछारह 4-He | JKIM is not a religious i te 
their तल Jn 50420 हा stated | that (Page No 4) 
conducting = uring. Investigation 
election’ process several Witnesses | ; ह 
mo. that गल6 कह were examined and a | The Witness reiterated paragraph 5 of 
nouhindianee An perusal of who | his Affidavit and stated that JIKIM was 
overthrowing the corroborated that | a member of the Hurriyat Conference 
pecsent the members — of | and $ had played a pivotal role in 
Goverment JIKIM and APHC providing support to terrorist 
were present at the | organizations. (Page No 5) 
scene and that they 
gave speeches to 
instigate —_anti-India 
sentiments in public, 
propagate separatist 
and secessionist 
ideas and _ instigate 
public to use their 
own resources and 
to foil the election 
and overthrow the 
Govt. 
Paral2@Peg5- 
Chargesheet dated 
05.04.2005 was filed. 
Para M4@Pg_ 5- 
Delay in filing 
chargesheet reasons. 
| PW-2 On 23.06.2000, a] FIR No. | PW-2/A-_| Statements | Para 4@Pg2-Prime | The Witness cited that even after the 
| docket was | 6/2000 Copy of | of object JKIM  to| banning, the organization continued 
Sh. Dheeraj received dated affidavit of | witnesses | promote separatist | with its activities and accordingly FIR 
Kumar, informing that | 23.06.2000 evidence. | recorded | ideas and — get | No 02/2025 came to be registered at 
on the occasion | u/s u/s 6l| secession of J&K | PS Karan Nagar. (Page No 20) 
Sub- of Ejid-e-Milad- | 53A/20B/ | PW-2/4- CrPC. from India. 
Divisional, |un Nabi and | i2() of | Copy रण Para 9@Pg3- FIR | The Witness stated that the contents 
Police officer, | Friday —_ prayer, | RPC. FIR No. 6/2000, On|of FIR No 64/2000 can be 
Shaheedgunj, | SPO Naseer 6/2000 occasion of Eid-e- | corroborated by videos available on 
Srinagar, Ahmad alonwith Milad-un Nabi and | YouTube (Page No 22) 
Kashmir. with his PW-2/2 to friday prayer APHC 
colleagues saw 2/3- Copies Chairman and abbas | The Witness stated am not aware 
Syed Ali Shah of Ansari delivered anti | whether Lt. Molvi Mohd. Abbas 
Geelani (the then statements national specch. Ansari was ever underground at any 
Chairman of of two Para @Pg 4- He | stage. He was never arrested in FIR 
APHC) and witnesses has stated _—that | No. 6/2000. (Vol.) In view of the 
Moulvi Abbas recorded investigation several | prevalent situation in Kashmir, it was 
Ansari and under reveals that _ the | not considered feasible to arrest him as 
others delivering Section 6i Chairman of JKIM | elaborated in para 4 of my affidavit. 
an anti- national ७६९८. and AHPC present | (Page No 722 
speech in Masjid there gave speeches 
Hamdaniya at PW-2/4- to instigate anti- 
Jhelum = Market, True Copy India sentiments in | The Witness Stated that while FIR No 
Batmaloo. The of public, propagate | 6/2000 was against _ individual 
separatist leaders Chargesheet separatist and | persons, the FIR makes references to 
through their dated secessionist ideas | the activities of both JIM as well as 
provocative 28.2.2002. and instigate public | Hurriyat. (Page No /4) 
speeches _ stirred at large for secession 
emotions of of J&K from UOI. 
youth to Para i3 @Pg4- 
maintain a wart Both accused 
and harm persons have died 
intergri of and as such case 


them 


against 


has 


also been abated. 


56 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


303. The deposition of PW-! concern FIR No. 37/998 which was occasioned on 
account of the fact that the founder of JKIM Mohd. Abbas Ansari, alongwith other 
separatist leaders of the APHC namely Mohd. Yasin Malik (who has been convicted 
in NIA case No. RC 0/207, Professor Ab Gani Bhat, Gh. Nabi Sumji and Javid 
Ahmad Mir gave speeches urging the people of the area to boycott parliamentary 
elections. They raised anti-India slogans and referred to the “illegal occupation” of 
J&K. 

304. The evidence of PW-2 concerns FIR No. 6l/2000. Again, the gist of the 
allegation is that Moulvi Abbas Ansari (former president of JKIM) alongwith other 
separatist leaders who have gave inflammatory speeches inter alia containing 
statements which undermine the territorial integrity of India, adverting to the 


Accession of Kashmir with India as being “impartial and insincere” and, exhorting 


youth of Kashmir to “continue their struggle against India, Indian Army and Police 


till their return from Kashmir”. The separatist leaders through their provocative 


speeches had stirred emotions of youth to maintain a bloody war and tried to harm 
the integrity of India. 

305. While it is true that FIR No. 37/998 and FIR No. 60/2000 were registered 
quite some time ago, the same cannot be characterized as being altogether irrelevant 
for the purpose of these proceedings. The said FIRs, though dated, give an insight as 
to the ideology propagated by the association and its collaboration/sympathies with 
separatist elements in the region of Jammu & Kashmir. As regards the relevance of 
these dated FIRs, the observations rendered in the report under Section 4(3) of the 
UAPA authored by Hon’ble Justice Navin Chawla in the context of ban on Jammat- 
E-Islami, Jammu & Kashmir are instructive. In the said case also, one of the 
contentions raised before the Tribunal was that the notification under Section 3 was 
based on “stale material’. It was observed by the Tribunal as under: 


“5l7.The submission of the learned counsel for the Objectors that most 
of the FIRs, being of March 2079, are stale and could not have acted as 
material for the opinion of the Central Government, though on first 
blush appeared attractive, cannot be accepted as it_is_the totality of 
circumstances and the material as a whole that needs to be considered. 


The material cannot be compartmentilised and seen in isolation. They, in 
the facts of the present reference, act as a chain and show the 


[भाग व---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 57 


continuation of the illegal activities of the Association even post its ban in 
20I8.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 


In the present case as well, the FIRs relied upon, although dated, give an 
insight of the nature of activities/ideology of the association. 
306. The FIRs and the material collected during investigation bring out that the 
association in question, through its erstwhile chief protagonist, has been supportive 
of secessionist activities, preaching disaffection against the Indian state, openly 
organising protest/s, raising slogans in which the status of J & K as integral part of 
India is disputed. 
307. Reliance sought to be placed by the association on the judgment of the 
Supreme Court in Mohd. Jafar (supra) is misconceived. In the said case, the 
Supreme Court was concerned with the issue whether there was justification (in that 
case), for banning the concerned association with immediate effect (from the date of 
publication of the concerned notification in the official gazette). The court did not 
pronounce upon the issue as to whether the concerned FIRs ceased to be relevant 
material for the purpose of assessing “sufficient cause” just because the said FIRs 
are dated. The scope and import of the judgment in Mohd. Jafar (supra), as also the 
relevance of FIRs which reveal the activities of the association was also touched 
upon in the judgment of the Delhi High Court in Islamic Research Foundation vy. 
Union of India decided on 76 March, 2077 in W.P.(C) 264/2077, 2077 SCC 
OnLine Del 7489 and it was observed as under: 


“5. Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner submitted that speeches and 
FIRs based on which the ban has been imposed constitute stale material and 
such _ material could not have been used to impose the ban with immediate 
effect. He further submitted that there is nothing stated in the notification 
with regard to the organisation and the allegations in the notifications are vis 
a vis its president, members and employees. It is submitted that the 
notification is also based on incorrect facts in as much as it states that Dr. 
Zakir Naik has been chargesheeted, whereas no such chargesheet has been 
filed till date. 


XXX XXX XXX 


58 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


22. In contra-distinction, in the impugned notification, as noticed above the 
additional reason is specifically stated. The impugned notification, in my 
view, satisfies the test laid down by Supreme Court in MOHAMMAD 
JAFAR (supra). 


23. The contention of learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner that the ban 
has been imposed based on stale material and that there is nothing stated in 
the notification with regard to the organisation and the allegations are vis a 
vis its president, members and employees and that the notification is based on 
incorrect facts, in my view is unsubstantiated. 


24. The reason stated in the notification is that the petitioner organisation 
and its members, particularly, the founder and President of the said 
Association, Dr. Zakir Naik, have been encouraging and aiding its followers 
to promote or attempt to promote, on grounds of religion, disharmony or 
feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between different religious communities 
and groups. Reference made to the cases registered against Dr. Zakir Naik 
and other members of the organisation under various sections of the Act and 
the Penal Code, /6609 is to show that the kind of activities the members are 
alleged to be indulging in. The statements and speeches made by Dr. Zakir 
Naik, the President of the organisation are stated to be objectionable and 
subversive in nature and that he has been extolling the known terrorists like 
Osama Bin Laden and proclaiming that every Muslim should be a terrorist 
and claiming that if Islam had indeed wanted, eighty percent of Indian 
population would not have remained Hindus as they could have been 
converted “if we wanted” by sword, justifying the suicide bombings, posting 
objectionable comments against Hindu gods, claiming that Golden Temple 
may not be as sacred as Mecca and Medina and making other statements 
which are derogatory to other religions. 


25. Dr. Zakir Naik, by his speeches and statements, is stated to have been 
promoting enmity and hatred between different religious groups and 
inspiring muslim youths and terrorists in India and abroad to commit 
terrorist acts. Material is stated to contain statements of some terrorists 
arrested in the terrorist attack incidents or arrested ISIS sympathisers which 
have revealed that they were inspired by the fundamentalist statements of Dr. 
Zakir Naik, which was indicative of the subversive nature of his preachings 
and speeches. In addition, the notification records that the activities of the 
organisation and its President Dr. Zakir Naik are highly inflammatory in 
nature and prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between various 
religious groups and communities and there is every possibility of many 
youth being motivated and radicalized to commit terrorist acts leading to 
promoting enmity between different religious groups. 


26. An “unlawful association” has been defined by Section 2(g) of the Act to 
mean an association which, inter alia, encourages or aids persons to 
undertake any unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such 
activity. “Unlawful activity” has been defined under section 2(f) of the Act to 
means any action taken which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 59 


308. 
with regard to which senior police officials from the Union Territory of Jammu & 
Kashmir have deposed in these proceedings, are wholly irrelevant. Moreover, this 


Tribunal is unable to countenance the attempt on the part of the association to 


about, on any ground whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of 
India or the secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union, or 
which incites any individual or group of individuals to bring about such 
cession or secession or which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to 
disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. 


27. The activities which the petitioner organisation and its president and 
members are alleged to have indulged in, would clearly come within the 
purview of “unlawful activity” and since the petitioner organisation and its 
members are alleged to have been indulging in the said activities it would 
come within the definition of “unlawful association ”. 


28. Thus, it cannot be held that the impugned notification insofar as it relates 
to, the exercise of power under proviso to section 3(3) of the Act and the 
declaration of the petitioner association to be an unlawful association with 
immediate effect, is an arbitrary and unreasonable exercise of power. Not 
only is the material available on the record of the Central Government but 
the reasons for exercise of the said power have been disclosed in the 
notification. The record, that was made available for the perusal of the court, 
discloses material for exercise of such power. The action of the Central 
Government would be covered under the exception of Article /9 (4) of the 
Constitution of India. The immediate action appears to have been taken in the 
interest of sovereignty and integrity of India and public order.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 


As such, it is incorrect to state that the concerned FIRs in the present case, 


trivialize the allegations which constitute the underlying basis of the FIR/s. 


309. 


while deposing with regard to the FIRs, stated, on the basis of their personal 


It is also pertinent to note that the concerned officials (PW-l and PW-2), 


experience as police officers that : 


“it is manifest that JKIM and its leaders have been actively and continuously 
but covertly and discreetly working for secession of J & K from the UOI and 
Cession of the territory of J & K to Pakistan which is obviously against the 
national interest and integrity of the nation by promoting feelings of enmity 
and hatred in the masses against the Government of India and hence, are 
acting in a manner prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of 
the UOI and hence, the ban imposed upon the association is necessary and 
correct. .... 


60 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


30. It also needs to be appreciated in these proceedings that this Tribunal is not 
concerned with the guilt or otherwise of the accused in the concerned FIRs. The 
ambit of these proceedings is not to conduct a mini trial in respect thereof. Also, the 
FIRs only constitute one set of material/evidence which this Tribunal is bound to 
consider for the purpose of adjudging existence of “sufficient cause” for the purpose 
of issuing the notification under Section 3() of the UAPA. The same has to be 
considered in the context of, and in conjuction with other material/evidence on 
record. As held by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-E-Islami Hind (supra), it is 
incumbent on this Tribunal to examine the totality of material/evidence cited in 
support of the ban on the association. 
3l. It has also been held by successive Tribunals constituted under Section 4 of 
the UAPA that for the purpose of these proceedings, even statements recorded 
under Section 6] CrPC is in the nature of relevant material which is liable to be 
considered. The same flows from the dicta laid down by the Supreme Court in 
Vinay D. Nagar vs. State of Rajasthan, (2008) 5 SCC 597 and Jamaat-E-Islami 
Hind (supra). 
32. Thus, the FIRs with regard to which PW- and PW-2 have deposed, is one of 
the material/evidence which gives an insight of the ideology and activities of the 
association. The contention that the same ought to be completely discarded/ignored, 
cannot be accepted. 
33. This Tribunal is also unable to accept the contention of the association that 
the rigors of the Code of Civil Procedure and the Indian Evidence Act shall apply 
with full vigor in the context of the present proceedings. The legal position as 
regards the procedure to be followed by this Tribunal has been succinctly explained 
by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-E-Islami Hind (supra). The relevant observations 
are once again reproduced as under: 

“॥, Section 4 deals with reference to the Tribunal. Sub-section (/) 

requires the Central Government to refer the notification issued under 

sub-section (7) of Section 3 to the Tribunal “for the purpose of 

adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the 


association unlawful”. The purpose of making the reference to the 
Tribunal is an adjudication by the Tribunal of the existence of 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


6] 


sufficient cause for making the declaration. The words ‘adjudicating’ 
and “sufficient cause” in the context are of significance. Sub-section 
(2) requires the Tribunal, on receipt of the reference, to call upon the 
association affected “by notice in writing to show cause” why the 
association should not be declared unlawful. This requirement would 
be meaningless unless there is effective notice of the basis on which 
the declaration is made and a reasonable opportunity to show cause 
against the same. Sub-section (3) prescribes an inquiry by the 
Tribunal, in the manner specified, after considering the cause shown 
to the said notice. The Tribunal may also call for such other 
information as it may consider necessary from the Central 
Government or the association to decide whether or not there is 
sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. The 
Tribunal is required to make an order which it may deem fit “either 
confirming the declaration made in the notification or cancelling the 
same”. The nature of inquiry contemplated by the Tribunal requires it 
to weigh the material on which the notification under sub-section (/) 
of Section 3 is issued by the Central Government, the cause shown by 
the Association in reply to the notice issued to it and take into 
consideration such further information which it may call for, to decide 
the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the Association to be 
unlawful. The entire procedure contemplates an _ objective 
determination made on the basis of material placed before the 
Tribunal by the two sides; and the inquiry is in the nature of 
adjudication of a lis between two parties, the outcome of which 
depends on the weight of the material produced by them. Credibility of 
the material should, ordinarily, be capable of objective assessment. 
The decision to be made by the Tribunal is “whether or not there is 
sufficient cause for declaring the Association unlawful”. Such a 
determination requires the Tribunal to reach the conclusion that the 
material to support the declaration outweighs the material against it 
and the additional weight to support the declaration is sufficient to 
sustain it. The test of greater probability appears to be the pragmatic 
test applicable in the context. 


42, Section 5 relates to constitution of the Tribunal and its powers. 
Sub-section (7) of Section 5 clearly provides that no person would be 
appointed “unless he is a Judge of a High Court”. Requirement of a 
sitting Judge of a High Court to constitute the Tribunal also suggests 
that the function is judicial in nature. Sub-section (7) says that any 
proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a “judicial 
proceeding” and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a “Civil Court” 
for the purposes specified. Section 6 deals with the period of operation 
and cancellation of notification. Section 8 has some significance in 
this context. Sub-section (8) of Section § provides the remedy to any 
person aggrieved by a notification issued in respect of a place under 
sub-section (7) or by an order made under sub-section (3) or sub- 


62 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


section 4, by an application made to the District Judge who is 
required to decide the same after giving the parties an opportunity of 
being heard. This also indicates the judicial character of the 
proceeding even under Section 8. Section 9 prescribes the procedure 
to be followed in the disposal of applications under the Act. 
Provisions of Section 9 of the Act lay down that the procedure to be 
followed by the Tribunal in holding an inquiry under sub-section (3) 
of Section 4 or by the District Judge under Section 8 shall, so far as 


may be, be the procedure prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure 


for the investigation of claims... ... ... ... ....- 


XXX XXX XXX 


20. As earlier mentioned, the requirement of specifying the grounds 
together with the disclosure of the facts on which they are based and 
an adjudication of the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the 
association to be unlawful in the form of decision after considering 
the cause, if any, shown by the association in response to the show- 
cause notice issued to it, are all consistent only with an objective 
determination of the points in controversy in a judicial scrutiny 
conducted by a Tribunal constituted by a sitting High Court Judge, 
which distinguishes the scheme under this Act with the requirement 
under the preventive detention laws to justify the anticipatory action 
of preventive detention based on suspicion reached by a process of 
subjective satisfaction. The scheme under this Act requiring 
adjudication of the controversy in this manner makes it implicit that 
the minimum requirement of natural justice must be satisfied, to make 
the adjudication meaningful............ 


2.07 ०0858: The procedure to be followed by the Tribunal must, therefore, 
be such which enables the Tribunal to itself assess the credibility of 
conflicting material on any point in controversy and evolve a process 
by which it can decide whether to accept the version of the Central 
Government or to reject it in the light of the other view asserted by the 
association. The difficulty in this sphere is likely to arise in relation to 
the evidence or material in respect of which the Central Government 
claims non-disclosure on the ground of public interest.” 
34. On the question of nature and type of evidence, which can be relied upon by 
the Tribunal, the Supreme Court referred to Rule 3 of UAP Rules, 968. Rule 3(]) 
stipulates that the Tribunal subject to sub-rule (2) shall follow, “as far as 
practicable”, the rules of evidence laid down in Indian Evidence Act. 
3I5. As regards the evidentiary standard/s applicable to these proceedings, it has 
been observed in Jamaat-e-Islami (supra), that the Tribunal shall evolve a procedure 


in consonance with the principles of natural justice, to determine whether the 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 63 


material to support the declaration outrights the material against it. The test of 
greater probability is the pragmatic test. Further, the procedure shall conform to 
procedure prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, for investigation of claims 


only “as far as may be”. 


3l6. As regards the evidentiary standards and the applicability of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, it is also instructive to refer to the legal position enunciated in a 
report under Section 4(3) of the UAPA authored by Justice Sanjiv Khanna, for the 
purpose of adjudicating the ban on ‘Students Islamic Movement of India’ (SIMI) 
(also referred to in the foregoing portions of this report). The same is as follows: 


“62. Section 9 uses the words "so far as may be” The words signify 
that the Legislature's intent does-not mandate that the Code should be 
followed in its entirety, section by section, order by order or. Word by 
word. Use of the words "so far as may be" ensure sufficient flexibility 
and freedom to the Tribunal to follow and regulate its own procedure 
which should be in consonance with, the procedure stipulated as per 
the- Code. The procedure prescribed in the Code can be modified and 
changed keeping in view the practical requirements, need and 
necessity. This may be required in view of the object and purpose of 
the Act and practical problems which may be faced in case the 
requirements of the Code are strictly and entirely followed, in Abdul 
Haji Mohd. Versus R. R. Naik AIR 7957 Bom, 440, it was held that 
the, words "as far as practicable" must be construed to mean to the 
extent it is practicable. Bombay, High Court in a subsequent decision 
Keshrimal Jeevli Shah and another versus Bank of Maharashira 
and others, 2004 (722) Company cases 83I has held that whenever 
words like “as far as possible" or as far as practicable etc. are used, 
the legislative intent is not to apply all the provisions in their entirety, 
but the provision have to be applied as far “as possible" and subject 
to such modifications as the context as well as the object and purpose 
of the enactment require. The setting in which the words occur, the 
statute in which they occur, the object and purpose behind the 
enactment and mischief which is sought to be taken care of and 
remedy which are relevant in determining to what extent and subject 
to what modifications the required enactment should be applied. 


63. Section 5(5) of the Act states that the Tribunal shall have power to 
regulate its procedure in matters' arising out of discharge of its 
functions including the place/places at which it will hold sittings. 
Therefore, the aforesaid sub-Section gives flexibility and freedom to 
the Tribunal to fix and regulate the procedure. to be followed subject 
of course to the requirement of fair and just hearing. Sub-section (6) 


64 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


to Section 5 further stipulates that the Tribunal while making the 
enquiry will have the power of a civil court in respect of matters 
stipulated in clauses (a)to (e). As per Section 4(3) of the Act, the 
Tribunal has to hold an enquiry within a period of six months from the 
date of issue of Notification under sub-section (/) of Section 3. There 
is no provision under which this time can be extended. The use of the 
expression "as far as may be" in Section 9 of the Act and the power 
given to the Tribunal to regulate its own procedure in Section 5(5) of 
the Act indicates that the strict procedure as stipulated and applicable 
to trial of civil suits is not envisaged or required. One will also have 
to keep in mind the time limit of six months within which the Tribunal 
is required to complete the enquiry and answer the reference: A 
summary procedure or a hybrid procedure which may be akin or 
similar to and in consonance with the procedure for adjudication of 
claims in the Code can be followed. 


64. The above ratio and reasoning will equally apply to Rule 3(7) 
which uses the expression "as far as practicable" the rules of 
evidence, as laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, will apply. It may 
be noticed that Rule 30) uses the words "rules of evidence" and 
does not use the words "provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 7872 
would apply". Therefore general principles or rules of evidence 
underlying the Evidence Act are applicable to the extent practicable. 
In these circumstances, I do not think that the Act or the Rules 
envisage and require an elaborate, and a detailed procedure for 
summoning of each and every witness mentioned in the charge-sheets, 
presence and examination of witnesses present at the time of 
preparation of panchanama or all police officers who were involved 
in the investigation. Summoning of record will be counter-productive, 
cumbersome and time consuming. There will be concerns about safety 
and security of the persons appearing as well as the records which 
may have to be summoned or produced. Normally, cases relied upon 
by the central government will be cases of serious cases and the 
chargesheet etc. will be voluminous and number of witnesses also 
substantial. The nature of material in-most-cases where unlawful 
activity is alleged would include oral evidence, documentary 
evidence; as well as confidential inputs based on information received 
from intelligence. These cases can have inter-State or trans-border 
involvement and a-large number of persons are normally involved in 
conspiracy. This aspect cannot be ignored as proceedings before the 
Tribunal have to be pragmatic and the provisions of the Code and 
the Evidence Act have to be applied to the extent possible and 
practicable.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 


3!7. The above observations also apply for the purpose of the evidence adduced 
by PW-3 (Liyakat Ali) who is working as “incharge” of the Social media cell at 


Crime Investigation Department, Jammu & Kashmir. The said witness has deposed 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 65 


about the activities of the association as reflected in social media posts/videos. It 
has been stated in the affidavit that Moulvi Abbas Ansari, the former president of 
JKIM had delivered various secessionist speeches and had also given interviews to 
media channels wherein the secessionist ideology of the association has been 
articulated. The said affidavit encloses a pendrive containing one speech and three 
interviews of M.A. Ansari which had been marked as Ex.PW-3/] and Ex. PW-3/3. 
The copies of the transcript of these videos are marked as Ex. PW-3/2. The same 
reads as under: 


७ Video recorded on 72.,09,.2008 (uploaded on 767 Jun 2009 on 
Itthadul Muslimeen): Moulvi Mohammad Abass Ansari (MAA) can be 
heard and seen, as saying that there can be no solution to ‘Kashmir Issue’ 
nor peace in the sub-continent unless Kashmiris are taken on board by 
India and its promise of ‘plebiscite’ in Kashmir is realized. 

e Interview video uploaded on ‘Concept Today’ on 247 Oct 2077: 
MAA can be heard saying that Modi isn’t ready for the talks with 
Kashmiris either in India or in ‘Azad Kashmir’ (PoJK) or with Pakistan. 
He says that Kashmiris won’t remain with either India or Pakistan, 
neither it belongs to Pakistan nor to Inida, And unless India, Pakistan 
and Kashmiris together sit, there can be no solution. 

० Interview of MAA in a ‘GEO TV’, Pakistani News channel, taken 
on 6" June 2005 (uploaded on 87 Nov, 2009, on Ittihadul-Muslimeen): 
MAA can be heard saying there is a need of coordination between 
Kashmiri leaders based in India and Pakistan. He said we have road- 
maps, and that we don’t need to follow the road-maps either of India or 
Pakistan. The road map cannot be disclosed to the India or Pakistan 
unless Kashmiri brothers from both sides are taken into confidence. We 


aren’t against Indo-Pak talks, but we want to be heard as we are caught 
between guns of Mujahideen and Indian security forces. 

७ Interview of MAA on article 25A and 370 abrogation (uploaded on 
247 Jan 2079), India_has promised Kashmir of his_right_to plebiscite 


recognized _by UN and _ until_and_unless that_right is realized the 
‘resistance_movement’ will continue. High court or Supreme court 


cannot decide the future people but Kashmiris alone, whom he terms as 
those living in ‘Indian occupied’ and Pakistan occupied Kashmir.” 


38. It has also been brought out that the current Chairman of JKIM Masroor 
Abbas Ansari has a “youtube channel” which also contains various objectionable 
speeches, advocating secessionism and also tacitly glorifying terror and terrorist 


activities in Jammu & Kashmir. The links of the said provocative speeches as 


66 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


referred to in the affidavit are as under: 


“https://youtu. be/6znqNkeDIKo; 
https://youtu. be/oLxVIC8uqvg; 
https://youtu.be/pmodR604MfA; ” 


39. The concerned videos have been submitted in a pen drive and marked as Ex. 
PW-3/] & Ex. PW-3/3. The English transcript/translations of the videos have been 
furnished as Ex. PW-3/2 and Ex. PW-3/4. 

320. It has also been brought out in the said affidavit that in an interview with 
BBC, the previous chairman of JKIM Moulvi Abbas Ansari made certain 
incendiary statements. The same has been placed on record as Ex. 7?५४-3/| & 3/3. A 
transcript of the interview has been furnished as Ex. PW-3/5. 

32. PW3 alongwith his affidavit has enclosed screeshots of the website of JKIM 
(hosted on www.tripod.com), the relevant extract of which has been appended 
alongwith the affidavit and which contains various objectionable statements. The 
same also contains a webpage, being a “Calendar of Events”. The same, inter alia, 


highlights following dates: 


JAMMU & KASHMIR ITTIHADUL 
MUSLIMEEN 


Calender of Events 


Here we may list activities that are scheduled for the next couple of 
months. Things could change frequently, so it is good idea to visit this 
page as often as possible to keep up to date. 


January 04 5:00 pm- Procession from Gulshan Bagh Ser 

January 05 (949) — UN adopts resolution for Kashmir issue 
January 05 3:00 pm- Procession from Androon Kathidarwaza 
(Rainawari) 

January 06 |4:00 pm- Procession from Guru Bazar, Behind Shali 
Store Srinagar 

January 07 5:00 pm — Procession from Momin Abad, Mandibal 
(Nowshera) 

January 08 Full Day- Day of Ashura 97 Moharram 

January 08 !:00 am- Ashoora Procession from Abiguzar to 
Zadibal 

Janauary 2 Full Day- Majlis Hussaini & Procession at Chek 
Hanjiwera Pattan 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 67 


January 2] (990) - Gowkadal Massacre 

January 23 Full Day- Majlis Hussain & Procession at Mirgund, 
Pattan 

January 23 Full Day — Majlis Hussaini & Procession at Garend, 
Budgam. 

January 26 (950)- Indian Republic Day (Black Day) 


October 27, (4947) - Indian Invasion on Kashmir (Black Day) 


March 23, (945) — Pakistan Day 


322. As can be seen, Indian Republic Day (January 26) has been referred to as 
“black day”; there is also a reference to “Indian invasion of Kashmir”. 


323. Notably, during the proceedings held on 23.08.2025, the factum of Masroor 
Abbas Ansari hosting a “youtube channel” was admitted. The videos hosted therein 
were elaborately perused by this Tribunal in the presence of respective counsel by 
accessing the internet. It was noted that the same included the interview given by 
Moulvi Abbas Ansari to a Pakistani channel viz. “Geo Tv”. The statements therein 
tally with the transcripts forming part of Ex. PW-3/5. The details of the 
videos/websites perused by the Tribunal during the hearing on 23.08.2025 are as 
under: 


SL DETAILS REMARKS 
No. 


l. HOME PAGE OF WEBSITE - 
https://ittihadul.tripod.com/ The website contains at the footer the 
copyright of the website under the 
name of the Association i.e.“@ 
Copyright 2008 - _  Itthihadul 
Muslimeen, Karanagar, Srinagar, 
Kashmir, 9000” 
Thus the copyright in respect of the 
content hosted there at, is stated to 
be owned by the Association. 
The homepage of the website 
describes the association as a religio- 
political organisation. A perusal of 
the homepage unfurls the secessionist 
ideologies of the association. Further 
the homepage explicitly mentions the 
association's stand on Kashmir issue 
inter-alia as under: 
# (4) JKIM_ believes that_the 
accession of Kashmir __ state 
with India is inchoate. Government 
of India cannot hold people 
of Kashmir. It must and in fact is 


under an obligation to ascertain the 


68 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


will of the people. People of our 
state have absolute choice in the 


matter _of their continuing with 
Government of India or to annual 
the arrangement. But under no 
circumstance Govt. of India can 
refuse to ascertain the political will 
of the people. In last 60 years 
holding of referendum on_ the 
question of accession has been 
avoided. JKIM believes that govt. 
of Indiais first__interested in 
altering [6 community 
composition of our people purely 
on the basis of religion and then 
hold the plebiscite as and when the 
present majority community is 
reduced to minority. We won’t let 
this happen. We want referendum 
now and we will leave no stone 
unturned in our efforts to 
pressurize Govt. of India 
and Pakistan to hold plebiscite in 
the whole state so that the 
commitment made to the people 
of Kashmir on October 27, 947 is 
fulfilled. 


(6) JKIM believes that for the 
purpose whatever means we may 
have to employ in achieving our 
political objective, will be adopted. 
Failure on the part of India to hold 
plebiscite provides complete 
morale basis to our movement and 
on going struggle. Our movement 
has roots in our conscience. It can 
never lie. Our generation after the 
other will fight. With every day the 
movement will become more 
intense and effective. Our 
movement has ideological basis. It 
cannot be suppressed no matter 
what the cost is. We = are 
determined to alter the status quo 
and put an end to _ Indian 
occupation on our soil. 


CALENDAR ON JKIM WEBSITE - 
https://ittihadul.tripod.com/id85.html 


Webpage depicting “calendar of 
events” as hosted conspicuously 
marks the Indian Republic Day 
(26.0.950) as "Black Day". Further, 
the calendar mentions 27.l0.l947 as 
"Indian invasion on Kashmir Black 
Day" 


FREEDOM STRUGGLE PAGE ON 
JKIM WEBSITE - 
https://ittihadul.tripod.com/id7.html 


Under the garb of freedom struggle 
the website incites hostility towards 
the Government of India and equates 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


69 


the administration of India 
Government in Kashmir to that of 
Bosnia and Burma, portraying the 
struggle of Kashmir far worse than 
that faced by people in Bosnia and 
Burma. 


CONTACT US PAGE ON JKIM 
WEBSITE - 
https://ittihadul.tripod.com/id9. html 


The webpage also contain Head office 
address and personal details of the 
office bearers (contact number, email 
address, etc.) mentioned on _ the 
“contact us” page of the website. 
These are the office bearers who have 
deposed as_ witnesses for the 
Association before this Tribunal. This 
fact was also admitted during the 
course of hearing on 23.08.2025. 


BBC INTERVIEW OF ABBAS 
ANSARI ON JKIM WEBSITE - 
https://ittihadul.tripod.com/id85.htm] 


Interview by Abbas Ansari, 
transcripts of which form part of 
several webpages hosted at this link, 
and which contains _ several 
incendiary and objectionable 
statements as also brought out by 
PW-3. 


YOUTUBE CHANNEL “Maulana 
Masroor Abbas Ansari 
Kashmiri @ MasroorAnsari-786”- 
https://www.youtube.com/@Masroo 
rAnsari-786 


The fact that this Youtube Channel is 
that of Masroor Abbas Ansari (RW- 
l) has been admitted during the 
course of hearing on 23.08.2025. 

The videos uploaded on the said 
Youtube Channel have been perused 
by this Tribunal on 23.08.2025 in the 
presence of the respective counsel 
for the parties. 


VIDEO MENTIONED IN EXHIBIT 
Pl IN THE AFFIDAVIT OF PW3 — 
LIYAQAT ALI, INSP., CID, JKP 
TITLED “Maulana Abbas Ansari in 
Geo TV Debate” UPLOADED ON 
08/I/2009 on OFFICIAL YOUTUBE 
CHANNEL “Maulana Masroor Abbas 
Ansari _ Kashmiri@ MasroorAnsari- 
786”- 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G 
G5mv4_Ux90 


This is the video of the interview 
given by Abbas Ansari to 
Pakistani news channel ‘Geo 
TV’ on 06/06/2005 and uploaded 
on THE OFFICIAL YOUTUBE 
CHANNEL “Maulana Masroor 
Abbas Ansari 
Kashmiri @ Masroor Ansari- 
786” on 08//2009 


VIDEO MENTIONED IN EXHIBIT 
Pl IN THE AFFIDAVIT OF PW3 — 
LIYAQAT ALI, INSP., CID, JKP 
TITLED “Maulana Abbas Ansari on 
Article 354 & 370” UPLOADED ON 
24/0/209 on YOUTUBE 
CHANNEL “Maulana Masroor Abbas 
Ansari _ Kashmiri @ MasroorAnsari- 
786” a 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ut 
TAU-PCMbg 


Interview of Molvi Abbas Ansari on 
article 35A and 370 abrogation stating 
that India has promised Kashmir of its 
right as recognized by UN and until 
and unless that right is realized the 
‘resistance movement’ will continue. 


70 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


324. From the speeches/interviews of Molvi Abbas Ansari (the erstwhile 
chairman) and Masroor Abbas Ansari (the current chief protagonist of the 
Association), it is apparent that the Association advocates /endorses /seeks to 
legitimize the separatist ideology. Further, the same undermines the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of India and foments discontent/dissatisfaction towards India. 
The video/ interviews speak of “right of self-determination’’/ plebiscite etc. The 
sloganeering in the videos is also illustrative of the manner in which dissatisfaction 


towards India is fomented. 


325. Itis also notable that in the interview given by Moulvi Abbas Ansari to BBC 
[transcript of which (Ex.PW3/5) has also been perused by the Tribunal], there is 
extensive and repeated reference to the “right of self-determination” and the same 


reveals the concerted attempt to undermine the legitimacy of the Indian State. 


326. The objection/s raised by learned counsel for the association as regards the 
authenticity of the videos/social media posts do not survive in view of the admission 
made during the course of hearing on 22.08.2025 and 23.08.2025 that the aforesaid 
“youtube channel” is being hosted by Masroor Abbas Ansari, wherein various 
videos are uploaded. A perusal of the videos leaves no manner of doubt as to the 
secessionist agenda of the association. Paradoxically, although learned counsel for 
the association refers to some of the videos referred to in the affidavit of PW-3 as 
“stale”, it is noteworthy that those very videos continue to be uploaded on the said 
“youtube channel” of Masroor Abbas Ansari. A gist of some of the videos hosted on 
the “youtube channel” of Masroor Abbas Ansari as referred to in the deposition of 


PW-3 are as under:- 


[भाग Ive 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण ]7 


Sl. | Name of document Particulars 
No. | & Original Exhibit - - 
No. Video Name Transcript (relevant 


portion) (Ex. PW3/4) 


l. 3 videos of Masroor | Videos of (L) 2.09.20I8 
Abbas Ansari Masroor 
delivering Abbas Ansari Video on YouTube is titled as 
provocative speeches “Kashmir__ki__Azadi___aur 
/interview in Moharam _ka__Dars” _on 
Kashmiri language YouTube Channel __“Er 


Mohammad Rafiq” 


(duration- 04.20 minutes) 


At 00:03 to 00:49 - “I 
support the people who 
pasted photographs of killed 
terrorist Burhan Muczaffar 
Wani. If authorities want to 
register case against 
Masroor Abbas Wani, I am 
ready for ever consequences. 
Peopleof Kashmir are 
‘Mazloom’. 


At 00:05 to 0/.02 - 


“..Yahan kya — chalega 

nizame Mustafa (land will 
only be ruled under Sharia 
Law)” 


At 0I:20 to 02:45- “... we the 
people are indispensable part 
of freedom struggle. I and 
you people want freedom... 
..not to succumb before the 
oppressor even if my head is 
removed from shoulders.” 
(Slogan) Masoor se_ Jo 
Takrayega ,Choor Choor 
Hojayega. 

At 03:20 to 03: 44 - 

“...we are ready to die for the 
cause of freedom and Islam, 


72 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


our mothers have produced 
lions for the cause....”’ 


(Mentioned in Ex.PW3/4) 


(2) 29.08.200 


Duration — 02:06 minutes 
(Slogan) “La Tahino wala 
Tahzanoo” (means-Don’t be 
lazy and gloomy, you will be 
victorious but only 
precondition is that you have 
to be firm in your faith). 

At 00:3] to 0I:27- 

..The Kashmiri people started 
freedom struggle in ॥937 and 
the struggle is for “Azadi Barai 
Islam (means freedom for 
Islam). Kashmir people gave 
sacrifices for the cause of 


freedom...” (Mentioned in 
Ex.PW3/4) 
(3) 72,06.20// 


Duration: 07.26 minutes 


At 00:30 to 07:26 

“JKIM want that unless and 
until Kashmiri people will not 
unite in one platform we 
cannot fight against our 
common enemy. In __ this 
regard what so ever forum for 
freedom struggle was formed, 
JKIM always extended its 
support. Being Shia cleric 
wants to replicate the model 
of their spiritual Iranian 
learder Ayotollah Khumani in 
J & K to forward the cause of 
freedom struggle. The 
freedom struggle shall 
continue till its culmination. 
(Mentioned in Ex.PW3/4) 


[भाग वा---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 73 


327. Itis also notable that apart from the videos referred to in the affidavit of PW- 
3, the youtube channel of Masroor Abbas Ansari also contains various other videos 
containing highly objectionable material. For instance, the video/s, hosted at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=evo0Ifi7xKk refers to Masrat Alam and Shahid 
UI Islam, who are protagonists/members of APHC, as “political prisoners”. There 
are other videos which have hightly objectionable material, for instance, the video / 
speech hosted at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cSGmAyykUGA which is 
interspersed with slogans for “‘azadi’”’, and refers to the alleged killing of civilions by 
“Indian forces”. 
328. The said objectionable videos continue to be hosted/uploaded on the youtube 
channel of Masroor Abbas Ansari i.e. https://www.youtube.com/@ MasroorAnsari- 
786. These also give an insight into the nature of activities, ideology and agenda of 
the association, and clearly corroborate the case set up by the central government. 
329. There is also little doubt as regards the authenticity of the website of the 
association hosted at https://ittihadul.tripod.com. It is notable that the footnote of 
the concerned webpages hosted therein contained the following endorsement: 

“@ Copyright 2008 — Itthihadul Muslimeen, Karanagar, Srinagar, 

Kashmir, /900/0” 
330. This aspect, and the other inferences which flow from a perusal of the 
webpages hosted at the aforesaid link, have been referred to at the table set out in 
paragraph 323 above. 
33l. There is another aspect of the matter. During the proceedings on 22.08.2025, 
this Tribunal made it clear that the relevant videos hosted on the “youtuble channel” 
of Masroor Abbas Ansari would be perused by the Tribunal on 23.08.2025. It 
transpires that in the intervening period between 22.08.2025 and 23.08.2025, one of 
the videos referred to in the affidavit of PW-3 was deleted. This was admitted by 
the association in additional rejoinder. 7२७] has also admitted this fact in his 
supplementary affidavit. The same is also a pointer to the fact that the association 


sought to disguise/conceal the true nature of its activities/ideology from this 


74 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Tribunal. Details of the deleted video are as under:- 


4 VIDEO RECORDED ON i. Video was available on the Youtube 
2.09.2008 OF M.A. channel till 22/08/2025. 
ANSARI CONTAINED IN 
A PENDRIVE WHICH IS i. Video was found to be deleted when the 
EX.PW3/l AND = PW3/3 same link was used to access the video on 
ANNEXED WITH THE 23.08.2025 on the youtube channel of 
AFFIDAVIT OF PW3 - “Maulana Masroor Abbas Ansari 
LIYAQAT ALI, INSP., CID, Kashmiri @ MasroorAnsari-786”. 
JKP. WITH TIME STAMP ii. PW-3 has furnished the English 
UPLOADED 00 THE Translation of the gist of the statements made 
OFFICIAL YOUTUBE in the said video. The said translation has been 
CHANNEL “Maulana placed on record and marked as Ex. PW-3/2. 
Masroor Abbas Ansari The same, inter alia, reads as under: 
Kashmiri _@MasroorAnsari- 
786” - “that there can be no solution to ‘Kashmir Issue’ 
https://youtu.be/dLZ35Zgry3 nor peace in the sub-continent unless Kashmiris are 
k?si=DtGyEF8_WwLijJFk taken on board by India and its promise of 


“plebiscite” in Kashmir is realized.” 


iii. JKIM has in its additional written 
submission (Served upon the UOI vide email 
dated 26.08.2025) has admitted specifically 
to deleting the said video from its Youtube 
channel on 22.08.2025 and upon the same 
being pointed out at the hearing of the 
present matter on 23.08.2025, the said video 
was re-uploaded thereafter. 


2 VIDEO RECORDED ON The video was re-uploaded on 23/08/2025 on 
2.09.2008 OF M.A. the youtube channel “Maulana Masroor Abbas 
ANSARI BEING RE- Ansari Kashmiri @ MasroorAnsari-786”. 


UPLOADED ON 23/08/2025 
ON THE OFFICIAL 
YOUTUBE CHANNEL 
“Maulana Masroor _ Abbas 
Ansari 

Kashmiri @ MasroorAnsari- 
786” . 
https://www.youtube.com/wa 


tch?v=-c4_UIMITY20 


332. Quite apart from the admissions that were made during the course of the 
proceedings on 23.08.2025, the objections raised by learned counsel for the 
association as regards the legal admissibility of the exhibits enclosed along with the 
affidavit of PW-3, are untenable. It hardly bears any reiteration that while this 
Tribunal is guided by the general principles underlying the Code of Civil Procedure, 
the strict rigors of the same are inapplicable to these proceedings. The legal position 
in this regard has been discussed in detail in the foregoing paras of this report. Also, 


as discussed hereinabove, the provisions of the Evidence Act/Bharatiya Sakshya 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 75 


Adhiniyam, 2023, shall also apply only “to the extent practicable”. 

333. Learned ASG is right in contending that in consonance with Section 63 of 
the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 (BSA), the affidavit of PW-3 produced the 
electronic evidence which is admissible as secondary evidence; a certificate in terms 
of Section 63(4) of BSA was submitted by the concerned witness before this 
Tribunal which constitutes substantial compliance with the said provision. 

334. In any event, during the hearing on 23.08.2025, the primary electronic 
evidence was directly perused by the Tribunal by accessing the internet. Section 57 


of the BSA provides as under: 


“57. Primary Evidence.—Primary evidence means the document itself 
produced for the inspection of the Court. 


Explanation I.—Where a document is executed in several parts, each part is 
primary evidence of the document. 


Explanation 2.—Where a document is executed in counterpart, each 
counterpart being executed by one or some of the parties only, each 
counterpart is primary evidence as against the parties executing it. 


Explanation 3.—Where a number of documents are all made by one uniform 
process, as in the case of printing, lithography or photography, each is 
primary evidence of the contents of the rest; but, where they are all copies 
of a common original, they are not primary evidence of the contents of the 
original. 


Explanation 4.—Where an electronic or digital record is created or stored, 
and such storage occurs simultaneously or sequentially in multiple files, 
each such file is primary evidence. 


Explanation 5.—Where an electronic or digital record is produced from 
proper custody, such electronic and digital record is primary evidence 
unless it is disputed. 


Explanation 6.—Where a video recording is simultaneously stored in 
electronic form and transmitted or broadcast or transferred to another, 
each of the stored recordings is primary evidence. 


Explanation 7.—Where an electronic or digital record is stored in multiple 
storage spaces in a computer resource, each such automated storage, 
including temporary files, is primary evidence.” 


76 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


335. Reliance has been rightly placed on Anvar PV v. PK Basheer, (204) 0 
SCC 473 which, after taking note of similar provisions of the then-applicable Indian 
Evidence Act 872, held as under: 


“24. The_situation would have _been_ different _had_the appellant 
adduced primary evidence, by making available in evidence, the CDs 
used for announcement and songs. Had those CDs used for 
objectionable songs or announcements been duly got seized through 
the police or Election Commission and had the same been used as 
primary evidence, the High Court could have played the same in court 
to see whether the allegations were true. That is not the situation in 
this case. The speeches, songs and announcements were recorded 
using other instruments and by feeding them into a computer, CDs 
were made therefrom which were produced in court, without due 
certification. Those CDs cannot be admitted in evidence since the 
mandatory requirements of Section 65B of the Evidence Act are not 
satisfied. It is clarified that notwithstanding what we have stated 
herein in the preceding paragraphs on the secondary evidence on 
electronic record with reference to Section 59, 65A and 65B of the 
Evidence Act, if an electronic record as such is used as primary 
evidence under Section 62 of the Evidence Act, the same is admissible 
in evidence, without compliance of the conditions in Section 65B of 
the Evidence Act.” 


336. Again, In Arjun Panditrao Khotkar v. Kailash Kushanrao Gorantyal, 
(2020) 7 ७९८९: it was held as under: 
“34. Quite obviously, the requisite certificate in sub-section (4) is 


unnecessary if the original document itself is produced. This can be 
done by the owner of a laptop computer, a computer tablet or even a 
mobile phone, by stepping into the witness box and proving that the 
concerned device, on which the original information is first stored, is 
owned and/or operated by him. In cases where “the computer”, as 
defined, happens to be a part of a “computer system” or “computer 
network” (as defined in the Information Technology Act, 2000) and it 
becomes impossible to physically bring such network or system to the 
Court, then the only means of proving information contained in such 
electronic record can be in accordance with Section 65B(l), together 
with the requisite certificate under Section 65B(4). This being the 
case, it is necessary to clarify what is contained in the last sentence in 
paragraph 24 of Anvar P.V. (supra) which reads as “...if an 
electronic record as such is used as primary evidence under Section 
62 of the Evidence Act...”. This may more appropriately be read 
without the words “under Section 62 of the Evidence Act,...”. With 
this minor clarification, the law stated in paragraph 24 of Anvar P.V. 
(supra) does not need to be revisited.” 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण [77 


337. During the course of final arguments, learned counsel for JKIM contended 
that for the electronic evidence to be admissible, it ought to be supported with an 
opinion of an expert witness such as an Examiner of Electronic Evidence under 
Section 79A of the IT Act 2000. 

338. The provision for an Examiner of Electronic Evidence under Section 79A of 


the IT Act 2000 is relatable to Section 39(2) BSA which reads as under: 


“39. Opinions of experts - 


(2) When in a proceeding, the court has to form an opinion on any 
matter relating to any information transmitted or stored in any 
computer resource or any other electronic or digital form, the opinion 
of the Examiner of Electronic Evidence referred to in section 79A of 
the Information Technology Act, 2000 (27 of 2000), is a relevant fact. 


Explanation.--For the purposes of this sub-section, an Examiner of 

Electronic Evidence shall be an expert.” 
339. Upon conjoint reading of Section 79A of IT Act 2000, together with other 
provisions of BSA, including Section 39(2) thereof, the opinion of the Examiner of 
Electronic Evidence referred to in Section 79A of the IT Act 2000 is relevant where 
“expert opinion” is necessitated as regards electronic evidence. This provision does 
not affect to the admissibility of the electronic evidence produced by a party, nor 
forms a condition precedent for the production of the same before this Tribunal. In 
essence, the provision/s contemplate that if an opinion is produced by an Examiner 
of Electronic Evidence under Section 79A of the IT Act 2000 by the parties or if the 
court warrants the opinion of such an expert, such opinion shall be a relevant fact. It 
does not preclude the court from forming an opinion on electronic evidence without 
the aid of such an opinion, nor does the lack of such opinion render the evidence 
inadmissible. 
340. Section 63 BSA does not require an “expert witness” to be produced before 
the Tribunal as contended by JKIM. The requirement of an ‘expert’ to provide a 


certificate under Section 63(4) BSA should also be construed in light of Section 


78 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


39(2) of BSA as one that may be produced if the opinion of an expert is required. 
The certificate required to be produced by the person in charge of the 
computer/device which has been used to produce the electronic record under 
Section 63(4) BSA, i.e. the certificate of PW-03 Mr. Liyaqat Ali, has already been 
submitted before this Tribunal and accordingly, there is substantial compliance with 
this provision. It is again re-emphasised that even otherwise, in terms of the 
judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), the strict rigors 
of all these provisions are not applicable. 

34l. There is, ex-facie, no merit in the contention of learned counsel for JKIM 
that the “electronic evidence” relied upon by the Central Government, is 
“doctored”. The same is a bald assertion, without any cogent basis. Thus, the 
electronic evidence produced in the affidavit is admissible and is required to be 
considered by this Tribunal. In the circumstances, this Tribunal is not inclined to 
accept the contention of the learned counsel for the association that the evidence 
adduced by the Central Government in the form of social media posts/videos, as 
also referred to in the deposition of PW3, is liable to be discarded. The said social 
media posts/videos are in the nature of relevant material that is required to be 
considered. The same, undoubtedly, gives an insight as to the nature of the 
secessionist ideology propagated by the association. The fact that the association 
describes itself as a ‘moderate’ organization, does not detract from the same. 

342. While the learned counsel for the association is at pains to urge that the 
association has no separatist moorings and/or it is distinct from the other 
constituents of APHC in this respect, (as also vehemently emphasized by the 
witnesses on behalf of the association), the same does not inspire confidence and is 
negated by the manner in which the association has been propagating the separatist 
views through posts/videos on social media. The same undoubtedly, seeks to 
undermine the credibility of the Indian State; makes reference to “plebiscite” in 
Kashmir/right to self determination etc. Some of the videos speak of India and 
Pakistan in the same vein with reference to Kashmir (for instance, in the interview 


of Masroor Abbas Ansari, RW-|, to a Pakistani News Channel viz., 060 Tv’). All 


[भाग वा---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 79 


these aspects negate the picture which has been sought to be projected through 
statements of the witnesses, who have deposed on behalf of the association. 

343. There are also some inconsistencies/incongruities in the depositions of the 
witnesses of the association. Thus, for instance, on one hand, learned counsel for the 
association is at pains to emphasis that the association has no linkage with any 
extremist/separatist element in Jammu and Kashmir, yet, on the other hand, in the 
cross-examination of २७ |/॥३500 Abbas Ansari, he acceded to that according to 
him, ‘Burhan Wan’ is a Martyr. Relevant portion of the cross-examination reads as 
under: 


“I know who is Burhan Wani. Although, he was perceived to be a 
terrorist since he was engaged in militancy, he had some support 
amongst the locals. Neither I nor JKIM ever subscribed to his 
ideology and never had any close association or terms with him. He 
belongs to an organization (Hizbul Mujahideen) which gave many 
threats to my father. I believe that Burhan Wani was a Martyr. I did 
not participate in the procession that was taken out on the occasion of 
the demise of Burhan Wani.” 


344. There is also incongruity in the stand taken as regards the very existence of 
the association. In this regard, it is pertinent to note that RWI has stated in his 
affidavit as under:- 


“3, Here it is submitted that in September 2023 the JKIM was 
dissolved by deponent as some of its members were not following the 
objectives of the organization and were indulging in antiparty 
activities. 


From September 2023, there is no association structure, as all its 
functions were being performed the deponent till democratic body for 
association is elected. To label the Answering Respondent as 
unlawful, when no association exists because of the Dissolution in 
September, 2023 is in fact abuse of process of law, which is quite 
strange and ironic and bereft of any factual position.” 


345. Even the learned counsel for the association has, on the one hand, submitted 
that JKIM was dissolved, however, in the same breath, it has also been asserted that 
presently there is no association structure, and all its functions are performed by the 
Acting President Maulana Masroor Abbas Ansari till a democratic body for the 
association is elected. 


80 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


346. It is again noted that it is incumbent on this Tribunal to ascertain existence of 
“sufficient cause” from the totality of circumstances and overall perusal of the 
material/evidence placed on record by the respective parties. Such overall 
consideration, in the totality of circumstances, reveals that there is credence in the 
version put forth by the Central Government. 


Public Witnesses 


347. Itis noted that some ‘public witnesses’ have submitted their affidavits during 
the course of these proceedings. The same contain generic statement/s, are 
identically worded and notarized by the same notary public on the same day. Vide 


order dated 2.07.2025, this Tribunal called upon the public witnesses to disclose 


the following: 
“(i) Whether they are/have been members of JKIM? If so, during what 
period? 
(ii) Whether they have had any connection with JKIM or its Office 
Bearers? 
(iii) Whether they are/have been actively involved in the activities of 
JKIM and if so, in what capacity? 
(iv) Whether they have been receiving any correspondence or 


instructions from JKIM or from its Office Bearers? 


348. Subsequently, in compliance of the order dated 2.07.2025, 2 out of the 24 
public witnesses, filed their supplementary affidavits, which are again, identical in 
terms. The same state as follows: 


“T) That I have been associated with Late Molvi Mhammad Abass 
Ansari (ra), from my childhood as follower (mureed). I have not been 
member of JKIM. However, as follower of Late Moulve Abass Ansari,_I had 
associated with organization as a common person. My association with Late 
Molvi Abass Ansari and after his death with Molvi Masroor Abass Ansari 
has been in religious affairs as follower/disciple (mureed). 

2) That I had no connection with JKIM or its office bearers, except as 
mentioned in para I of this affidavit. 

3) That I have been disciple/follower (mureed) of religious leader 
Late Molvi Abass Ansari and thereafter his death Molvi Masroor Abass 
Ansari and have not been involved in activities of JKIM. 

4) I have been receiving guidance from religious leader Late Molvi 
Abass Ansari and thereafter from Molvi Masroor Abass Ansari in religious 
affairs and have been receiving such guidance throughout my life in 
accordance with Shia sect of Islam.” 


[भाग U—€re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 8] 


As such, the said public witnesses, evidently, apart from avowedly being 
“followers” of the association, have no direct connection with the association, 
much less do they have any knowledge about the inner workings / activities of the 
association. As such, no inference can be derived from these affidavit/s of “public 


witnesses” for the purpose of these proceedings. 


Material/Evidence in the form of Report/Inputs of Intelligence Agencies 
(furnished in Sealed Cover) 


349. The confidential materials/reports furnished by the PW4 in a sealed cover 
have been examined threadbare by this Tribunal, the same, undoubtedly, 
corroborates the necessity for proscribing the association. A perusal of the same 
validates and corroborates each and every aspect of the activities of the association 
as referred to in the notification and elaborated in the background note. A perusal of 
the same leads to inexorable and definitive conclusion that the ban on the 
association is legal and justified in view of the material/report referred to, being of 
confidential nature, the same is not being reproduced herein. However, the same has 
been taken into consideration strictly in line with the parameters laid down by the 
Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami (supra). 

350. The documents/material which have been submitted in a sealed cover gives 
comprehensive insight and details as to the unlawful activities and separatist 
endeavours of JKIM and its collaborations with inimical elements from across the 
border. 

35l. Thus, the Central Government has been able to make out a cogent case in 
support of impugned notification dated .03.2025 for declaring the association i.e. 
JKIM as banned association. As noted, the evidence adduced by the Central 
Government is elaborate and extensive, and inter alia comprises (i) evidence of 3 
officers from the State of J & K, who have deposed in respect of 2 FIRs against the 
chief protagonist of the association and other members, on account of his various 


incidents/actions as referred to hereinabove; (ii) Evidence in the form of social 


82 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


media posts/videos, which brings out the secessionist agenda of the association and 
the fact that the association has sought to seriously undermine the sovereignty and 
integrity of India; (iii) excerpts from website/s (ittihadul.tripod.com); (iv) Evidence 
in the form of intelligence reports/memo furnished by the security agencies 
regarding the activities of the association, with precise details as to the inimical and 
unlawful activities. As opposed to this, the evidence adduced by the association is 
lacking in credibility and is not borne out by cogent material. 

352. During the course of arguments, an apprehension has been expressed by 
learned counsel for the association that in case the ban on the concerned association 
is upheld, the religious activities being carried out by Masroor Abbas Ansari (and 
other persons who have been associated with the association) shall be impeded. The 
said apprehension is misconceived. To allay this apprehension, learned ASG has 
made a statement that that religious activities which are not within the purview of 
‘unlawful activity’ under Section 2(0) of the UAPA are not prohibited under UAPA. 
It has been categorically stated that (ex) members of JKIM who undertake such 
legitimate activities in their personal capacity, for religious purposes, will not be 
impacted by the proscription of the association'. The said statement is taken on 
record. It is also noted that Masroor Abbas Ansari, the chairman of JKIM himself 
stated in his deposition that he was permitted to take out a procession on 04.07.2025 
on the occasion of Moharram in which lakhs of people participated and the 
government gave due permission for the same. He further stated that certain other 
processions were also held around the same period in which he participated. Thus, it 
is evident that legitimate religious activities undertaken by member/s of JKIM in 
their personal capacity, shall remain unimpacted by the present action against JKIM 


under UAPA, 967. 


t Following submission has been made in the additional written submissions of the Union of India: 

“In this regard, it is most respectfully submitted that religious activities which are not within the purview of ‘unlawful 
activity’ under Section 2(0), UAPA are not prohibited under UAPA. Members of JKIM who undertake such 
legitimate activities in their personal capacity for religious purposes will not be impacted by an order under Section 4 
by this Hon’ble Tribunal.” 


[भाग पए---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 83 


CONCLUSION 


353. From the elaborate material /evidence placed on record in these proceedings, 
this Tribunal finds that there is ample justification to declare JKIM as an unlawful 
association under the UAPA. Moreover, given the nature of activities of the 
association, the Central Government was justified in taking recourse to the proviso 


to Section 3 (3) of the UAPA for the reasons given in the notification. 


354. Thus, this Tribunal having followed the procedure laid down in the UAPA 
and its Rules and having independently and objectively appreciated and evaluated 
the material and evidence on record, is of the firm and considered view that there 
exists sufficient cause for declaring JKIM as an unlawful association under Section 
3() of the UAPA, 967, vide the notification dated .03.2025. Thus, an order is 
passed under Section 4 (3) of the UAPA, 967, confirming the declaration made in 
the notification bearing no.S.0O.lll4(E), published in the official gazette on 
.03.2025 issued under Section 3() of the UAPA, 967. 


(JUSTICE SACHIN DATTA) 
UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL 


SEPTEMBER 03, 2025 ” 


[F. No.l407/2/2025-NI-MFO] 
RAJEEV KUMAR, Jt. Secy. 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-!0064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-ll0054. #ए ७४४ 


