रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल. (एन) 04/0007/2003--05 REGD. NO. 0. L. (५) 04/0007/2003—05 


नी रत = राजपकन्र 


Che Gazette of Jndia 


OSH. -FY.We.-F.-72025-267708 
CG-DL-W-72025-267708 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


साप्ताहिक 
WEEKLY 


सं. 44] नई दिल्‍ली, नवम्बर 9---नवम्बर 5, 2025, शनिवार/कार्तिक i83—arfta 24, 947 
No. 44] NEW DELHI, NOVEMBER 9— NOVEMBER |5, 2025, SATURDAY/KARTIKA 8—KARTIKA 24, 947 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह पृथक संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके 
Separate Paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation 


भाग Il—ave ३---उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART H—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 


भारत सरकार के मंत्रालयों (TAT मंत्रालय को छोड़कर) द्वारा जारी किए गए सांविधिक आदेश और अधिसूचनाएं 
Statutory Orders and Notifications Issued by the Ministries of the Government of India 
(Other than the Ministry of Defence) 
वित्त मंत्रालय 
(राजस्व विभाग) 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 नवम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. (967.—ea AHIR, राजभाषा (संघ के शासकीय प्रयोजनों के लिए प्रयोग) नियम, 976 के 
नियम 40 के उप-नियम (4) के अनुसरण में राजस्व विभाग के केन्द्रीय अप्रत्यक्ष कर एवं सीमा शुल्क बोर्ड के अधीन आयुक्त, 
सीमा शुल्क (आयात), मुंबई जोन-|॥॥ के कार्यालय, जिसके 80 प्रतिशत से अधिक अधिकारियों एवं कर्मचारियों ने हिन्दी का 
कार्यसाधक ज्ञान प्राप्त कर लिया है, को अधिसूचित करती है। 


[OT. सं. $-407/3/207- हिन्दी-2-अधिसूचना] 
प्रीति सेलारे, उप निदेशक (रा.भा.) 


742 GI/2025 (6975) 


6976 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Department of Revenue) 
New Delhi, the 7th November, 2025 


S.O. 967.—In pursuance of sub-rule (4) of Rule l0 of the Official Language (Use for Official Purpose of 
the Union) Rules, 976, the Central Government, hereby notifies, Office of The Commissioner of Customs 
(Import), Mumbai, Zone-III under Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs, Department of Revenue where 
more than 80% staff has acquired the working knowledge of Hindi. 


[F. No. E-07/3/207- Hindi-2-Notification] 
PREETI SELLARE, Dy. Director (OL) 


श्रम एवं रोजगार मंत्रालय 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2025 


का.आ. 4968.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का i4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार मेसर्स महालक्ष्मी मिलेनियम एजेंसीज प्राइवेट लिमिटेड मेसर्स चिराग सैंडिटेक्सट प्राइवेट लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के 
संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री कुमार सदाशिव नेनहे एंड 52 अन्य के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2, मुंबई, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 64/2048) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, 
प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 30.40.2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, एल-29042/24/2048-आईआर(एम)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMLOYMENT 


New Delhi, the 30th October, 2025 


5.0. 968.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 64/208) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-2, Mumbai as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to M/s Mahalaxmi Millennium Agencies Pvt Ltd M/s Chirag Sanditext Private Limited and Shri 
Kumar Sadashiv Nenahe and 52 others which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central 
Government on 30.0.2025. 


[No. L-2902/2/20I8-IR(M)] 


SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE JUSTICE RETIRED SHIV SHANKER PRASAD 
PRESIDING OFFICER/LINK OFFICER 
THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.2, MUMBAI 
PRESENT 
JUSTICE RETIRED SHIV SHANKER PRASAD 
Presiding Officer/Link Officer 
REFERENCE NO. CGIT-2/64 of 208 
EMPLOYERS IN RELATION TO THE MANAGEMENT OF 
Party No.l l. M/s. Mahalaxmi Millennium Agencies Ptv. Ltd., 
Mr. Mahendra P. Shah, Director, 
M/s. Mahalaxmi Millennium Agencies Pvt. Ltd., 
408, Parshwa Chambers, |7/2], Issaji street, 
Vadadgadi, Mumbai, Maharashtra- 400003. 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 6977 


2. M/s. Chirag Sanditext Ptv. Ltd., 
The Mine Manager, 
M/s. Chirag Sanditext Pvt. Ltd., 
Bakol Patlewadi, At. Post- Phondaghat, 
Tal. — Kankavli, District- Sindhudurg- 4660I. 
AND 
THEIR WORKMEN. 
Party No.2 (Mr. Kumar Sadashiv Nenehe & Ors.,) 
At. Post- Phondaghat, Pimpalwadi, 
Tal. — Kankavli, 
District- Sindhudurg, Maharashtra- 4660]. 
APPEARANCES: 
Management No. | : Mr. Ketan P. Sheth 
Representative 
Management No.2 : Ms. Pavitra Manesh 
Advocate 
& 
Mr. Kiran Maruti Mohite 
Representative 
Workmen : Mr. Sanjay Anant Teli 
Representative 
AWARD 
(Delivered on 08-0-2025) 


. This Reference has been made by the Central Government in exercise of powers under clause (d) of sub- 
section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, vide Government of India, 
Ministry of Labour & Employment, New Delhi, order No. L-2902/2/208 (IR(M) dated 26.I.20I8. The terms of 
reference given in the schedule are as follows: 


i. “Whether the applicant workmen have worked with M/s. Chirag Sanditext Pvt. Ltd., since March /997 
till date? If so, what should be the liabilities of the company towards applicant workmen?” 


ii. “Whether M/s.Mahalaxmi Millennium Agencies Pvt. Ltd, has operated the Mines at any point of time? 
If so, the duration and its liabilities to the applicant workmen?” 


iii. “Whether there existed any legal arrangement between M/s. Mahalaxmi Millennium Agencies Pvt. Ltd, 
and M/s. Chirag Sanditext Pvt. Ltd., to run the mines? If yes, whether Maharashtra State Mineral 
Corporation was aware of the above arrangement?” 


iv. “What would be the legal terminal dues payable to the applicant workmen on account of 
termination/closure of Mines by both M/s. Chirag Sanditext Pvt. Ltd., and M/s. Mahalaxmi Millennium 
Agencies Pyt. Ltd, till March 20/092 


2. The case is listed on 3..2025, but, today the parties have jointly moved an application before the Tribunal 
for taking the matter on today’s Board. In the interest of justice, application for taking the matter on today’s Board is 
hereby allowed. 


3. The First Party No. | & 2 and the Second Party jointly states that, the dispute raised in the present Reference 
has been settled between the parties and accordingly the Memorandum of Settlement has been signed between the 
parties. Both the parties pray that, the present Reference be disposed in terms of the Memorandum of Settlement 
signed between the parties. The Second Party employees, who have signed hereby Authorise Mr. Sanjay Anant Teli to 
represent the Second Party before the Court. The First Party No. | has appointed Mr. Ketan P. Sheth to represent the 
present case on behalf of the First Party No.l. The First Party No.2 has appointed Ms. Pavitra Manesh & Mr. Kiran 
Maruti Mohite to attend the Hon’ble Tribunal on behalf of the First Party No.2 for completing the formalities for 
disposal of the Reference. 


6978 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


4. The Ministry, time to time encourages settling the cases, pending before the Court by means of mediation or 
by presenting the cases before the Lok Adalat. In the present case, both the parties have settled their dispute amicably 
out of the Court, in terms and conditions mentioned in the memo of compromise, signed by both the parties on 
07.0.2024. Both parties therefore pray to dispose off the matter as settled. 


5. In view of this, the matter is disposed off as settled. 

In the result, I proceed to pass the following order- 

ORDER 

i. The Reference is disposed off as settled. 

ii. The parties to bear their own cost. 

ili. The Award be sent to the Central Government. 
Date: 08-0-2025 

Justice SHIV SHANKER PRASAD, Presiding Officer/Link Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 नवम्बर, 2025 
का.आ. 4969.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार रक्षा 


मंत्रालय का एकीकृत मुख्यालय (नौसेना) के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय हैदराबाद के Gare (2/206) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं. एल-42025/04/2025-आईआर/(बी-)-437] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th November, 2025 


S.O. 969.— In pursuance of Section 47 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 2/206) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of The Integrated 


Headquarter of MOD (Navy) and their workmen. 
[No. L-2025/0/2025- IR (B-I)-37] 


SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT HYDERABAD 
Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 297 day of September, 2025 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 2/206 
Between: 
Sri Allam Tulasidas, 
R/o D.No.2-224/l, Lakshminagar, 
Gopalapatnam, 
Visakhapatnam- 530 027. ...... Petitioner 
AND 
l. Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, 
Visakhapatnam. 
2. The Integrated Headquarter of MOD(Navy), 
Directorate of Civilian Personnel Services, 
D-II Wing, Sena Bhavan, 
New Delhi—00I]. 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 6979 


3. Officer in charge- Command 


Non Public Transport Fund, 


INS Satavahana, Visakhapatnam-|4. ....Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : M/s. R. Sreeramulu & R. Praveena, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Ch. Guruvu Setty, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri A. Tulasidas who worked as_un-skilled labour (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents Command Non-Public Fund 
Transport, I.N.S. Satavahana, Visakhapatnam seeking to continue his casual services or regularize into service duly 
granting all the service benefits. 


2. The checkered history of this case revealed from the record is as hereunder:- 


Initially Petitioner had filed petition under section 2A(2) of the I.D. Act, !947 before the Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court at Visakhapatnam challenging termination of his service passed by Respondent with effect from 
..997. The case was numbered as ITID(C) १२०.३।/।997. Thereafter, Respondent appeared and filed the reply 
statement and after hearing both the parties that ITID(C) case came to be decided by the Presiding Officer, Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court Visakhapatnam vide award dated 5.4.999. That award was challenged by the 
Respondent in writ petition No.23995/l999 came to be decided on 3.9.20l2, wherein Hon'ble High Court setting 
aside award dated 5.4.999 vide its order dated 3.9.20l2 and the matter was remanded back to the Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court, Visakhapatnam and industrial dispute was restored to file and Tribunal was directed to 
pass an award afresh after putting both the parties on notice and give them an opportunity of being heard and 
thereafter pass the award in accordance with law. Thereafter, this Industrial Dispute case was transferred to CGIT, 
Hyderabad vide order No.L-4025/07/l999-IR(DU) dated 7.5.205 of the Government of India for disposal according 
to law. 


3. In brief facts culled out from the claim petition filed by the Petitioner are _that:- 


It is submitted that the Petitioner was working as unskilled labour in Non-Public Fund Transport of Eastern Naval 
Command, Visakhapatnam. The applicant was drawing wage of Rs.l359/- per month at the time of termination of his 
services as consolidated pay. The Non-Public Fund Transport is under the overall administrative control of Flag 
Officer, Commanding in Chief and immediate operational control of the Commanding Officer, INS Satavahana 
through his Subordinate Officer in Charge, Non-Public Fund Transport, INS Satavahana. It is submitted that he was 
detailed to do clerical duties as stated in his application at page number 0. While so the Petitioner was intimated 
orally on 5.0.997 that his services will be terminated any time after 5.0.997. It is submitted that the applicant 
was initially appointed as USL in the office of the Command Transport Pool with effect from 8..982 against 
sanction accorded by HQtrs., Eastern Naval Command letter dated 30.2.98l. He served in that capacity till 
30..983 against sanction renewed from time to time for a total period of 590 days. During this period, he was 
paid from defence service estimates and treated as a casual central government employee (as a civilian in defence 
service). It is submitted that he was given a break from |.2.983 to 25.2.983 presumably for want of vacancies in 
government department. It is further submitted that he was reappointed as a casual U.S.L., in Command Non-Public 
Fund Transport under INS Circar's with effect from 26.2.983 C.O., INS Circar's letter dated 0.2.993. It is 
submitted that the Command Non-Public Fund Transport comprises of motor vehicles which have been purchased out 
of regimental funds and command amenities fund maintained by the H.Q., ENC. The operation of the fund and the 
vehicles is entrusted by the Command to one of the Naval units in Visakhapatnam. Further it is submitted that earlier 
the transport was operated by ions sircar's but now it is operated by INS Satavahana presumably as per order of H.Q., 
E.N.C. The C.O., Satavahana controls and operates the N.P.F. Transport through one of the officers designated as 
Officer in Charge NPF Transport. It is submitted that besides the central government contributions by way of 
regimental funds and command amenities fund through which the motor vehicles were purchased the fund is further 
supported by transport charges realised through school bus passes come home to duty transport office half officers 
and staff both service and civilian and also through hiring charges on transport hired out for amenity purpose. 
Therefore, it is clear that the Non-Public Fund Transport is an industry within the meaning of section 2(j) of the ID. 
Act, 947. It is submitted that during April !99! Government of India issued O.M.No.4904/4/90-Estt. (C) Ministry 
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension Department (D/o Personnel and Training) dated 8.4.]99] stating that 
casual industrial employee who were recruited prior to 7.6.!988 and wherein position in service as on the date of 
issue of the letter can be considered for regularisation against government sanction even if they were not sponsored 
initially through the employment exchange. Further, it is submitted that the applicant satisfied the requirements of 
this letter, he was initially recruited on 8..!982 and was in casual service as on 8..!99l. The applicant’s claim was 
overlooked and the services of 2 others namely S/Sri B Appanna and M Srihari were regularised even though they 


6980 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


were juniors to the applicant and were not in service as an 8.4.99l. It is submitted that the applicant filed 
OA No.739 of 994 in the Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad against the Respondents for ignoring 
the seniority and regularising the services of his juniors mentioned above, even when they did not satisfy the 
requirement of Government of India letter dated 8.4.99] referred. The Tribunal while not admitting the applicant’s 
claim for regularisation observed as under:- 


“having stated this, I also consider it necessary to add that the applicant had indeed been rendering continuous 
service in various units of the Navy no matter in which capacity of status. The very fact that he had been asked 
to perform clerical duty and which he continues to do even at present indicates that his services were 
apparently found useful and efficient. Considering this background the Respondents are to extend the benefit of 
any provision which might enable him to improve his service prospects under any scheme which may be evolved 
by the government in future.” 


In pursuance of the above observation of the Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad the applicant 
submitted an application dated 7.9.!997 which was forwarded to Flag Officer Commanding in Chief & Chief of 
Naval Staff, NHQ, New Delhi. It is submitted that as this was not palatable to them the applicant has been worldly 
informed that his services would be terminated anytime after 5.l0.997 which is clearly a vindictive action. The 
application was followed by a telegram dated 7.0.997 and a letter dated 0.0.!997. The management did not 
consider Petitioner’s application and decided to terminate his services vide Hqrs.ENC letter TP/3062 dated 9.0.97. 
Further, it is submitted that Petitioner was terminated with effect from |..!997 while a junior Sri K Suresh Kumar 
has been retained in service. Hence it is prayed to direct the Respondents to regularise the services of the applicant 
against any existing regular vacancy or continue his casual services until he can be absorbed in a regular vacancy with 
all service benefits. 


4. Respondent filed counter denying the averments of the Petitioner_as under:- 


Respondent filed reply statement wherein Respondent has denied the material averments made in the petition and 
save those that are expressly admitted therein. Further, Respondent contended that this Tribunal does not have any 
jurisdiction to entertain the application since the establishment under which the applicant has worked is not an 
industry as defined under section 2(j) of the I.D.Act, !947 and as such I.D.Act is not applicable to him. Further, it is 
contended that in the defence establishments there are vehicles provided from government funds. These are as per 
government sanctions. As such I.D.Act, 947 is not applicable and filing of the application by the applicant is 
incorrect and it is liable to be dismissed on this ground alone. At the outset, Hon’ble Court does not have any 
jurisdiction to entertain the application since the establishment under which the applicant had worked is not an 
‘Industry' as defined under Section 2(j) of ID Act and as such the Industrial Disputes Act is not applicable to him. 
The definition of Industry that was given under section 2(j) of ID Act is as follows:- 


“Industry means any business, trade, undertaking, manufacture or calling of employers and includes any 
calling, service, employment, handicraft or industrial occupation or avocation of workmen.” 


In the defence establishments as in any other government establishments there are vehicles provided from government 
funds (Public Funds). These are as per the government sanctions. However, there is invariably a short-fall of such 
vehicles. This, in many cases, is made up from the regimental funds or unit funds which are funds raised from local 
sources such as contribution from officers, grants from amenity funds, canteen and mess funds etc. which are known 
as Non-Public Funds or private funds of the Command. Command Non-Public Fund Transport (CNPFT) in which the 
applicant had worked is one such Non-Public Fund (Regimental Fund). As such ID Act is not applicable and filing 
of application by the applicant in this Tribunal is incorrect and it is liable to be dismissed on this ground alone. Shri 
A Tulsidas had worked as casual labourer during the period between 8.!.82 to 30.l!.83 with intermittent breaks at 
INS Circars. This employment as casual labourer was as on required basis on daily wages. Payment of wages for 
this employment was made through government funds which were utilized only when there was an urgent and/or 
operational requirement. The applicant was not re-employed beyond 30..83. Thereafter, he was employed by the 
Officer in Charge, | Command Non-Public Fund Transport as a Non-Public Fund employee w.e.f. 26 Dec 83. 
Payment of wages on a honorarium basis to the applicant was also made from this Fund only. Except for the period 
from l8 Jan 82 to 30 Nov 83, the applicant was not under the employment of any Ministry under the Government of 
India and as such he is not entitled to regularisation against the schemes prescribed by the government. In this 
connection the Apex Court judgement ((996 SCC (L&S) 69]) in relation to the Management of Reserve Bank of 
India Vs. Workmen is relevant. In the aforesaid judgement, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that in the case of 
Reserve Bank of India Canteen in the absence of any statutory or other legal obligation and in the absence of any right 
in the Bank to supervise and control the work or the details thereof in any manner regarding the canteen workers 
employed in the three types of canteen cannot be said that the relationship of master and servant existed between the 
Bank and the various persons employed in three types of canteens. They are not workmen of the Reserve Bank of 
India and they are not comparable employees employed in the officers lounge. Therefore, the demand for 
regularisation is unsustainable and they are not entitled to any relief. Shri A. Tulasidas filed OA 739/94 in the 
Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad and the Hon’ble Tribunal dismissed the OA on 25.7.97. While 
dismissing the OA filed by the applicant, the Hon'ble Tribunal held that: 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 698] 


(a) Although it is a fact that the applicant has been continuing in some capacity to work for the Respondents, 
and even if he has been asked to perform some of the clerical duties, it cannot be said that he had been on 
regular nerrick-rated casual service after 7963, To that extent he cannot possibly claim any relief under the 
provisions of a scheme for which he is not eligible. 


(b) As regards, the two officials( viz., Shri B Appanna and M Srihari Rao with whom the applicant compared his 
case), they were regularized wholly in accordance with their status and eligibility as per the instructions and 
provisions of the Scheme. In any case, any right or wrong done in their case cannot by itself result in the creation of 
any right for the applicant who has to demonstrate his entitlement on the strength of his own eligibility in terms of the 
same scheme and this he has not succeeded in doing.” 


Shri A Tulasidas thereafter submitted applications dated 0! Aug and [7 Sep 97 to this Headquarters which were duly 
examined by the Competent Authority and it was informed to him that he is neither entitled to any employment as 
unskilled labourer on regular basis nor casual basis. It is also submitted that the Non-public Fund Transport pool 
which was under the control of the Officer--in--Charge, Command Transport Pool, Visakhapatnam is presently placed 
under the control of the Commanding Officer, INS Satavahana. It is submitted that the non-Public Fund Transport 
Pool was wound up with effect from 5 Oct 97 due to paucity of funds-and-it is now functioning with 2 vehicles for 
very limited purpose. With the winding up of the above, the Services of Some of the employees employed in CNPFT 
including that of the present, applicant could not be continued due to lack of Work. Since the Non-public Fund 
Transport is only a local fund, no service rules are applicable and it has a right to appoint/terminate the services of any 
individual at any time and continue the services of a junior person considering the competency of the individual. It is 
submitted that the applicant had worked during the period from 3 Jan 92 to 30 Noy 93 with intermittent breaks as 
casual labourer and it is true that during his employment as casual labourer he was paid from the Government Funds. 
Thereafter he was not employed as casual labourer. However, the applicant got employment under i.e., Command 
Nonpublic public Fund Transport w.e.f. 26 Dec 83. Payment of wages during his employment in Non-public 
Transport pool was made out of Non-Public Fund only. The contention of the applicant that he was reappointed as 
casual USL in Command Non-Public Fund Transport is incorrect. There is no nexus between the appointment as 
casual labourer against Government Funds and appointment as USL in Non-Public Fund Transport since for the 
former appointment he was paid pay and allowances against government funds while for the latter it was paid from 
the Nonpublic Funds. It is submitted that the contention of the applicant that Non-Public Funds Transport is an 
Industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the I.D. Act is not accepted. The Command or Satavahana Non-Public 
Fund cannot be termed as a Industry within the meaning of Sec.2(j) of the Act since, it is not having any business, 
trade, undertaking, manufacturing etc.. Further, it is submitted that even for Industrial Establishments in defence 
Installation, only Sec. 3 of I.D.Act dealing with works committee are contained from rules 38 to 57 under Industrial 
Tribunal (Central) Rules 957. It is submitted that the applicant has already raised these points vide OA 739/93 filed 
by him in the Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal and as stated by him the contentions of the applicant were not 
accepted by the tribunal. Even the tribunal held that although it is a fact that the applicant has been continuing in some 
capacity to work for the Respondents and even if he has been asked to perform some clerical duties it cannot be said 
that he had been on regular nerrick-rated casual service after 983. It is submitted that with regard to the 
regularization regarding S/Sri B Appanna and M Srihari Rao, the Tribunal of Hyderabad held that the explanation 
given by the Respondents was satisfactory in as much as they were regularised wholly in accordance with their status 
and eligibility as per instructions and provisions of the scheme the Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal dismissed 
the OA filed by the present applicant. As such he cannot again contest all these points once again. It is submitted that 
the applicant has submitted two representations dated [/ August 97 and 7'* September 97 which were considered by 
the competent authority and it was informed to him vide letter dated [87 November 97 that he was not entitled to any 
employment as USL either on regular or casual basis. Further, it is submitted that due to winding up of the Command 
Non Public Funds Transport it was intimated to all the staff that their services may be terminated at any time after I5" 
October 97. This was intimated to help the individuals to get some other employment and it is not a vindictive action 
as claimed by the applicant. The services of Sri K Suresh Kumar were retained as he was considered to be more 
competent and efficient in his job than the applicant. Further it is submitted that since it is only a non public fund the 
Respondents reserves the right to appoint or terminate the services of any individual get any time as these 
appointments being purely and casual and on “as required basis”. Therefore, prayed to dismiss the claim petition. 


5. In support of the averments of the claim statement Petitioner in his oral evidence has produced the witness 
WWI whereas in the documentary evidence 


he has produced documents Ex.W! to Ex.W6. Whereas Respondent has examined witness MWI in oral evidence and 
has not produced any documentary evidence. 


6. Heard the argument of Learned Counsels for both the parties. 
de On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties following issues emerge for determination:- 
I. Whether this tribunal has got jurisdiction to decide the dispute? 
Il. Whether the action of Respondent management in terminating the services of the Petitioner vide 


letter dated 9th October 997 with effect from I** November 997 is legal and justified? 


6982 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


IH. Whether the Petitioner is entitled for regularization in the service of the Respondent on the basis of 
averments made in the claim statement? 
IV. To what relief if any the Petitioner is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
8. Issue No.I:- In this context, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted that this Tribunal does not 


have any jurisdiction to entertain the petition filed by the Petitioner against the termination order since the 
Respondent management establishment under which Petitioner had worked is not an industry as defined under 
section 2(j) of the I.D.Act, !947. Thus, Industrial Disputes Act is not applicable to this case. 


9. Further, it is contended that the Command Satavahana Non-Public Fund Transport cannot be termed as 
industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of I.D.Act, 947 since it does not have any business, trade, undertaking, 
manufacturing, etc.. Moreover, even for industrial establishments in defence installation, only Section 3 of I.D.Act, 
dealing with works committee is applicable and rules regarding works committee are contained from rules 38 to 57 
under Industrial Tribunal (Central) Rules, [957., Therefore, the petition filed by the Petitioner is not maintainable in 
the Tribunal. 


0. On the other hand, Learned Counsel for Petitioner has submitted that Respondent cannot and should not 
raise the issue of jurisdiction again vide para 7 of his affidavit which has already been adjudicated by a competent 
court as above through its award dated 5.4.999, the Respondent should have gone through the order dated 7.5.205 
of Government of India, Ministry of Labour, vide which the reference has been made to this Hon’ble Court according 
to which the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court shall proceed from the stage at which it was 
transferred to it and dispose of the same in accordance with law. The Respondent is not entitled to open an issue 
which has already been adjudicated by the Hon’ble Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Visakhapatnam. 


ll. In view of the submissions made by the Learned Counsels for both the parties, perused the record. As per 
record the Command Non-Public Fund Transport comprises of motor vehicles which have been purchased out of 
regimental fund and command amenity fund maintained by the Headquarters Eastern Naval Command. The 
operation of the fund and the vehicles is entrusted by the command to one of the naval units in Visakhapatnam. 
Earlier the transport was operated by Indian Naval ship Circars but now it is operated by Indian Naval Ship 
Satavahana presumably as per order of Headquarters Eastern Naval Command. Control Center operates the Non- 
Public Fund Transport through one of the officers designated as Officer-in-Charge Non-Public Fund Transport. 
Besides central government contributions by way of regimental funds and command amenities funds realised through 
school bus passes, Home to duty transport of officers and staff, both service and civilian and also through hiring 
charges on transport are hired out for amenity purpose. The description of the activities as admitted by the 
Respondent management, clearly makes out that the transport system of the management is an industry by itself. The 
definition of industry as provided under section 2(j) of the ID act as amended by the Act 46/82 reads as under:- 


“2(j):- “industry "means any business, trade, undertaking, manufacture or calling of employers and includes 
any calling service, employment, handicraft or industrial occupation or avocation of workmen.” 


In the case of Management of Horticulture Department vs. Trilok Chand & Anr., dated 4.2.999, 82(999)DLT747, 
the Hon'ble Delhi High Court have held:- 


9. Seven Judges bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Bangalore Water Supply and Sewage Board Vs. 
Rajappa laid down triple test for determining whether a particular establishment is "indus- try" or not. The 
triple test is where: (a) systematic activity; (b) organized by cooperation between employer and employee (the 
direct and substantial element is commercial); (c) for the production and/or distribution of goods and services 
calculated to satisfy human wants and wishes (not merely spiritual or religious blunt inclusive of material 
things or services geared to celestial bliss i.e. making on a large scale of (prasad or food) prima facie, there is 
an industry in that enterprise. 


409. The Apex Court further held that absence of profit motive or gainful objective is irrelevant, be the venture in 
the public, joint, private or other sector. It also held that the true focus is functional and the decisive test is the 
nature of the activity with special emphasis on the employer-employee relations. It further held that if the 
organisation is a trade or business, it does not cease to be one because of philanthropy animating the 
undertaking. 


44. Consequently, the Court held that professions, clubs, educational institutions, cooperatives, research 
institutions, charitable projects and other kindred adventures, if they fulfill the triple test stated above, would 
fall within Section 2 of the Act. Ofcourse, a restricted category of professions, clubs, cooperatives and even 
gurukulas and research labs, may qualify for exemption if in simple ventures substantially and going by the 
dominant nature criterion substantively, no employees are entertained but in minimal matters, marginal 
employees are hired without destroying the non-employee character of the unit. If in a pious or altruist mission 
many employ themselves, free or for small honorarium, such a lawyers volunteer- ing to run a free legal service 
clinic or doctors serving in their spare hours in a free medical center or aphanites working at the bidding of the 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 6983 


holiness, divinity or like personality and the services are supplied free or at nominal cost and those who serve 
are not engaged for remuneration or on the basis of master and servant relationship then the institution is not 
an industry, even if stray servants, manual or technical, are hired. Of- course, following this principle, in many 
cases it has been held that particular establishments are not "industry". However, it depends on the facts and 
circumstances of each case and as far as present case is concerned no material is produced by the Petitioner 
before the Labour Court. 


Thus, in view of the definition of industry as provided under Section 2(j) of I.D.Act, 947 the Respondent 
management in the present case is plying the vehicles for the staff of the Respondent management. There is 
systematic activity organised by the cooperation employer, between employer, the Respondent management and 
employees, the workman who has been engaged for the production and distribution of services to calculate and 
satisfy the human wants and wishes. Therefore, the activity carried on by the Respondent management in which the 
Petitioner has been engaged as an employee satisfies the triple test laid down by the Constitutional Bench of Supreme 
Court India, in the case of Bangalore Water Supply and Sewage Board Vs. Rajappa. However, Respondent has 
failed to put on record sufficient material as to how it was not an industry. Therefore, inview of law laid down by the 
Hon’ble Apex Court in Bangalore Water Supply case (supra), Respondent management is covered under the 
definition of industry as provided u/s 2(j) of ID Act, |947. Thus, present petition filed by the Petitioner against his 
termination order from employment passed by Respondent is maintainable under the I.D. Act, 947 and Tribunal has 
jurisdiction to adjudicate the matter under the Industrial Disputes Act, 947. 


This, Issue is decided against the Respondent and in favour of Petitioner. 


2. Issue No.II:- Petitioner in his claim statement has alleged that he was initially appointed as USL in the office 
of Command Non-Public Fund Transport of Eastern Naval Command on 8..!982 against the sanction accorded by 
the Hqtrs. Eastern Naval Command letter dated 30.2.98. He served in that capacity till 30..983 against sanction 
renewed from time to time for a total period of 590 days as detailed in the enclosure one to this annexure. Further, 
Petitioner submitted that during this period, he was paid from defence services estimates and was treated as a central 
government employee as a civilian in defence service. He was given a break from .l2.983 to 25.2.983 
presumably for want of vacancies in government department. Further, Petitioner submits that he was reappointed as 
casual USL in Command Non-Public Transport under INS circars with effect from 26.!2.983 vide order dated 
0.2.993. Further, Petitioner alleges that he filed OA before Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal for seeking 
relief against ignoring his seniority and regularization into services but same was dismissed by the Tribunal with the 
observation as hereunder:- 


“considering this background the Respondents ought to extend the benefit of any provision which might enable him to 
improve his service prospects under any scheme which may be evolved by the government in future.” 


3. In pursuance of the observation of Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, the applicant submitted an 
application dated 7.9.997, bringing out the injustice done to him and praying for his regularization. However, the 
Respondent informed him that his services would be terminated anytime after |5.l0.97 which is clearly a vindictive 
action. Respondent management did not consider his application and terminated the Petitioner’s services with 
effect from |..97 while a junior Sri K Suresh Kumar was retained in service. 


4. Petitioner in his rejoinder contended that the authorities were annoyed with him that he had filed a case 
against Respondent before Hon’ble CAT. So instead of implementing the Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, 
Hyderabad recommendation for regularisation of services, Respondent terminated services of Petitioner with effect 
from .9.997. 


I5. It is further submitted by the Petitioner that the transport pool of Respondent was not wound up as stated in 
para 8 of the reply statement, since, Respondent has retained the services of 9 persons as against a total of 8, that 
amounts not winding up of establishment but retrenchment in which case seniority should be given due weight as per 
the section 25F of the ID Act. It has also been alleged that instead of retaining the services of the applicant who was 
initially recruited on 8..982 the Respondents retained the services of one Sri K Suresh Kumar who was recruited 
only in the year 993 and was junior to the applicant by |] years. It can not be justified to say that the junior was 
retained in service by Respondent on grounds of competency cannot be justified. Petitioner who had been rendering 
competent and satisfactory services for over |5 years could not have become incompetent overnight by any stretch of 
imagination. The act of the Respondent in retaining services of the junior superseding, is, act of favouritism. 
Further, it is submitted that in all the muster rolls as per instance, in the payroll for the month of January 97 the 
applicant was described as senior clerk and the said K Suresh Kumar was described as a clerk. Therefore, Petitioner 
being senior clerk should have been retained in preference of junior one. 


l6. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that Shri A Tulsidas had worked as casual labourer during the 
period between 8..82 to 30..83 with intermittent breaks at INS Circars. This employment as casual labourer 
was, as on required basis on daily wages. Payment of wages for this employment was made through government 
funds which were utilized only when there was an urgent and/or operational requirement. The applicant was not re- 
employed beyond 30..83. Thereafter, he was employed by the Officer-in-Charge, Command Non-Public Fund 


6984 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Transport as a Non-Public Fund employee w.e.f. 26.2.83. Payment of wages on a honorarium basis to the applicant 
was also made from this Fund only. Except for the period from 8.!.82 to 30..83, the applicant was not under the 
employment of any Ministry under the Government of India and as such he is not entitled to regularisation against the 
schemes prescribed by the government. 


In this connection the Apex Court judgement (996 SCC (L&S) 69) in relation to the Management of Reserve 
Bank of India Vs. Workmen is relevant. In the aforesaid judgement, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that in the 
case of Reserve Bank of India Canteen in the absence of any statutory or other legal obligation and in the absence of 
any right in the Bank to supervise and control the work or the details thereof in any manner regarding the canteen 
workers employed in the three types of canteen cannot be said that the relationship of master and servant existed 
between the Bank and the various persons employed in three types of canteens. They are not workmen of the Reserve 
Bank of India and they are not comparable employees employed in the officers lounge. Therefore, the demand for 
regularisation is unsustainable and they are not entitled to any relief. 


7. Further, Respondent contended that the Non-public Fund Transport pool which was under the control of the 
Officer--in--Charge, Command Transport Pool, Visakhapatnam is presently placed under the control of the 
Commanding Officer, INS Satavahana. It is submitted that the non-Public Fund Transport Pool was wound up with 
effect from 5 October, 997 due to paucity of funds, and it is now functioning with 2 vehicles for very limited 
purpose. With the winding up of the above, the services of some of the employees employed in CNPFT including that 
of the present, applicant could not be continued due to lack of Work. Since the Non-public Fund Transport is only a 
local fund, no service rules are applicable and it has the right to appoint/terminate the services of any individual at any 
time and continue the services of a junior person considering the competency of the individual. It is submitted that 
the applicant had worked during the period from 3..92 to 30.l.93 with intermittent breaks as casual labourer and 
it is true that during his employment as casual labourer he was paid from the Government Funds. Thereafter, he was 
not employed as casual labourer. However, the applicant got employment under i.e., Command Non- Public Fund 
Transport w.e.f. 26.2.83. Payment of wages during his employment in Non-public Transport pool was made out of 
Non-Public Fund only. The contention of the applicant that he was reappointed as casual USL in Command Non- 
Public Fund Transport is incorrect. There is no nexus between the appointment as casual labourer against Government 
Funds and appointment as USL in Non-Public Fund Transport since for the former appointment he was paid the 
wages and allowances against government funds while for the latter it was paid from the Non-public Funds. 


8. Before delving into the claim of the Petitioner it would be apposite to go through the relevant provision 
contained under section under ID Act as well as the law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court: - 


Section 25F in The Industrial Disputes Act, /947 


25F. Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No workman employed in any industry who has been 
in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the workman has been given one month's notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the 
period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the 
notice: 


(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen 
days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; 
and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25-F FF of the Act relates to closure of undertaking which envisages as hereunder:- 


"25-F FF. Compensation to workman is case of closing down of undertaking (/) where an undertaking is closed 
down for any reason whatsoever, every workman who has been in continuous service for not less than one year 
in that undertaking immediately before such closure shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), be 
entitled to notice and compensation in accordance with the provisions of Section 25-F, as if the workman had 
been retrenched; 


Provided that where the undertaking is closed down on account of unavoidable circumstances beyond the 
control of the employer the compensation to be paid to the workman under clause (b) of Section 25-F shall not 
exceed his average pay for three months." 


Section 25 - H: “Where any workmen are retrenched, and the employer proposes to take into his employ any 
persons, he shall, in such manner as may be prescribed, give an opportunity [to the retrenched workmen who 
are citizens of India to offer themselves for re-employment, and such retrenched workmen] who offer themselves 
for re-employment shall have preference over other persons.” 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 6985 


Thus, provision contained u/s. 25FFF provides for compensation to the Workman in case of closing down of the 
undertaking. 


9. Petitioner witness १४५७॥| in his chief examination statement has stated that he had worked as daily wage 
workman in INS Circar Command Transport Pool from 8..82 to 30..83. Later there was a break of 25 days. 
Thereafter, he was again appointed as M.T. cleaner with effect from 26.l2.983 in the same pool where he worked till 
30.0.97 continuously and till |983 he was paid wages from defence service estimates. Further, १४५७] states that and 
from December,!983 onwards he used to be paid wages from Command Non Public Transport Fund and his services 
used to be extracted in the transport pool office for cleaning buses in the morning, opening the doors of the CTO, 
dusting the furniture there, checking the oil in the vehicles, pouring water in radiators and also attending to clerical 
duties. The Commanding Transport Officer used to be in-charge of the entire transport working from 8:30 AM to 5:00 
PM. Further, ४५७] states that in the year 995 the entire transport system manned by employees paid wages from 
Non Public Fund was transferred to INS Satavahana and it was given the name non-Public Fund Transport. There he 
used to work for attending the transport needs of the officers etc., and he was removed from service with effect from 
..97. WWI states that management did not issue any prior notice of one month nor paid wages of one month in 
lieu of such notice. Moreover, they did not pay him any retrenchment compensation also. While terminating his 
services the management retained the services of his juniors namely Mr.K Suresh Kumar, and thus, his retrenchment 
is illegal. ७४५७७] has exhibited the documents Ex.W] which is the service particulars of the Workman, Ex.W2 is the 
charge list, Ex.W3 is the letter pertaining to winding up Command Non-Public Transport and as per Ex.W4 Sri K 
Suresh Kumar, Clerk was retained in service and he is junior to the Petitioner by l0 years. Ex.W5S is the letter for 
recommendation of regularization of services of Petitioner and Ex.W6 is the letter dated 5..93 moved by 
Petitioner seeking regularization of his services. WWI in his cross examination states that he has not worked in any 
non-public fund transport organization and that his averment made in para one of the claim application to the effect 
that he had worked as unskilled in non-public fund transport section in INS Satavahana is not correct. Thus, in his 
cross examination the witness has given contradictory statements to his claim statement. Further, witness states that 
he worked up to 3.0.997. In reply to a suggestion ४४७] states that it is not correct to say that non-public 
transport pool was wound up with effect from 5.0.997. 


20. Petitioner in support of his claim has also filed documents. Ex.W3 is a copy of order of Commander, 
Command Logistics Officer for Flag Afsar Kaman-in-Chief dated 9.0.97. Whereby direction was issued for winding 
up of Command Non-Public Transport. Ex.W3 delineates that flag officer commanding-in-chief Eastern Naval 
Command, Naval Base, Visakhapatnam accorded approval for winding up of Command Non-Public Transport Fund 
as on 3.0.997 and certain directions were issued in this respect mentioned at para (a), (b), (०), (d), (०), (f)m (2), (h), 
(j) (0), (), and (m) of letter regarding transportation. 


Para (g), (h) and (j) reads out as follows:- 


(g) Four drivers and one fitter cum driver be retained out of CNPT | staff for running the vehicles at 
para (f) above. 


(h) Selection of five personnel as in (g) above is to be carried out impartially by a Board of Officers 
nominated to CO, INS Satavahana 


(j) Services of remaining staff will be terminated with effect from lst November 97. Those who are 
retrenched like this will be paid one month pay over and above their pay till 3** October 97. 


2l. Further, Ex.W4 goes to show that name of the staff are mentioned at SI.Nos.| to |4 and name of employees 
mentioned at serial Nos. |,4, 6,7,8,9, ,!2 and 6 has been retained in service by the Respondent management and 
rest of the employees has been retrenched, including Petitioner. 


22. In this context, Respondent witness ०७ in his chief affidavit has stated that Petitioner worked as casual 
labour during the period between 8..982 to 30..983 with intermittent breaks at INS Circar. The engagement as 
casual labourer was on, as required basis, on daily wages. The payment of wages for these casual labourers was made 
through government funds which were utilised only when there was an urgent and/or operational requirement. Further 
५७] states that the applicant’s engagement as casual labourer was terminated in November,|983 as there was no 
more requirement. The applicant was not reengaged beyond 30..!983. Thereafter, the applicant was engaged by the 
Officer-in-charge, Command Non-Public Transport Fund as a non-public employee with effect from 26.2.983. 
However, payment of wages on a honorarium basis to the applicant was also made from this fund only. Thus, except 
for the period from 8..!982 to 30.I!.983 the applicant was not under the employment of any Ministry under the 
Government of India and as such he is not entitled to regularisation against the schemes prescribed by the 
government. Petitioner has never challenged his termination order dated 30.I.!983 and later he joined the service as 
casual labour willingly in non-public transport. Thus, now he can not claim that he was in employment of Respondent 
regularly from 0..982. As per letter dated 6.5.994, Petitioner has given his willingness to work as USL on casual 
basis. Contents of letter are reproduced as hereunder:- 


6986 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


“3. Ifit is not feasible to offer him regular appointment, by counting service rendered, the individual is willing 
to serve as USL on continuous Casual basis. A declaration to this effect is enclosed herewith. 


4. In view of the position explained it is requested that suitable action may be taken at the earliest in order to 
absorb the individual as USL on continuous casual basis.” 


“Willingness Certificate 


I am willing to serve even as USL on continuous casual basis in any units of Headquarters, Eastern Naval 
Command, Visakhapatnam if the post is offered to me.”’ 


23. Further, ७७७] states that the non-public fund transport pool which was under the control of the Officer- 
incharge, Command Transport Pool Visakhapatnam is presently placed under the control of the Commanding 
Officer, INS Satavahana. The non-public fund transport pool was wound up with effect from 5" October 997 due 
to paucity of funds. With the winding up of the above service, some of the employees employed in CNPFT including 
that of the present applicant could not be continued due to lack of work. Since the non-public fund transport is only a 
local fund, no service rules are applicable and it has a right to appoint/terminate the service of any individual at any 
time and continue the service of a junior person considering the competency of the individual. ४४४] was cross 
examined by the counsel for Petitioner and in cross examination MWI states that the workman Sri A. Tulsidas was 
working as a daily labour on daily wages. Further, ७] states that it is false to say that as per Ex.WI the Workman 
A Tulsidas was a government servant and it is false to say that due to gap of 25 days, Petitioner was not regularised. 
Further, ७०७] states that it is true that Petitioner was working under the Respondent management from 8..982 to 
3.0.997 as a casual labour. MWI adds that he was working as a casual labour and partly as a cleaner in non-public 
transport fund. Further, ७५७४] states that it is false to say that at the time of termination of the Workman from service 
Respondent has not followed the provisions of Sec.25 F of I.D.Act, |947. ४५७४] 5965 that it is false to say that at 
the time of termination of Workman, even though Mr Suresh Kumar |0 years junior to Sri A. Tulsidas working on 
same footing as per Ex.W4 was working as clerk and Petitioner was terminated from service and Sri Suresh Kumar 
was retained in the service. Thus, from the statement of MWI it manifest that the Petitioner had worked with the 
Respondent management as a daily wage labour in the non-public fund transport since 8..982 to 3.0.997 and 
services of the Petitioner has been retrenched by the Respondent for the want of work due to winding up of the 
undertaking non public fund transport as it manifest from document Ex.W3. Respondent has nowhere stated that 
before retrenchment of the Petitioner from service he was paid one month wages/compensation in accordance with the 
provision contained under section 25F of the ID Act. 


Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of The Managing Director Haryana Seeds vs. Presiding Officer and another 
AIR 997 Supreme Court 3086 has held:- 


“The admitted position is that the Haryana Seeds Development Corporation Ltd. has been carrying on the 
business of distribution of the certified varieties of the crop seeds to the farmers during Rabi and Kharif sowing 
seasons. As a consequence, a number of employees including the salesman like the Respondents came to be 
appointed. It is also on record that due to heavy flood etc., a number of units including the seeds sales counter 
were closed. As a consequence, the services of the employees have been dispensed with. The Respondent have 
sought a reference under Section /0(/2(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, /947 [for short, the "Act"]. The Labour 
Court held that the dispensation of the services of the Respondents amounts to retrenchment within the meaning 
of Section 25-F of the Act. As a result without giving one month's notice or salary in lieu thereof, the 
retrenchment is bad in law. Accordingly, it passed the award which was affirmed by the High Court. Thus, 
appeals by special leave. 


Section 25-FFF of the Act regulates the closure of the industry which envisages as under :- 


"25-F FF. Compensation to workman is case of closing down of undertaking (/) where an undertaking is closed 
down for any reason whatsoever, every workman who has been in continuous service for not less than one year 
in that undertaking immediately before such closure shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), be entitled 
to notice and compensation in accordance with the provisions of Section 25-F, as if the workman had been 
retrenched; 


Provided that where the undertaking is closed down on account of unavoidable circumstances beyond the control 
of the employer the compensation to be paid to the workman under clause (b) of Section 25-F shall not exceed his 
average pay for three months." 


As a consequence of the closure of the industry, Section 25-F of the Act is not attracted and the rigour imposed 
thereunder stands excluded. That was the view taken by this Court. In other cases, that was also followed by 
another learned Single Judge of the High Court. In that view of the matter, the learned Single has committed 
grievous error of law in not admitting the writ petition.” 


Further, in the case of Management of Hindustan Steel Limited vs. The Workmen and others dated 27 January 
973 in 973 AIR 878 Hon’ble Supreme Court has held:- 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 6987 


“Both of these sections occur in Ch. V-A of the Act dealing with "Lay-off and Retrenchment" inserted in /953. 
In enacting s. 25F the Legislature standardised the payment of compensation to workmen retrenched in the 
normal or ordinary sense in an existing or continuous industry by adopting a simple yard-stick of the length of 
service of the retrenched workmen doing away with the perplexing variety of factors for determining the 
appropriate relief in each case. In Hari Prasad Shiv Shankar Shukla v. A. D. Divekar(l) it was held that this 
section was not intended by the Legislature to be applicable to bona fide closure of business. This decision led 
to amendment of the Act by the Parliament. In /957 S. 25FFF was inserted in order to give benefit of s. 25F to 
the retrenched workmen where an undertaking is closed down "for any reason whatsoever". We need not refer 
to the amendment of S. 25FF because that section does not directly concern us. According to sub-s.(2) of s. 
25FFF it is quite clear that in case of closure of the categories of undertakings as mentioned therein, no 
workman employed in those undertakings can claim compensation under cl. (b) of S.25F. The language of s. 
25FFF(2) is plain and unambiguous. Indeed, the learned counsel for the Respondent also did not dispute that if 
it were to be held in this case that the undertaking had been closed down then cl. (b) of S. 257 would not be 
attracted and Shri Naidu would not be entitled to claim relief under that clause. According to Shri Madan 
Mohan, however, the present was not a case of closure of the undertaking. His submission was that only the 
work of the Housing Project at Ranchi had been completed. It was argued that unless the entire undertaking of 
the appellant was closed down not acceptable. The word undertaking as used in.S. 25F FF seems to us to have 
been used in its ordinary sense connoting thereby any work, enterprise, project or business undertaking. It is 
not intended to cover the entire industry or business of the employer ‘as was suggested on behalf of the 
Respondent. Even closure or stoppage of a part of the business or activities of the employer would seem in law 


4 


to be covered by this sub-section. The question has indeed to, be decided on the facts of each case",,,. 


In Workmen of the Indian Leafs Tobacco Development Co. Ltd. v. Management(I) closure of eight out of 
24 depots of the company though not amounting to, closure of its entire business was considered, to amount to a 
closure within the contemplation of s. 25FFF. In Parry & Co. Ltd. v. P. C. Lal(2) it was observed that it was 
within the managerial discretion of an employer to organise and arrange his business in the manner he 
considered best and that if a bona fide scheme for such re-organisation results in surplusage of employees, no 
employer is expected to carry on the burden of such economic deadweight and retrenchment has to be accepted 
as inevitable, however unfortunate. The reasoning and ratio of these decisions support the appellant's 
argument.” 


In view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the case of closing down of 
undertaking workman is entitled to notice and compensation as per provision of section 25F, as if the Workman has 
been retrenched. But Respondent has not adduced evidence to the effect that before termination of Petitioner one 
month wages or compensation was paid to him in accordance with the provision contained under section 25F. 
Therefore, for the want of compliance of provision contained under section 25 F, the retrenchment of the Petitioner, 
from service by Respondent is illegal. 


24. Witness WW in his chief statement of affidavit has stated that management did not issue any prior notice 
of one month nor paid wages for one month in lieu of such notice. Above statement of १५७] in respect of prior 
notice and non-payment of one month wage has not been contradicted in cross examination. Now, it is undisputed 
that Respondent Management has not paid one month wages or compensation while terminating services of 
Petitioner. 


29: Hence, through on going oral and documentary evidence on record, it is established that the Respondent 
undertaking was wounded up with effect from 3.0.997 vide Ex.W3 and retrenchment of the Petitioner Workman 
from service was done due to closure of the undertaking of the Respondent management and in this case provision of 
section 25 FFF of the ID Act would be applicable. 


Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Avon Services (Production Agencies) vs. Industrial Tribunal, Haryana 
dated 6™ October 978, 979 AIR SC 70, has explained the distinction between the provision contained regarding 
retrenchment under section 25 F and 25 FFF of the ID Act. Hon’ble Supreme Court has held:- 


“A comparison of the language employed in_s. 257 and.s._25F (// would bring about in bold relief the 
difference between the phraseology employed by the Legislature and its impact on the resultant rights of the 
workmen. Under.s. 25F a workman employed in an industrial undertaking cannot be retrenched by the 
employer until the payment is made as provided in clauses (a) and (b). Section 25777 (/) provides that the 
workman shall be entitled to notice and compensation in accordance with the provisions of s. 25F if the 
undertaking is closed for any reason, as if the workman has been retrenched. Taking note of this difference in 
language, this Court in State of Bombay & Ors. v. The Hospital Mazdoor Sabha & (5. (/) held that the failure 
to comply with the provision prescribing conditions precedent for valid retrenchment in c. 25F renders the 
order of retrenchment invalid and inoperative. Expounding this position, a Constitution Bench of this Court in 
M/s. Hatisingh Mfg. Co. Ltd. & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.,(2) held that the Legislature has not sought to 
place closure of an undertaking on the same footing as retrenchment under_s. 257, By_s. 257 a prohibition 
against retrenchment until the conditions prescribed by that section are fulfilled, is imposed; by s. 25FFF (॥ 


6988 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


termination of employment on closure of the undertaking without payment of compensation and without either 
serving notice or paying wages in lieu of notice is not prohibited. Payment of compensation and payment of 
wages for the period of notice are not, therefore, conditions precedent to closure. 


As against this, reference was made to Management of Hindustan Steel Ltd. v. The Workmen_& Ors.,(2) 
wherein the management contended that it is a case of closure and the workmen contended that the termination 
was on account of retrenchment. The entire decision turns on the facts of the case. Hindustan Steel Ltd. had set 
up what was described as Ranchi Housing Project and this Project was completed in /966., After completion of 
the residuary work, the services of certain employees were terminated. This termination was questioned 
alleging that it was a case of retrenchment and as the condition precedent was not complied with, the 
retrenchment was invalid. The employer contended that it is a case of closure and payment of compensation 
was not a condition precedent and did not invalidate the termination of service. This Court held that the word 
‘undertaking' as used in s. 25F FF appears to have been used in its ordinary sense connoting thereby any work, 
enterprise, project or business undertaking. It is not intended to cover the entire industry or business of the 
employer. Even closure or stoppage of a part of the business or activities of the employer would seem in law to 
be covered by this sub- section. This question has to be decided on the facts of each case. Examining the facts of 
the case, this Court came to the conclusion that it was a case of closure.” 


Thus, in view of the decision of Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the condition precedent for retrenchment as 
mentioned above under section 25 F of the I.D. Act, 947 is not applicable to the case covered under section 25 FFF 
of the I.D. Act, 947. In the matter at hand, services of Petitioner has been retrenched under section 25 FFF 
Therefore, condition of prior notice and notice pay or compensation prior to retrenchment is not applicable. 


26. Further, the Petitioner witness WWI has stated that while terminating his services the management has 
retained the services of his junior Sri K Suresh Kumar which is illegal in view of the provision contained under 
section 25 G of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Section 25 G reads out as here under:- 


Section 25 — G: “Where any workman in an industrial establishment who is a citizen of India, is to be 
retrenched and he belongs to a particular category of workmen in that establishment, in the absence of any 
agreement between the employer and the workman in this behalf, the employer shall ordinarily retrench the 
workman who was the last person to be employed in that category, unless for reasons to be recorded the 
employer retrenches any other workman.” 


In this context, decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of M/s. Om Oil & Oil Seeds Exchange Ltd., vs. 
Their Workmen, decision dated 28.3.966, 966 AIR 657,is relevant wherein a three Judge Bench of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court has held:- 


“The question then is whether in departing from the rule, the management had acted mala fide, or that its 
action amounted to an unfair labour practice. The Tribunal has to determine in each case whether the 
management has in ordering retrenchment acted fairly and properly and not with any ulterior motive: it cannot 
assume from mere departure from the rule that the management was actuated by improper motives or that the 
management had acted in a manner amounting to an unfair labour practice. Nor has the Tribunal authority to 
sit in appeal over the decision of the management if for valid and justifiable reasons the management has 
departed from the rule that the senior employees may be retrenched before his junior in employment. 


The rule of "first come, last go" is intended to secure an equitable treatment to the employees when, having 
regard to the exigencies of the business, it is necessary to retrench some employees. But in the application of 
the rule the interests of the business cannot be overlooked. The rule has to be applied where other things are 
equal. The management of the business must act fairly to the employees, where however the management bona 
fide retains staff possessing special aptitude in the interests of the business, it cannot be assumed to have acted 
unfairly merely because the rule "first come, last go" is not observed. If retention of a clerical employee is 
regarded as necessary by the management in the interests of the business, that opinion cannot be discarded 
merely on the ground that the clerk concerned is not the seniormost. There is nothing on the record to show that 
there was, among the senior employees, a clerk possessing the aptitude which Jagdish Pershad possessed. 
Kidar Nath Thakural was doing "typing work" and he was retained because he was the only typist with the 
Company. Our attention has not been invited to any evidence that there were other typists who were senior to 
him and they had been retrenched. A typist is undoubtedly a clerk in a business concern but that does not mean 
that every clerk, unless specially trained, can become a competent typist. Om Prakash Juneja was retained 
because he was looking after the records of the Company and was "fully conversant as to where different type 
of records" were "lying", and that this employee was doing the work satisfactorily. A record-keeper's work in a 
business cannot be performed efficiently without special training or long experience. It would be difficult to 
hold that in retrenching employees, if the management retains an efficient record-keeper in preference to a 
senior clerk who has no training or experience in record-keeping, the management acts mala fide or 
improperly, or perpetrates an unfair labour practice. 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 6989 


In the present case the four clerks retained had, beside ex- perience, special skill and aptitude in the particular 
branch of the business of the appellant they were attending to, and the management had retained them because 
of that skill or aptitude. The Labour Court inferred mala fides merely because the management departed from 
the rule "first come, last go". Whether the management in departing from the rule has acted mala fide, must 
depend upon the circumstances of the case : it cannot be inferred merely from departure from the rule.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court as discussed above, the employer can depart 
from provision contained u/s.25G of I.D.Act, |947 and may retain the services of junior employee assigning the 
reason for doing so. Now, we _ proceed to examine whether the action of Respondent of retrenchment of the 
Petitioner Workman while retaining the services of junior clerk Sri K Suresh Kumar is justified. 


27. In this context, Ex.W3 goes to show that vide order dated 9.0.997 the undertaking of the Respondent 
management was closed. At para (j) of Ex.W3 it is specifically mentioned that services of remaining staff will be 
terminated with effect from |.!.997. Those who are retrenched like this will be paid one month pay over and above 
their pay till 3.0.997. Further, at para (h) of Ex.W3 it is mentioned that selection of five personnel as in (g) above 
is to be carried out impartially by Board of Officers nominated by CO, INS Satavahana and at para (g) it is 
mentioned that four drivers and one fitter cum driver be retained out of CNPT staff for running the vehicles at para 
(f) above. Ex.W3 pertains to orders of winding up of Respondent undertaking of non-public transport and there is 
no mention of retaining any staff of clerical cadre. However, Ex.W4/I order dated 28.0.996 containing proposal 
for revision of salary of Command NPT Fund Staff. Ex.W4/2 is the enclosure to INS Satavahana letter dated 
28.0.996. This document contains list of number of workmen engaged. Petitioner submits that services of the 
workmen mentioned at serial No.2, 3, 5, 0, 3, 4, 5, |7 and l8, total 8 workmen has been retrenched. Whereas 
workmen named at serial No.l-R. Shankar Rao -fitter, No.4. B. Reddy- driver, No.6 0. Krishna Rao-driver, No.7 T 
Suribabu-driver, No.8 - K Suresh Kumar-clerk, No.9- Sri T. Viswesara Rao- Driver, ।१०.| Ch. Suryanarayana-driver, 
No.l2 M. Sampath Rao-driver and No.l6- A Viswanatham-cleaner have been retained by Respondent in service. 
Undisputedly Sri K Suresh Kumar, clerk who has been retained by the Respondent for the work is junior to the 
Petitioner Sri A Tulsidas in terms of date of appointment and length of the service. However, the Respondent in his 
counter has furnished explanation and reasons for winding up of undertaking and retaining Sri K Suresh Kumar as 
clerk in employment on closure of the undertaking. As per Ex.W3 non-public fund transport was closed with effect 
from 5" October 997 due to paucity of funds and it is now functioning with two vehicles for very limited purpose. 
With the closure of said undertaking some of the employees including Petitioner could not be continued due to lack 
of work. Since the non-public fund transport is only a local fund, no service rules are applicable and Respondent has 
a right to appoint /terminate the services of any individual at anytime and continue the services of a junior person 
considering the competency of the individual. Thus, the Respondent has assigned reasons for retaining Sri K. Suresh 
Kumar a junior in the cadre of clerk and Petitioner along with the other Workmen has been retrenched due to lack of 
work. Sri K Suresh Kumar has been retained by the Respondent management for doing the work in preference to 
Petitioner in view of competency in work. However, ४७] was not cross examined by Petitioner on the point of 
competency of Sri K. Suresh Kumar, hence, this fact remained uncontraverted. Therefore, in view of fore gone 
discussion and law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court as discussed above, the plea of the Petitioner that he has 
been retrenched in contravention of the provision of section 25G of the I.D. Act, 947 is not tenable. 


In the case of Regional Manager, SBI vs Rakesh Kumar Tewari dated 3..2006, AIR 2006 Supreme Court 839, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court has held:- 


“Section 25G provides for the procedure for retrenchment of a workman. The Respondents have correctly 
submitted that the provisions of Sections 25G and 25H of the Act do not require that the workman should have 
been in continuous employment within the meaning of Section 25B before he could said to have been 
retrenched. The decision in Central Bank of India v. S. Satyam (7996) 5 SCC 479 is clear authority on the issue. 
We see no reason to take a contrary view. Section 25G requires the employer to "ordinarily retrench the 
workman who was the last person to be employed in a particular category of workman unless for reasons to be 
recorded the employer retrenches any other workman". This "last come first go", rule predicates. 7) that the 
workman retrenched belongs to a particular category; 2) that there was no agreement to the contrary, 3) that 
the employer had not recorded any reasons for not following the principle. These are all questions of fact in 
respect of which evidence would have to be led, the onus to prove the first requirement being on the workman 
and the second and third requirements on the employer. Necessarily a fair opportunity of leading such evidence 
must be available to both parties. This would in turn entail laying of a foundation for the case in the pleadings. 
If the plea is not put forward such an opportunity is denied, quite apart from the principle that no amount of 
evidence can be looked into unless such a plea is raised. [See Siddik Mahomed Shah vs. Mt. Saran AIR /930 
PC 57 (0), Bondar Singh & Or. Vs.Nihal Singh and Ors. (2003) 4 SCC 767॥. 


In J.K.Iron_ and Steel Company Ltd. vs. The Iron and Steel Mazdoor Union Kanpur (/955) 2 SCR 73/5, the 
court noted that even though industrial tribunals are not bound by all technicalities of civil courts: 


6990 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


" they must nevertheless follow the same general pattern. Now the only point of requiring pleadings and issues 
is to ascertain the real dispute between the parties, to narrow the area of conflict and to see just where the two 
sides differ. It is not open to the Tribunals to fly off at a tangent and disregarding the pleadings, to reach any 
conclusions that they think are just and proper". 


In the first appeal, the Respondent had raised no allegation of violation of Section 25G in his statement of claim 
before the Industrial Tribunal. His only case was that Section 25H of the Act had been violated. Section 
25H unlike Section 25G deals with a situation where the retrenchment is assumed to have been validly made. In 
the circumstances, if the employer wishes to re employ any employee, he must offer to employ retrenched 
workman first and give them preference over others. The two sections viz 25G and 25H therefore operate in 
different fields and deal with two contradictory fact situations. The Tribunal ignored the fact that there was no 
pleading by the Respondent in support of an alleged violation of Section 2506, Indeed the order of reference by 
the Central Government did not also refer to Section 25G but only to Section 25H. In the circumstances it was 
not open to the Tribunal to "go off on a tangent" 


and conclude that the termination of service of the Respondent was invalid because of any violation of 
Section 25G by the appellant.” 


On going the evidence on record, I am constrained to conclude that the Petitioner has failed to plead and prove that 
while terminating the services of Petitioner management is departing from rule enumerated under section 25G has 
acted malafide or that its action amounts to unfair labour practice. Respondent management has departed from 
principle contained under section 25G for a justifiable and valid reason of competency of junior clerk Sri K Suresh 
Kumar. However, as regard plea of non-payment of compensation and payment of one month wages in view of 
principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court it is not condition precedent to case of retrenchment in case of closure in 
view of law laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court in case of Avon Services (Production Agencies) vs. Industrial 
Tribunal, Haryana. 


Therefore, issue is decided accordingly against the Petitioner and in favour of Respondent. 


28. Issue No. HI: In this context, Respondent has contended that claim of Petitioner for regularization in the 
service of Respondent, is not maintainable because Petitioner Sri A. Tulsidas had filed OA No. 739/94 in the 
Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad and Hon’ble Tribunal dismissed the OA filed by Petitioner by 
order dated 25.7.997. Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad in that OA No.739 /94 has decided the 
matter on merit that Petitioner applicant is not eligible for regularization. Therefore, Petitioner raising the same plea 
of his regularization again before the Hon’ble Industrial Tribunal in his petition is barred by principle of res judi cata. 
Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad vide order dated 25.7.997 in the OA No.739 of 94 has already 
rejected the claim of Petitioner for regularization as he was not eligible for regularization in the employment. 
Therefore, the claim of Petitioner for regularization is barred by res judi cata. 


29. Perused the record. Petitioner in his claim petition has averred that he filled OA No.739 of 94 in the Hon’ble 
Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad against the Respondent for ignoring his seniority and claiming 
regularisation in services. Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal in para of 5 and 6 of its order has observed is 
being reproduced verbatim as hereunder:- 


“having stated this, I also consider it necessary to add that the applicant had indeed been rendering continuous 
service in various units of the Navy no matter in which capacity of status. The very fact that he had been asked to 
perform clerical duty and which he continues to do even at present indicates that his services were apparently 
found useful and efficient. Considering this background the Respondents are to extend the benefit of any 
provision which might enable him to improve his service prospects under any scheme which may be evolved by 
the government in future.” 


30. Perusal of the order of Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad goes to reveal that the Petitioner 
had filed OA 739 of 94 for claiming regularization in the services of the Respondent against the existing vacancies 
and Hon’ble Tribunal vide its order dated 25.7.997 has observed as hereunder: - 


“6. It is evident that the applicant as well as the two private Respondents named in the OA were alike recruited 
and deployed in a manner similar to one another in vacancies of unskilled labourers and were later utilised 
similarly in non public fund activity. However, the difference between applicant and the other two is that 
whereas the former worked for certain period between January 7962 to November /963 only, the other two 
officials worked as casual labourers from 7962 through /966, The Board of officers which scrutinised the cases 
and claims of all casual labourers in August /997, was guided solely by the basic eligibility conditions, like 
number of days of engagement and the precise period of such engagement. The position was that the applicant, 
not being in service in /965-87 then he had been working in non-public fund activities for the preceding 2 
years-was not eligible to be considered. Indeed his name never went before the board of officers for scrutiny 
while this was so in the case of the applicant Mr Srihari Rao and Mr Appanna were duly considered on the 
ground that they were employed as nerrick- rated unskilled casual labourers in /965, the year in which the 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 699] 


basic procedures for such regularisation were laid down by the Ministry and although the actual scrutiny of 
cases was done only in /997, the scheme and instructions had their starting-point in /963 onwards. 


7. Thus, although it is a fact that the applicant has been continuing in some capacity to work for the 
Respondents and even if he has been asked to perform some of the clerical duties, he cannot be said that he had 
been on regular nerrick-rated casual service after /963, To that extent he cannot possibly claim any relief 
under the provisions of a scheme for which he is not eligible. As regards the two officials referred to above, I 
find the explanation given by the Respondents satisfactory in as much as they were regularised wholly in 
accordance with their status and eligibility as per instructions and provisions of the scheme. In any case, any 
right or wrong done in their case cannot buy itself result in the creation of any right for the applicant who has 
to demonstrate his entitlement on the strength of his own eligibility in terms of the same scheme. And this he has 
not succeeded in doing. 


Thus, from the above order of Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal it is clear that the Petitioner was found not 
eligible for regularization in the services of Respondent and his petition was dismissed. Thus, issue of regularisation 
of the Petitioner in the services of the Respondent management has already been heard and decided by the competent 
Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal on merit after hearing both the parties and said order of Hon’ble Central 
Administrative Tribunal operates as res judi cata against the Petitioner as per provision contained under section || of 
Code of Civil Procedure. 


Section || of the Code of Civil Procedure provides enumerate principle of Res judi cata as reproduced hereunder: - 


No Court shall try any suit or issue in which the matter directly and substantially in issue has been directly and 
substantially in issue in a former suit between the same parties, or between parties under whom they or any of 
them claim, litigating under the same title, in a Court competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit in which 
such issue has been subsequently raised, and has been heard and finally decided by such Court. 


Explanation I .-The expression "former suit" shall denote a suit which has been decided prior to the suit in 
question whether or not it was instituted prior thereto. 


Explanation II .-For the purposes of this section, the competence of a Court shall be determined irrespective of 
any provisions as to a right of appeal from the decision of such Court. 


Explanation III .-The matter above referred to must in the former suit have been alleged by one party and either 
denied or admitted, expressly or impliedly, by the other. 

Explanation IV.-Any matter which might and ought to have been made ground of defence or attack in such 
former suit shall be deemed to have been a matter directly and substantially in issue in such suit. 


Explanation V.-Any relief claimed in the plaint, which is not expressly granted by the decree, shall, for the 
purposes of this section, be deemed to have been refused. 

Explanation VI .-Where persons litigate bona fide in respect of a public right or of a private right claimed in 
common for themselves and others, all persons interested in such right shall, for the purposes of this section, be 
deemed to claim under the persons so litigating. 


Explanation VII .-The provisions of this section shall apply to a proceeding for the execution of a decree and 
references in this section to any suit, issue or former suit shall be construed as references, respectively, to a 
proceeding for the execution of the decree, question arising in such proceeding and a former proceeding for the 
execution of that decree. 


Explanation VIII .-An issue heard and finally decided by a Court of limited jurisdiction, competent to decide 
such issue, shall operate as res judicata in a subsequent suit, notwithstanding that such Court of limited 
jurisdiction was not competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has been subsequently 
raised.” 
Thus, in view of provision contained under Sec.ll of Code of Civil Procedure, no Court shall try any suit or issue in 
which the matter directly and substantially in a former suit between the same parties, or between parties under whom 
they or any of them claim, litigating under the same title, in a Court competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit 
in which such issue has been subsequently raised, and has been heard and finally decided by such Court. In the 
present case the issue of regularization of the Petitioner has already been heard and decided on merit by the Hon’ble 
Central Government Administrative Tribunal in the OA No.739 of 94 vide its order dated 25.7.997 therein same 
parties were litigants under same title. Therefore, claim of Petitioner, reagitating the same issue of regularization in 
the present petition which has been decided by competent court in O.A. No.739 of 994 vide order dated 25.7.997 is 
barred by principle of res judi cata, hence, not maintainable. 
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Workmen of the Strawboard vs. M/s.Straw Board Manufacturing Co. Ltd., 
AIR 974 SC 32 has held:- 


“25. It is now well established that, although the entire Civil Procedure Code is not applicable to industrial 
adjudication, the principles of res judicata laid down under section // of the Code of Civil Procedure, however, 
are applicable, wherever possible, for very good reasons. This is so since multiplicity of litigation and agitation 
and re-agitation of the same dispute at issue between the same employer and his employees will not be 


6992 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


conducive to industrial peace which is the principal object of all labour legislation bearing on industrial 
adjudication. But whether a matter in dispute in a subsequent case had earlier been directly and substantially in 
issue between the same parties and the same had been heard and finally decided by the Tribunal will be of 
pertinent consideration and will have to be determined before holding in a particular case that the principles of 
res judicata are attracted.” 
Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above claim of 
Petitioner for regularization in the services of Respondent raised the present petition is barred by principle of res judi 
cata. 
This, Issue is decided against the Petitioner and in favour of the Respondent. 
3l. Issue No.IV:- In view of the finding given at Issue Nos. I, If and III the Petitioner Sri A. Tulsidas has been 
terminated from service by the Respondent for the closure of undertaking, hence the petitioner’s case is covered under 
section 25FFF of the I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, as per provision contained under Section 25FFF, Petitioner is entitled 
for compensation in accordance with the provision of section 25 F(b) as if the Workman has been retrenched from 
service. 
Therefore this issue is decided accordingly. 
AWARD 
In view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Issues No.l, I] & IV, I am of the considered view 
that the action of the Respondent Command Non-Public Fund Transport, INS Satavahana, Visakhapatnam in 
terminating the services of the Petitioner Sri Allam Tulsidas is held legal and justified. | However, Petitioner is 
entitled for compensation in view of the provision contained u/s.25FFF of I.D. Act, !947 as per contained Section 
25F(b) of I.D. Act, 947. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 
Dictated to Smt. P. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her and corrected by me on this the 29" 
day of September, 2025. 
IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri A. Tulasidas ५७४]: Sri Lt Cdr TK Sahoo 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Ex.WI: Photostat copy of service particulars of workman 
Ex.W2: Photostat copy of charge list 
Ex.W3:Photostat copy of Ir. reg. winding up of command non-public transport dt.9.0.97 
Ex.W4/I:Photostat copy of Ir. dt.28.0.96 reg.proposal for revision of salary of command NPT staff 
Ex.W4/2:Photostat copy of Encl. to INS Satavahana Ir.No.436/66/4 dt.28.0.96 
Ex.WS5: Photostat copy of Ir. for regularization of Petitioner’s services dt.l7.9.97 
Ex.W6:Photostat copy of Ir. for regularization of Petitioner’s services dt.5..93 
Ex.W7: Photostat copy of Ir. dt.l8.0.94 reg. transfer of CNPFT to INS Satavahana 
Ex.W8: Photostat copy of hiring of transports-files list 982-94 
Ex.W9:Photostat copy of Ir.forwarding muster roll of Petitioner dt.30/3.2.94 to INS Satavahana 
Ex.W0:Photostat copy of Ir. forwarding of hiring of transport bills for the m/o Nov’94 dt.23.2.94 
Ex.WI:Photostat copy of reg.sanctions of Respondent dt.26.2.83 


Documents marked for the Respondent 
NIL 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 नवम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 4970.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार भारतीय खाद्य निगम के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 6993 


विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, चेन्नई के Gare (सन्दर्भ Fea 42/207) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04/44/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल-22043/0॥/202 5-आईआर/(सी-एम-])] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक/लिंक अधिकारी 


New Delhi, the 7th November, 2025 


S.O. 970.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ([4 of 947), the Central 
Governent hereby publishes the Award ( Reference.I.D.No. 4/207) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, CHANNAI as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of Food 
Corporations of India and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 04////2025. 


[No. L-2203/0/2025— IR (CM-ID] 
SALONI, Dy. Director/Link officer 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL- CUM - LABOUR COURT 
CHENNAI 
ID No. 4/207 
Present: SUSHIL KUMAR-II, PRESIDING OFFICER 
Date:  29-0-2025 
Smt. A. Karpagam, 
W/o Anandakumar, 
No.l/4, Kothandaraman Street, 
Old Washermenpet, 
Chennai — 600 02I : [7 Party/Petitioner 
AND 
The Management of the Food Corporation of India 
(South Zone) Employees Co-operative Society Ltd, 
New No.40, Old No.33, 274 Floor, 
Vepery High Road, Periamet, 
Chennai-600 003. हे 274 Party / Respondent 
Award 


Whereas an Industrial Dispute between the workman and the management has been filed before this Tribunal 
by the First Party directly under Section 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 200 for adjudication, 
and the same has been taken on the file of this Tribunal as ID 4/207, due notices were issued to both parties for 
their appearance. 


2; The ID case is called out. The Respondent is not present. When the matter was taken up for hearing, the 
Learned Counsel for the Petitioner filed a memo stating that the Petitioner has decided to withdraw the case since she 
has settled the case directly with the Respondent by entering into a settlement under Section |8() of the Industrial 
Dispute Act,!947 on 7.04.2025. The Counsel, therefore, prays that this Hon’ble Tribunal may be pleased to dismiss 
the above Industrial Dispute being I.D. No.4I/207 as settled and withdrawn. 


3. In view of the above reasons, Industrial Dispute filed by the Petitioner is dismissed as withdrawn. 
An Award is passed accordingly. 
SUSHIL KUMAR-I, Presiding Officer 


6994 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 नवम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 974.—aileifre विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार भारतीय खाद्य निगम के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, चेन्नई के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संखया 36/207) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04/44/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. WA-2203/0/202 5-आईआर/(सी-एम-])] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक/लिंक अधिकारी 


New Delhi, the 7th November, 2025 


S.O. 97.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Reference.I.D.No. 36/20l7) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, CHANNAI as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of Food Corporations of India and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 04///2025. 


[No. L-2203/0/2025 — IR (CM-II)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director/Link officer 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL- CUM - LABOUR COURT 
CHENNAI 
ID No. 36/207 


Present: SUSHIL KUMAR-II, PRESIDING OFFICER 
Date: 29-0-2025 
Smt. M. Reena, 


W/o S. Janakiraman, 
No.84-B, Kalayanapuam Main Road, 
Vyasarpadi, 
Chennai-600 039. : [7 Party/Petitioner 
AND 
The Management of the Food Corporation of India 
(South Zone) Employees Co-operative Society Ltd, 
New No.40, Old No.33, 274 Floor, 
Vepery High Road, Periamet, 
Chennai-600 003. : 274 Party / Respondent 
AWARD 


Whereas an Industrial Dispute between the workman and the management has been filed before this Tribunal 
by the First Party directly under Section 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 200 for adjudication, 
and the same has been taken on the file of this Tribunal as ID 36/20l7, due notices were issued to both parties for 
their appearance. 


2. The ID case is called out. The Respondent is not present. When the matter was taken up for hearing, the 
Learned Counsel for the Petitioner filed a memo stating that the Petitioner has decided to withdraw the case since she 
has settled the case directly with the Respondent by entering into a settlement under Section 8() of the Industrial 
Dispute Act,!947 on 7.04.2025. The Counsel, therefore, prays that this Hon’ble Tribunal may be pleased to dismiss 
the above Industrial Dispute being I.D. No.36/207 as settled and withdrawn. 


3. In view of the above reasons, Industrial Dispute filed by the Petitioner is dismissed as withdrawn. 
An Award is passed accordingly. 
SUSHIL KUMAR-I, Presiding Officer 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 6995 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 नवम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 4972.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार भारतीय खाद्य निगम के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, चेन्नई के tare (सन्दर्भ Wea 37/207) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04,//44,/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. Vot-2203/0I/2025-ang आर .(सी.एम-)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक/लिंक अधिकारी 


New Delhi, the 7th November, 2025 


S.O. 972.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Reference.I.D.No. 37/20l7) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, CHANNAI as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of Food Corporations of India and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 04////2025 


[No. L-2203/0/2025 — IR (CM-II)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director/Link officer 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL- CUM - LABOUR COURT 


CHENNAI 
ID No. 37/207 
Present: SUSHIL KUMAR-ITI, PRESIDING OFFICER 
Date: 29-0-2025 


Smt. K. Vijayachandrika, 
W/o V.Anandha Amirtharaj, 
No.48/36, First Street, Thiruvalluvar Nagar, 
Korrukkupet, Chennai - 600 02l. : [7 Party/Petitioner 
AND 
The Management of the Food Corporation of India 
(South Zone) Employees Co-operative Society Ltd, 
New No.40, Old No.33, 2"! Floor, 
Vepery High Road, Periamet, 
Chennai-600 003. : 2™ Party / Respondent 
AWARD 


Whereas an Industrial Dispute between the workman and the management has been filed before this Tribunal 
by the First Party directly under Section 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 200 for adjudication, 
and the same has been taken on the file of this Tribunal as ID 37/207, due notices were issued to both parties for 
their appearance. 


2. The ID case is called out. The Respondent is not present. When the matter was taken up for hearing, the 
Learned Counsel for the Petitioner filed a memo stating that the Petitioner has decided to withdraw the case since she 
has settled the case directly with the Respondent by entering into a settlement under Section |8() of the Industrial 
Dispute Act,!947 on 7.04.2025. The Counsel, therefore, prays that this Hon’ble Tribunal may be pleased to dismiss 
the above Industrial Dispute being I.D. No.37/207 as settled and withdrawn. 


3. In view of the above reasons, Industrial Dispute filed by the Petitioner is dismissed as withdrawn. An Award 
is passed accordingly. 


SUSHIL KUMAR-II, Presiding Officer 


6996 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 नवम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 4973.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार भारतीय खाद्य निगम के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको | और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, चेन्नई के tare (सन्दर्भ Fea 38/207) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04,//44,/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[a. Vet-2203/0I/2025-ang आर .(सी.एम-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक/लिंक अधिकारी 


New Delhi, the 7th November, 2025 


S.O. 973.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of l947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Reference..D.No. 38/20l7) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, CHANNAI as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of Food Corporations of India and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 04////2025 


[No. L-2203/0/2025 — IR (CM-ID)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director/Link officer 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL- CUM - LABOUR COURT 
CHENNAI 
ID No. 38/207 
Present: SUSHIL KUMAR-II, PRESIDING OFFICER 
Date: 29-0-2025 

Smt. N.S. Subbulakshmi, 
W/o Pathmanaban, 
No.I2/93, Perambur High Road, 
Perambur, Chennai — 600 0] : [7 Party/Petitioner 


AND 
The Management of the Food Corporation of India 


(South Zone) Employees Co-operative Society Ltd, 
New No.40, Old No.33, 2" Floor, 
Vepery High Road, Periamet, 
Chennai-600 003. : 2™ Party / Respondent 
AWARD 


Whereas an Industrial Dispute between the workman and the management has been filed before this Tribunal 
by the First Party directly under Section 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 200 for adjudication, 
and the same has been taken on the file of this Tribunal as ID 38/20l7, due notices were issued to both parties for 
their appearance. 


2. The ID case is called out. The Respondent is not present. When the matter was taken up for hearing, the 
Learned Counsel for the Petitioner filed a memo stating that the Petitioner has decided to withdraw the case since she 
has settled the case directly with the Respondent by entering into a settlement under Section 8() of the Industrial 
Dispute Act,!947 on 7.04.2025. The Counsel, therefore, prays that this Hon’ble Tribunal may be pleased to dismiss 
the above Industrial Dispute being I.D. No.38/207 as settled and withdrawn. 


3. In view of the above reasons, Industrial Dispute filed by the Petitioner is dismissed as withdrawn. 
An Award is passed accordingly. 
SUSHIL KUMAR-I, Presiding Officer 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 6997 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 नवम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 4974.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार भारतीय खाद्य निगम के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, चेन्नई के tare (सन्दर्भ Feat 39/207) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04,//44,//2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल-22043/04/2025-आई आर .(सी.एम- ID] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक/लिंक अधिकारी 
New Delhi, the 7th November, 2025 


S.O. 974.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Reference.I.D.No. 39/207) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, CHANNAI as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of Food Corporations of India and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 04////2025. 


[No. L-2203/0/2025 — IR (CM-ID)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director/Link officer 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL- CUM - LABOUR COURT 


CHENNAI 
ID No. 39/20I7 
Present: SUSHIL KUMAR-II, PRESIDING OFFICER 
Date: 29-0-2025 
Smt. R. Premalatha, 
W/o Sivakumar, 
No.l3, Vijayalakshmi Avenue, 
Poonamallee, 
Chennai — 600 056 | [४ Party/Petitioner 
AND 
The Management of the Food Corporation of India 
(South Zone) Employees Co-operative Society Ltd, 
New No.40, Old No.33, 2" Floor, 
Vepery High Road, Periamet, 
Chennai-600 003. : 274 Party / Respondent 
AWARD 


Whereas an Industrial Dispute between the workman and the management has been filed before this Tribunal 
by the First Party directly under Section 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 200 for adjudication, 
and the same has been taken on the file of this Tribunal as ID 39/207, due notices were issued to both parties for 
their appearance. 


2, The ID case is called out. The Respondent is not present. When the matter was taken up for hearing, the 
Learned Counsel for the Petitioner filed a memo stating that the Petitioner has decided to withdraw the case since she 
has settled the case directly with the Respondent by entering into a settlement under Section |8() of the Industrial 
Dispute Act,!947 on 7.04.2025. The Counsel, therefore, prays that this Hon’ble Tribunal may be pleased to dismiss 
the above Industrial Dispute being I.D. No.39/207 as settled and withdrawn. 


3. In view of the above reasons, Industrial Dispute filed by the Petitioner is dismissed as withdrawn. An Award 
is passed accordingly. 


SUSHIL KUMAR-I, Presiding Officer 


6998 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 नवम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 4975.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार भारतीय खाद्य निगम के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, चेन्नई के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ Fea 40/207) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04/44/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल-22043/04/2025-आई आर .(सी.एम-])] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक/लिंक अधिकारी 


New Delhi, the 7th November, 2025 


S.O. 975.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Reference.I.D.No.40/207) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, CHANNAI as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of Food 
Corporations of India and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 04////2025. 


[No. L-2203/0/2025 — IR (CM-ID] 
SALONI, Dy. Director/Link officer 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL- CUM - LABOUR COURT 
CHENNAI 
ID No. 40/207 
Present: SUSHIL KUMAR-II, PRESIDING OFFICER 
Date: 29-0-2025 
Smt. V. Ponni, 
W/o Viswapathy, 
No.46, Bajanai Koil Street, 
Thennai Big Village, Thirumalpur Post, 
Arokonam, Vellore District : [४ Party/Petitioner 
AND 
The Management of the Food Corporation of India 
(South Zone) Employees Co-operative Society Ltd, 
New No.40, Old १२०.33, 2" Floor, 
Vepery High Road, Periamet, 
Chennai-600 003. : 274 Party / Respondent 
Award 


Whereas an Industrial Dispute between the workman and the management has been filed before this Tribunal 

by the First Party directly under Section 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 200 for adjudication, 
and the same has been taken on the file of this Tribunal as ID 40/207, due notices were issued to both parties for 
their appearance. 
2. The ID case is called out. The Respondent is not present. When the matter was taken up for hearing, the 
Learned Counsel for the Petitioner filed a memo stating that the Petitioner has decided to withdraw the case since she 
has settled the case directly with the Respondent by entering into a settlement under Section |8() of the Industrial 
Dispute Act,!947 on 7.04.2025. The Counsel, therefore, prays that this Hon’ble Tribunal may be pleased to dismiss 
the above Industrial Dispute being I.D. No.40/207 as settled and withdrawn. 


3. In view of the above reasons, Industrial Dispute filed by the Petitioner is dismissed as withdrawn. 
An Award is passed accordingly. 
SUSHIL KUMAR-II, Presiding Officer 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 6999 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 नवम्बर, 2025 
का.आ. 4976.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार ई सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको | और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, आसनसोल कंपंचाट(एलसी/आर-46/2009) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 03,/44,/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल-2202/33/2008-आई आर .(सी.एम-ा)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक/लिंक अधिकारी 
New Delhi, the 7th November, 2025 

S.O. 976.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Reference.LC/R/6/2009) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management 

of ECL and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 03/7I/2025 
[No. L-2202/33/2008 — IR (CM-I])] 
SALONI, Dy. Director/Link officer 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM- LABOUR COURT, 
ASANSOL. 
PRESENT: Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 
Presiding Officer, 


C.G.I.T-cum-L.C., Asansol. 
REFERENCE CASE NO. 6 OF 2009 
PARTIES: Bistu Das and |! Others 
Vs. 
Management of Bhojudih Coal Washery, BCCL 


REPRESENTATIVES: 
For the Union/Workmen: None. 
For the Management of BCCL: Mr. P. K. Das, Advocate. 
INDUSTRY: Coal 
STATE: West Bengal. 
Dated: 24.09.2025 
AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section (l) and Sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Government of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2202/33/2008-IR(CM-II) dated 3.03.2009 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer, that is the Management of Bhojudih Coal Washery of Bharat Coking Coal Limited and their workmen for 
adjudication by this Tribunal. 

SCHEDULE 
“ Whether the demand of Rashtriya Colliery Mazdoor Sangh for regularization of Shri Bistu Das and I] 


other contract labour w.e.f. July 7993 with the management of Bhojudih Coal Washery of M/s. B.C.C.Ltd. is 
legal and justified? To what relief the claimants are entitled for? ” 


On receiving Order No. L-2202/33/2008-IR(CM-II) dated 3.03.2009 from the Government of India 
Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, a Reference case was registered on l3.04.2009 and an 
order was passed for issuing notice to the parties through registered post, directing them to appear and submit their 
written statements along with relevant documents in support of their claims. 


7000 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


2; President, Rashtriya Colliery Mazdoor Sangh, Dhanbad field written statement on behalf of the 2 aggrieved 
workmen on 20.05.2009. Fact of the case in brief as disclosed in the written statement is that Bistu Das and eleven 
others namely, Karmu Mahato, Nitai Mahato, Balaram Mahato, Durga Charan Mahato, Gandhari Mahato, Nitai 
Mahato, Mohan Mahato, Bhiswa Mahato, Muruli Mahato, Kalipada Mahato and Adhir Gorain are working at 
Bhojudih Coal Washery under Bharat Coking Coal Limited (hereinafter referred to as BCCL) since July, 993 and 
were engaged in the work for cleaning and maintenance of the Marshalling Yard of Bhojudih Coal Washery which 
was previously performed by the Railways. The management of the Washery bore the expenditure incurred for 
cleaning and maintenance of Marshalling Yard since inception of Bhojudih Coal Washery. After the Railways 
discontinued the cleaning and maintenance work, management took up the job of cleaning and maintenance of 
Marshalling Yard through the aforementioned workmen under its direct supervision and control since July, 993. The 
workmen were engaged in the cleaning and maintenance work, performed their work on regular basis and 
continuously as the job is of permanent nature. Further case of the union is that the concerned workmen are rendering 
service for several years in uninterrupted manner and their job is an integral part of Coal Washery’s operation which 
is engaged with the production and dispatch of washery products. Though the workmen are employees of the 
management, the management of Bhojudih Coal Washery have been paying wages to the workmen through 
contractors, far below the permissible rate provided under National Coal Wage Agreement (hereinafter referred to as 
NCWA) and Coal Mines Provident Fund (hereinafter referred to as CMPF) contributions are deducted from the wages 
of the employees and they have CMPF Account Numbers. According to the union the engagement of workmen 
through contractors are merely for the purpose of paper arrangement which is done by preparing work-orders in the 
name of contractors, Attendance Register, Payment Sheets, etc. The apparent engagement of the workmen through 
contractors is actually sham and with the object to camouflage the fact that the workmen are actually under the 
supervision and control of the principal employer i.e., the management of Bhojudih Coal Washery. In the instant case 
under reference the union has prayed for regularization of the workmen under the management of Bhojudih Coal 
Washery w.e.f. July, |993 and for payment of all pecuniary benefits / entitlement and back wages. 


3. Management filed their written statement on 4.08.20l2 denying the material assertions and claims made by 
the union. The facts disclosed in the written statement is that there is no employer - employee relationship between 
the management and the concerned workmen and the claim of the union that the concerned workmen are entitled to be 
regularized as permanent employees is not legally tenable. According to the management the persons named in the 
Order of Reference were never engaged by the management and they were engaged by the contractors to execute the 
work-orders issued by the management. The concerned workmen received their wages and all benefits form the 
contractors and their attendance used to be maintained by the contractors. The management denied having any 
obligation towards the contractual workmen and urged that the management is justified in not regularizing the 
concerned workmen and they are not entitled to any relief. 


4. Union filed a rejoinder on 0.0.203. It is claimed by the union that the workmen at Bhojudih Coal 
Washery are under direct control and supervision of the management of BCCL and that they are performing their job 
for several years which would indicate that the work performed by the workmen is permanent in nature and only to 
avoid regularization of the workmen as employees of BCCL the management has engaged contractors to camouflage 
the relationship. 


3. In the present case Mr. Dipak Kumar Majee, Secretary of Rashtriya Colliery Mazdoor Sangh, Bhojudih Unit 
has adduced evidence on behalf of the workmen. He filed an affidavit-in-chief in support of the claim of the union. In 
his affidavit-in-chief the witness stated that the referred workers namely, Bistu Das and eleven others are performing 
the job at Bhojudih Coal Washery since 993 and their work is of permanent and perennial nature. The workmen 
performed their work under the supervision and control of management of Bhojudih Coal Washery on regular basis 
and sometimes even on Sundays and holidays on the instruction of management. The witness further stated that their 
job is of permanent nature and their contribution towards CMPF is deducted from their wages. The witness prayed for 
regularization of the workmen for their long and continuous service rendered for cleaning and maintenance of 
Marshalling Yard and Railway Tracks of Bhojudih Coal Washery. 


6. On cross-examination it transpires that the concerned workmen are members of union namely, Rashtriya 
Colliery Mazdoor Sangh, Bhojudih Unit. During his cross-examination on 24.08.206 the witness stated that Karmu 
Mahato has expired and other workmen are alive. From the copy of Death Certificate in the record it appears that 
Bishwa Mahato, another employee has expired on 3.02.20I4. It may be presumed that the rest of the employees are 
alive and still working. No evidence has been adduced by the management to the contrary. Initially, the case was 
being conducted by Mr. N. Ganguly, learned advocate, who appeared for the union. Subsequently, the union went 
unrepresented from 26.08.2024. Management adduced no evidence in this case, though Mr. P. K. Das, learned 
advocate for the management participated on all dates. 


7. Advancing his argument, learned advocate for the management of Bhojudih Coal Washery submitted that the 
workmen did not adduce any evidence to establish their relationship with the management of Bhojudih Coal Washery, 
as their employer. Therefore, by no stretch of imagination it can be held that there was an employer-employee 
relationship between the respondent company and the !2 workmen. It is further argued that the union has failed to 
prove their case and did not produce any document to prove the period for which the workmen rendered continuous 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 700] 


service at Bhojudih Coal Washery. Mr. P. K. Das argued that the workmen have participated periodically for cleaning 
and maintenance of Marshalling Yard and Railway Tracks and they had worked under the contractor firms to whom 
the maintenance work was assigned. It is argued that there was no supervision or control of the management of BCCL 
over the !2 workmen, as such the prayer of the union for regularization of the workmen is not tenable and they are not 
entitled to any relief. 


8. No argument has been advanced on behalf of the union after the case was fixed up on 05.03.2025 and 
thereafter |.03.2025 for hearing of argument. 


9. Having considered the pleadings of the parties, evidence on record and argument advanced by Mr. Das, 
learned advocate for the management of BCCL, I find that the management of Bhojudih Coal Washery has admitted 
that the enlisted workmen performed work at Bhojudih Coal Washery and were engaged through the contractor. In 
respect of the claim in the written statement that all the [2 workmen performed cleaning and maintenance of the 
Marshalling Yard and Railway Tracks at Bhojudih Coal Washery since July, 993 has not been denied by the 
management. The management being the custodian of all records did not suggest any alternative case that the 
workmen engaged during any other period or that their identities could not be verified. It is therefore clear that the 2 
workmen named in the Reference were engaged for performing cleaning and maintenance of Marshalling Yard and 
Railway Tracks at Bhojudih Coal Washery. The work performed was invariably permanent and perennial in nature 
which transpires from the fact that all these workmen have served the management of Bhojudih Coal Washery 
uninterrupted and continuously since 993 and Coal Mines Provident Fund accounts were maintained in their names. 
Cleaning and maintenance of Marshalling Yard and Railway Tracks are integral part of activity of a Coal Washery as 
functional Railway Tracks are essential for importing raw materials and dispatch of Washery products. I, therefore, 
hold that the concerned workmen are in continuous employment for a long period and in regular manner at Bhojudih 
Coal Washery. For the purpose of deciding the question as to regularization, the twin test which needs to be 
satisfied are as follows : 


Firstly, it is to be ascertained as to who was making the payment of monthly wages to the workman and 
Secondly, under whose supervision they were working. 


0. Under the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, the burden of proving the facts specially within the 
knowledge of the management of BCCL lies upon the employer management. It has been claimed by the principal 
employer that the !2 workmen were engaged through contractors but the management has not produced any 
document to prove the terms of engagement of the petitioners through contractor firms and the duration for which it 
had assigned the work of cleaning and maintenance to the different firms. The management failed to produce any 
license of the contractor firms engage for the work which is essential under the Contract Labour (Regulation & 
Abolition) Act, 970. The fact and circumstances clearly indicate that the engagement of the 2 workmen under 
contractors was a mere adjustment in paper to coverup the fact that !2 workmen actually under the supervision and 
control of the management of Bharat Coking Coal Limited, rendering long and uninterrupted service. The concerned 
workmen have been performing their assigned duties without any break and there is no case of the management that 
they have been inducted in their work in any illegal manner. They also received their wages through their Bank 
accounts. The workman enjoyed the Health Benefits from BCCL which is evident from the Health Cards issued in the 
name of the workmen by the Assistant Manager (P), Bhojudih Coal Washery, Santaldih, Purulia. 


Il. It appears to me that the role of the employees is essential for proper maintenance of the Coal Washery and 
their sustained contributions in the service of the employer establishment extending for a long period goes to prove 
that the nature of job performed by them is indispensable for the employer establishment and their work is perennial 
in nature. There is no adverse record against any of the said workmen. Therefore, the workmen who are alive are 
entitled to equitable treatment of regularization in their service. Denial of such benefit would amount to injustice and 
must be redressed. 


2. It is imperative for the management of Bharat Coking Coal Limited, a public undertaking, to provide fair and 
stable employment to a person who is rendering utility service for a long period. Workmen engaged on a temporary 
basis but for extended period are integral to the organization’s functioning amounts to contravention of labour 
standards and unfair labour practice. 


I3. In the case of Jaggo Vs. Union of India [2024 SCC OnLine SC 3826], the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India 
referring to the judgment in the case of Secretary, State of Karnataka Vs. Uma Devi [(2006) 4 SCC ] observed as 
follows : 


“ 26. While the judgment in Uma Devi (supra) sought to curtail the practice of backdoor entries and 
ensure appointments adhered to constitutional principles, it is regrettable that its principles are often misinterpreted 
or misapplied to deny legitimate claims of long-serving employees. This judgment aimed to distinguish between 
“illegal” and “irregular” appointments. It categorically held that employees in irregular appointments, who were 
engaged in duly sanctioned posts and had served continuously for more than ten years, should be considered for 
regularization as a one-time measure. However, the laudable intent of the judgment is being subverted when 


7002 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


institutions rely on its dicta to indiscriminately reject the claims of employees, even in cases where their appointments 
are not illegal, but merely lack adherence to procedural formalities. Government departments often cite the judgment 
in Uma Devi (supra) to argue that no vested right to regularization exists for temporary employees, 
overlooking the —judgment's explicit acknowledgment of cases where regularization is appropriate. This 
selective application distorts the judgment's spirit and purpose, effectively weaponizing it against employees who 
have rendered indispensable services over decades. 


27. In light of these considerations, in our opinion, it is imperative for government departments to lead by 
example in providing fair and stable employment. Engaging workers on a temporary basis for extended periods, 
especially when their roles are integral to the organization's functioning, not only contravenes international labour 
standards but also exposes the organization to legal challenges and undermines employee morale. By ensuring fair 
employment practices, government institutions can reduce the burden of unnecessary litigation, promote job security, 
and uphold the principles of justice and fairness that they are meant to embody. This approach aligns with 
international standards and sets a positive precedent for the private sector to follow, thereby contributing to the 
overall betterment of labour practices in the country.” 


4. Drawing wisdom from the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and in view of the settled position 
of law discussed above, I hold that this is a fit case where the enlisted employees who are still alive be regularized in 
the service of Bhojudih Coal Washery, BCCL forthwith. They shall be entitled to their pecuniary benefits at par with 
the permanent employees of the company and would be entitled to continuity of service for the period they are in 
service and the same would be counted for their post-retired benefits. 


Hence, 
ORDERED 


that the Industrial Dispute is allowed on contest. The management of Bhojudih Coal Washery of Bharat 
Coking Coal Limited is directed to regularize the enlisted workmen in their employment forthwith who are still 
alive and serving, maintaining their continuity of service from the period they are serving the company Let an award 
be drawn up in light of my above findings. Let copies of the Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and Notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 7 नवम्बर, 2025 
का.आ. 4977.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार ई सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, आसनसोल के पंचाट(एलसी/आर-57/2004) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 03,/44/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. Vet-2202/409/2003-anE आर .(सी.एम-ा)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक/लिंक अधिकारी 


New Delhi, the 7th November, 2025 


S.O. 977.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Reference.LC/R/57/2004) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management 
of ECL and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 03////2025. 

[No. L-2202/409/2003 — IR (CM-ID)] 


SALONI, Dy. Director/Link officer 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM- LABOUR COURT, 
ASANSOL 
PRESENT: Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 


Presiding Officer, 
C.G.L.T-cum-L.C., Asansol. 
REFERENCE CASE NO. 57 OF 2004 


[भाग [avs 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 7003 


PARTIES: P. N. Adhikari 
Vs 
Management of Dalurband Colliery, Pandaveswar Area, ECL 

REPRESENTATIVES: 
For the Union/Workman: P. N. Adhikari (in person) 
For the Management of ECL: Mr. P. K. Das, Advocate. 
INDUSTRY: Coal. 
STATE: West Bengal. 
Dated: 22/09/2025 

AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section (l) and Sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Government of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2202/409/2003-IR(CM-II) dated 04/0/2004 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer, that is the Management of Dalurband Colliery, Pandaveswar Area of Eastern Coalfields Limited and their 
workman for adjudication by this Tribunal. 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the management of Dalurband Colliery under Pandaveshwar Area of M/s. ECL in 
denying stepping-up of basic pay with retrospective effect and consequential benefits to Sri P.N. Adhikary, 
Accountant is legal and justified? If not, to what relief the workman is entitled?” 


On receiving Order No. L-2202/409/2003-IR(CM-II) dated 04/0/2004 from the Government of India 
Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, a Reference case No. 57 of 2004 was registered on 
4/0/2004 and an order was passed for issuing notice to the parties through registered post, directing them to appear 
and submit their written statements along with relevant documents in support of their claims. 


2. Colliery Mazdoor Sabha of India filed written statement on behalf of the aggrieved workman on 4/02/2005. 
Mr. P. K. Das, learned advocate for Management of ECL filed written statement on 04/06/2009. In gist, fact leading 
to the initiation of this Industrial Dispute is that Mr. P. N. Adhikari was posted as Clerk, Grade I in the Accounts 
Department of Dalurband Colliery, ECL. He was promoted to the special grade, the next higher grade on and from 
/04/99] along with thirteen other employees. Mr. P. N. Adhikari was thereafter promoted to Technical Grade ‘A’ 
w.e.f. 05/02/996 and his Basic pay was fixed at Rs. 3,680 per month. It is contended that Sh. Jaladhi Chatterjee who 
was also promoted along with P. N. Adhikari on /04/99 remained in special grade till he was promoted to the 
next higher grade on and from 5/04/I998. Further contention of the union is that when P. N. Adhikari and Jaladhi 
Chatterjee were in the special grade and until their promotion, Basic pay of both the workmen was Rs. 3,528. On 
implementation of NCWA-VI w.e.f. 0!/07/l996 which was signed on 23/2/2000, pay structure of workmen were 
revised under Implementation Instruction No. |8 to clear doubt and ambiguity. It is the specific case of the workman 
that prior to implementation of NCWA-VI, Basic pay of P. N. Adhikari was Rs. 3,680 whereas Basic pay of Jaladhi 
Chatterjee was Rs. 3,658, but after fixation of pay as per NCWA-VI, Basic pay of Mr. P. N. Adhikari was fixed at Rs. 
Rs. 6,020 and after granting three increments his Basic pay was fixed at Rs. 6,542, whereas Basic pay of Jaladhi 
Chatterjee and others was fixed at Rs. 6,067 and after adding three increments their Basic pay was fixed at Rs. 6,577 
which is higher than the pay of P. N. Adhikari. Rest of the workmen including Jaladhi Chatterjee who are junior to 
Mr. Adhikari are receiving Rs. 400 more per month. It is contended that a junior workman cannot get higher pay than 
the senior workman. It is submitted that Mr. P. N. Adhikari was promoted to Technical Grade ‘A’ in the year 996 
and Jaladhi Chatterjee was promoted to Technical Grade ‘A’ in the year 998, as such Mr. Adhikari cannot get lower 
Basic pay than Mr. Chatterjee when the Basic pay of Mr. Chatterjee in June, 996 was less than Mr. Adhikari. It is 
urged that fixation of pay of aggrieved workman is absolutely illegal and Basic pay of P. N. Adhikari is required to be 
fixed w.e.f. 0/07/996 and arrear along with consequential benefits may be allowed in favour of the workman by 
passing an appropriate Award. 


3. Management in the written statement denied the allegation made in written statement of the union. 
According to the management as per job nomenclature and cadre scheme of the company Accounts Cadre and Cash 
Cadre are altogether different. Mr. P. N. Adhikari belongs to Accounts Cadre and his designation was Accountant in 
Tech. & Supv. Grade ‘A’ in the year 99l. His Basic pay was correctly fixed as per his entitlement in the cadre 
scheme. It is further stated that Jaladhi Chatterjee compared by the union belonged to a different cadre and according 
to the pay structure and guidelines of the cadre scheme, Basic pay was correctly fixed by the management and there 
has been no violation of NCWA-VI while fixation of their respective Basic pay. Management asserted that the 
concerned workman is not entitled to any relief as prayed and the Industrial Dispute is liable to be set aside. 


7004 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


4. Mr. P. N. Adhikari filed his affidavit-in-chief reiterating the case disclosed in the written statement filed by 
the union. It is derived from the affidavit-in-chief that initially P. N. Adhikari was posted as Clerk, Grade I from 
3/04/99 and he was promoted to the next higher grade, in Technical Grade ‘A’ on and from 05/02/996. While 
serving as special grade clerk in the Accounts department his Basic pay was Rs. 3,680 as per NCWA-V and Basic pay 
of Jaladhi Chatterjee who was promoted to Technical Grade ‘A’ in the year 998 was Rs. 3,658. After 
implementation of NCWA-VI Basic pay of P. N. Adhikari was fixed at Rs. 6,542 and that of Mr. Jaladhi Chatterjee 
was fixed at Rs. 6,577. In cross-examination witness denied the suggestion that his claim was incorrect and 
unjustified. Workman produced a copy of office order dated /04/99! (marked as Exhibit W-l) whereby fourteen 
employees including P. N. Adhikari and Jaladhi Chatterjee were promoted from their clerical grade I to special grade 
as per the approval of the General Manager, Pandaveswar Area. The order reveals that on /04/99! both the 
workmen were in the same grade i.e. special grade. Workman has also produced pay fixation statement in two pages 
which is collectively marked as Exhibit W-2. 


5. Mr. Anuj Lakra (Management Witness) has been examined by ECL as Management Witness-I. He filed his 
affidavit-in-chief. In course of evidence, management witness produced the following documents: - 

(i) copy of Comparative Chart in two pages is collectively produced as Exhibit १४-। after objection. 

(ii) copy of pay structure as per NCWA-VI in two pages is collectively produced as Exhibit M-2. 

() copy of cadre scheme for Ministerial Staff (Cash Personnel Cadre) of ECL in three pages is 

collectively marked as Exhibit M-3. 

(iv) copy of revised wage structure as per NCWA-VI is collectively marked as Exhibit M-4. 

(v) copy of comparison chart of Basic pay under NCWA-V and NCWA-VI is produced as Exhibit M-5. 

(vi) copy of fixation chart of Jaladhi Chatterjee, P. N. Adhikari and others as per NCWA-VI is produced 


as Exhibit M-6. 


(vil) copy of comparison chart relating to fixation of pay of P. N. Adhikari viz-a-viz Jaladhi Chatterjee is 
produced as Exhibit M-7. 


(viii) copy of Implementation Instruction No. 8 of NCWA-VI for removal of anomaly in the matter of 
fixation of pay where junior gets higher pay than senior in the same pay scale and are covered by 

the same seniority list in a cadre is produced as Exhibit M-8. 
It appears from evidence of M.W.-I that till February, !996 NCWA-V was in force. Mr. P. N. Adhikari and 
Jaladhi Chatterjee were both in the same grade at Dalurband Colliery from the year 99] to 04/02/996. On 
05/02/996 P. N. Adhikari was promoted to the post of Accountant in T & S Grade ‘A’ from the post of Assistant. He 
remained in the same post and in the same cadre till his retirement in the year 20l0. Mr. Jaladhi Chatterjee, Co- 
worker received annual increment in April, 996 in the same grade and he was promoted to T & S Grade ‘A’ in 
August, 999. The provisions of NCWA-VI became applicable from July, 996 and Basic pay of Mr. Adhikari was 
initially fixed at Rs. 3,680 in the month of February, 996. On implementation of NCWA-VI in July, 996 his pay 
was fixed as Rs. 6,468.26. According to the wage structure, Basic pay of Mr. P. N. Adhikari was raised to Rs. 6,542. 
Thereafter he received annual increment every year in February till his retirement. Witness deposed that Jaladhi 
Chatterjee was promoted in August, 999 as Cashier, T & S Grade ‘A’ and his pay was fixed as per the provision of 
NCWA-V as NCWA-VI was not finalized then. On his promotion his pay was initially fixed at Rs. 4,l00 w.e.f. 
5/04/998 and the pay was revised as per NCWA-VI and was fixed at Rs. 6,432.28. On fitment of pay, his Basic pay 
was fixed at Rs. 6,577 as per the chart provided in NCWA-VI. Witness produced a comparative chart of Basic pay of 
NCWA-V and NCWA-VI (Exhibit M-5). Management Witness deposed that according to Implementation Instruction 
No. 8 of NCWA-VI it was decided that anomaly arising as a result of revision of pay scale may be checked up 
carefully and after satisfying that anomaly has arisen in the case of senior employee in the same seniority list and 
same cadre, the pay of senior employee will be stepped up to the level of the pay of junior employee concerned from 
the date the anomaly has arisen i.e. from the date the junior employee started getting higher Basic pay than the senior 
employee. Reference is made to Point. No. 2 of Exhibit M-8 which lays down that senior employee in the same pay 
scale and covered by the same seniority list in a cadre and who has secured fixation at the same stage as his junior, but 


due to different dates of increment the junior starts getting higher pay than his senior, the removal of such anomalies 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 7005 


will be subject to the following conditions: 


(a) both the junior and senior employee should belong to the same cadre and the post in which they have been 


promoted and should be covered by the same seniority list and same cadre. 
Mr. P. N. Adhikari who appeared in person declined to cross-examine the management witness. 


6. Mr. P. K. Das, learned advocate argued that though initially P. N. Adhikari and Jaladhi Chatterjee were 
posted in the same cadre from the year 99] to February, 996 as special grade clerk in Accounts department, Mr. 
Adhikari was promoted in the month of February, 996 and he received his annual increment in the month of 
February. According to NCWA-VI which came into force from 0/07/996, Basic pay of P. N. Adhikari in the post of 
Accountant T & S Grade ‘A’ was fixed at Rs. 6,542 after fitment as per the chart provided. It is argued that Jaladhi 
Chatterjee was in the post of Sr. Cashier in T & S Grade ‘B’. Under NCWA-V his Basic pay was Rs. 3,658 on 
30/06/996 and Basic pay was fixed at Rs. 6,432.28 with implementation of NCWA-VI w.e.f. 0/07/996. On fitment 
according to the chart provided his Basic pay rose to Rs. 6,577. Thereafter he moved to the next higher grade of 
Cashier on promotion on 45/04998, It is argued that Basic pay of P. N. Adhikari has been properly and correctly 
fixed and there is no anomaly in the matter of fixation. It is argued that as per Implementation Instruction No. 8 
(Exhibit M-8) difference of Basic pay of Mr. Adhikari and Mr. Chatterjee cannot be removed as employees do not 
belong to the same cadre and same post and after promotion, they are not covered by the same seniority list. Only 
point raised by Mr. Adhikari in support of his case is that he being a senior employee and having been promoted two 
years earlier to Mr. Chatterjee cannot have less Basic pay. It is urged that anomaly arising out of such fixation of pay 
may be removed by increasing his Basic pay. Mr. Adhikari prayed for payment of difference of pay on account of 


such wrong fixation for the period from 0/07/996 till his superannuation in the year 200. 


7. Central point for consideration before the Tribunal is whether pay of Mr. P. N. Adhikari has been correctly 


fixed as per the provision of NCWA-VI and is he entitled to any benefit arising out of any incorrect fixation of pay? 


8. I have considered the argument advanced by both parties and materials on record. Admitted position in this 
case is that Mr. Adhikari and Mr. Jaladhi Chatterjee were both posted as Clerk Grade -I in the Accounts Department 
of Dalurband Colliery from |/04/99]. Mr. Adhikari was promoted to the next higher grade of Accountant in T & S 
Grade ‘A’ on 05/02/996 where his Basic pay was fixed at Rs. 3,680 per month. As per NCWA-VI Basic pay of Mr. 
Adhikari was revised and fixed at Rs. 6,542. Mr. Jaladhi Chatterjee, a co-worker was promoted to the post of Sr. 
Cashier in T & S Grade ‘B’ w.e.f. 5/04/998. Basic pay of Jaladhi Chatterjee as on 30/06/996 was Rs. 3,658 and 
under NCWA-VI his pay was fixed at Rs. 6,432.28. On fitment of such pay, according to the pay structure as per 
NCWA-VI, Basic pay of Mr. Jaladhi Chatterjee would have been Rs. 6,407 but as his total pay exceeded the amount, 
his Basic was fixed at Rs. 6,577. Total pay of Mr. Adhikary was Rs. 6,468.26 and as per pay structure of NCWA-VI 
his pay was correctly fixed as Rs. 6,542. Although Basic pay of Mr. Jaladhi Chatterjee, a junior member getting 
promotion at a later point of time is more than that of Mr. Adhikari, fitment of their respective pay appears to have 
been done in a correct manner as per the chart provided. Mr. Adhikari after availing opportunity was unable to point 
out any incorrect approach or discrepancy in the matter of fixation of his pay. At this juncture it would be pertinent to 
take recourse to the provision of Implementation Instruction No. l8 dated 7/04/200l which was issued under 
NCWA-VI for the purpose of removal of anomaly in pay of senior employees in the same pay scales covered by the 
same seniority list and same designation in a cadre getting lower pay than their juniors due to implementation of 
NCWA-VI from 0/07/996. It is provided in Paragraph two (2) of Exhibit M-8 that senior employee in the same pay 
scale and covered by the same seniority list in a cadre and who has secured fixation at the same stage as his junior, but 
due to different dates of increment the junior starts getting higher pay than his senior. The removal of such anomalies 


will be subject to the following conditions: 


7006 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(a) both the junior and senior employee should belong to the same cadre and the post in which they have been 


promoted and should be covered by the same seniority list and same cadre. 


In the instant case I find that junior and senior employees do not belong to the same cadre and they were promoted on 
different dates. While Mr. Adhikari was in Accounts Cadre and belongs to T & S Grade ‘A’, Mr. Jaladhi Chatterjee 
was promoted to T & S Grade ‘B’ in the cash personnel cadre. Under such circumstance applying the conditions of 
Implementation Instruction No. 8 I find that there is no error or illegality in fixing the pay of P. N. Adhikari and the 


claim raised by him through the union is not sustainable. Therefore, he is not entitled to any relief in this case. 
Hence, 
ORDERED 


that the Industrial Dispute is dismissed on contest against the workman. Let an Award be drawn up in the light 


of my above discussion. Let copies of Award be communicated to the Ministry for information and Notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 नवम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 978.—silettie विवाद अधिनियम, i947 (4947 का 44) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार ई सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण॑८ - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, आसनसोल केपंचाट(एलसी/आर-34/2005) को प्रकाशित 
करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 03,/44/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[a. Vet-2202/04/2004-ang आर (At.74-ID)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक/लिंक अधिकारी 


New Delhi, the 7th November, 2025 


S.O. 978.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Reference.LC/R/3/2005) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management 
of ECL and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 03/7//2025. 


[No. L-2202/04/2004 — IR (CM-ID] 
SALONI, Dy. Director/Link officer 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM- LABOUR COURT, 
ASANSOL 
PRESENT: Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 
Presiding Officer, 


C.G.I.T-cum-L.C., Asansol. 
REFERENCE CASE NO. 3l OF 2005 
PARTIES: Hareram Paswan 
Vs 
Management of Kuardih Colliery, ECL 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 7007 


REPRESENTATIVES: 
For the Union/Workman: Smt. Debarati Konar, learned Advocate 
For the Management of ECL: Mr. P. K. Das, learned Advocate. 
INDUSTRY: Coal. 
STATE: West Bengal. 
Dated: 23/09/2025 

AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section (l) and Sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Government of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2202/04/2004-IR(CM-II) dated /05/2005 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer, that is the Management of Kuardih Colliery, Satgram Area of Eastern Coalfields Limited and their 
workman for adjudication by this Tribunal. 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the management of Kuardih Colliery of M/s Eastern Coalfields Limited in dismissing 
of Sh. Hareram Paswan from service vide letter No.SAT/GM/PER/LAB-C/2002/542(E) dated 28.9.2002 is 
legal and justified? If not, to what relief he is entitled?” 


On receiving Order No. L-2202/04/2004-IR(CM-II) dated /05/2005 from the Government of India 
Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, a Reference case No. 3] of 2005 was registered on 
3/05/2005 and an order was passed for issuing notice to the parties through registered post, directing them to appear 
and submit their written statements along with relevant documents in support of their claims. 


2. Management of ECL filed their written statement on 8/l!/2005 and the dismissed workman after his 
appearance before the Tribunal filed his written statement on 02/02/200. In gist, fact of the workman’s case is that 
Hareram Paswan was appointed in service of ECL on 0I/06/995 bearing U.M. Number !88!2. He was charge 
sheeted on 0I/02/200 for his unauthorized absence from duty for more than ten days from 03/07/200 and for his 
habitual absence on earlier occasions. He was posted at Kuardih colliery at the time of issuance of charge sheet. 
Charge sheet under clauses 26.23 and 26.29 of Certified Standing Order of the company was served upon him. 
Workman submitted reply to the charge sheet and stated that the absence was beyond his control due to his illness and 
during the period of absence he was under medical treatment at Sub-Divisional Hospital, Asansol. After recovery 
from illness, he went to join duty but he was not allowed to join and no subsistence allowance was paid to him. It is 
contended that Sr. Personnel Officer, Kuardih Colliery declared himself to be the Enquiry Officer and initiated a 
departmental enquiry without authority. Workman never received Notice of Enquiry at any point of time. He was not 
informed about the appointment of Enquiry Officer and Management Representative. Subsequently, signature of the 
workman was obtained on some documents before the Enquiry Officer. It is contended that the Enquiry Report was 
manufactured and workman was not allowed to take any assistance of co-workers. Workman produced medical 
documents in support of his absence from duty but without challenging the genuinity of medical certificates, the 
Enquiry Officer admitted the medical certificates in the enquiry and without supplying any copy of enquiry report, the 
General Manager, Satgram Area dismissed the workman from service on 25/ /2002. It is contended that the General 
Manager is not the Competent Authority to dismiss the workman from service and the order of dismissal dismissing 
the workman from service is illegal. Workman after dismissal prayed for allowing him to resume his duty but the 
management did not pay heed to the prayer of the workman. It is contended that management enhanced the charge by 
considering his past record which is totally unlawful and the same is liable to be set aside. Further case of the 
workman is that Disciplinary Authority issued order of dismissal without application of his mind in a rigid manner 
and action taken by the management was harsh and disproportionate to the alleged charge. Workman prayed for 
setting aside the Impugned Order and for his reinstatement in service along with back wages and consequential 
benefits. 


3. Management in support of the enquiry proceeding and order of dismissal stated that the concerned workman 
was charge sheeted on 0/02/200! for the act of his unauthorized absence as well as habitual absence. Charge sheet 
was issued under clauses 26(23) and 26(29) of the Certified Standing Order of the company. It is claimed that 
workman appeared before the Enquiry Officer and opportunities were granted to him to defend his case. Management 
admitted that the workman produced certificates from Sub-Divisional Hospital, Asansol but failed to explain the 
reasons for not informing the colliery authority about his absence. It is asserted that the Enquiry Officer after hearing 
the parties concluded the enquiry proceeding and held the workman guilty of the arraignments. Further case of the 
management is that the Competent Authority after perusing the enquiry report and the gravity of misconduct found no 
ground to show any leniency to the workman and punished him by way of dismissing him from service in accordance 
with provision of standing order effecting the dismissal from 25//2002. It is inter alia submitted that past 
performance of the workman was poor and he attended duty for only ninety three days in the year 995, Nil in the 


7008 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


year 996 and 997, sixty three days in the year 998, Nil in the year 999 and sixteen days in the year 2000. It is 
further asserted that total attendance of the workman from the year 995 to 2000 was only one hundred seventy two 
days. On earlier occasion punishment of stoppage of four annual increments was passed against him for his 
unauthorized absence from duty but he did not rectify his conduct. According to the management, the workman has 
been rightly dismissed from service and he is not entitled to any relief. 


4. Point for consideration before this Tribunal is whether the action of the management in dismissing Hareram 
Paswan from service vide order dated 28/09/2002 is legal and justified and what relief he is entitled to. 


5. In support of the case workman filed affidavit-in-chief wherein he stated that he did not receive Notice of 
Enquiry and no enquiry was at all held. It is contended that Enquiry Officer decided upon the charge on the basis of 
extraneous factors without proper enquiry. It is further asserted that he produced medical certificates which were 
accepted by the Enquiry Officer. The enquiry proceeding and enquiry report were not supplied to him and he has been 
illegally dismissed from service. 


6. In cross-examination the witness stated that he will submit treatment papers and further stated that he had 
produced documents from government hospital. It transpires from his cross-examination that his residence is about 
one and a half to two kilometers away from the colliery where he was working and the hospital is about five 
kilometers away from his residence. Witness further stated that he went to the hospital three to four times for 
treatment. Suggestion was put to the workman that he never went to the hospital for treatment, which he denied. 
Witness could not disclose the name of the disease he was suffering from. He further stated that he was admitted in 
the hospital and was thereafter discharged. Workman subsequently did not produce any documents in support of his 
medical treatment nor did he produce any material to establish that he was admitted to the hospital on account for the 
purpose of any medical treatment during the period of his long absence. 


7. Mr. Kalyan Roy, Management Representative has been examined as Management Witness-I. He filed an 
affidavit-in-chief wherein he disclosed that charge sheet was served upon Hareram Paswan under clauses 26.23 and 
26.29 of the Certified Standing Order for habitual late attendance and absence from duty without reasons beyond ten 
days, respectively. Management Witness stated that the workman participated in the enquiry. In course of enquiry, the 
Enquiry Officer found the workman guilty of charge and submitted his report. During his evidence, MW-I produced 
the following documents in support of their case:- 


(i) Copy of charge sheet dated 0/02/200] is produced as Exhibit M-|. 


(ii) Copy of certificate dated 6/03/200l issued by the Superintendent, Sub-Divisional Hospital, 
Asansol certifying that Hareram Paswan of Kuardih Colliery was under treatment at their hospital 
as OPD patient on 02/07/2000 with a history of chest pain, occasional fever, cough and cold and 
on 6/03/200] he was examined and found fit for duty is produced as Exhibit M-2. 


() Copy of Notice of Enquiry issued to Hareram Paswan is produced as Exhibit M-3. 

(iv) Copy of enquiry proceeding along with findings is produced as Exhibit M-4. 

(v) Copy of second show cause Notice dated 09/]0/2002 is produced as Exhibit M-S5. 

(vi) Copy of letter dated 25/] [/2002 dismissing the workman from service is produced as Exhibit M-6. 


In course of cross-examination witness deposed that the workman absented from 03/07/2000 to 

0/02/200 without prior intimation. Witness denied the suggestion that dismissal of the workman 

was not legal and justified. 
8. On the date fixed for hearing of argument neither the workman nor did the advocate appear before the 
Tribunal even though Notice was issued at his address. Mr. P. K. Das, learned advocate for the management argued 
that conduct of the workman was extremely bad and he had been a habitual absentee for several years, thereby 
disrupted the production process and work of the company. It is argued that charge sheet was issued to the workman 
on 0I/02/200l with a clear charge under clause 26.29 of the Certified Standing Order of the company that he was 
absent from duty without information from 03/07/2000. Workman tried to make misleading statements in his written 
statement and affidavit-in-chief by stating that he was absent from 03/07/200I. It is further contended that workman 
participated in the enquiry proceeding and admitted that he was unable to attend duty. Workman Witness deposed that 
Doctor of Sub-Divisional Hospital, Asansol declared him fit on 6/03/200I and he reported for duty. Ld. Advocate 
referring to enquiry proceeding (Exhibit M-3) submitted that workman made false statement before the Tribunal by 
representing that no departmental enquiry was held though the workman has put signature on enquiry proceeding after 


his statement and cross-examination. Ld. Advocate for the management submitted that second show cause Notice 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 7009 


along with enquiry proceeding were served upon the workman for his response and the workman did not deny receipt 
of the second show cause Notice. It is argued that enquiry proceeding was held by the Enquiry Officer by following 
the principle of Natural Justice and the Disciplinary Authority after considering all materials, issued an order dated 
28/09/2002, dismissing the workman with immediate effect. It is argued that the enquiry proceeding carried out is 
consistent with the principle of Natural Justice and the punishment imposed upon the workman is justified. 
Management urged that they had no option but to dismiss the workman due to his continuous indisciplined and 


absenting nature. 


9. I have considered materials on record, evidence adduced by both parties and the argument advanced on 
behalf of the management. Charge sheet dated 0/02/200] is clear of the fact that the workman was absent from duty 
from 03/07/2000 and not from 03/07/200l. There are two ingredients of charge levelled against him. Workman duly 
participated in the enquiry held on 6/03/200l. It appears from evidence of Management Representative that the 
workman did not inform the management about his illness and did not apply for any leave. Management 
Representative stated that on previous occasion there were stoppage of three SPRA from 30/04/999 to 05/06/2000 
and warning was given for his unauthorized absence from !0/03/997 to 05/05/997. It also appears that attendance 
of the workman in the year 998 and 999 was Nil and in the year 2000 he attended duty for sixteen days. The 
charged employee did not cross-examine the Management Representative during enquiry. Therefore, the allegation of 
habitual absence of workman was unrebutted and the same was clearly established against him. In his statement 
before the Enquiry Officer, charged employee stated that he was having severe chest pain on 02/07/2000 and he was 
taken to the Sub-Divisional Hospital, Asansol. Medical certificate was issued on 6/03/200l. No document relating to 
medical treatment was produced by the workman to establish that he actually received medical treatment at the 
hospital. On a perusal of Exhibit M-2, a certificate said to have been issued by the Superintendent, Sub-Divisional 
Hospital, Asansol, I find that signature of the patient has not been attested by the Doctor which is contrary to the 
medical jurisprudence. Certificate has not been issued on the letter head of Sub-Divisional Hospital, Asansol and it is 
only a typed document. It is stated in the certificate that the workman was treated as OPD patient. There was no 
certificate to the effect that patient was under treatment from 02/07/2000 to 6/03/200], therefore, the statement made 


in the certificate is not found reliable and do not serve any extenuating purpose. 


0. Workman in his cross-examination deposed that he would produce documents related to medical treatment 
issued by the hospital. He further stated that he was admitted in the hospital and thereafter was discharged. In Exhibit 
M-2, such relevant fact regarding admission and discharge of patient has not been mentioned. On the contrary, 
content of certificate clearly contradicted the statement of the workman in his cross-examination since the patient 
claimed that he was admitted in the hospital. It transpires from the cross-examination of workman witness that his 
place of work was within two kilometers from his residence. In a span of seven months of absence from duty, 
workman made no effort to inform the management of the employer company about his illness and inability to attend 
duty. In this context, it would be appropriate to refer to a decision of Hon’ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana in 
the case of Nav Bharat Industries Vs. Presiding Officer and another [208 LLR 439], wherein it was held that ifa 
workman remained absent unauthorizedly for a long time, even due to his illness without informing the management 
about it, termination of his service by invoking conditions as stipulated in the Certified Standing Orders, is not illegal. 
It was further held that when the workman does not inform the management about his illness, remaining absent for a 
long time, presumption drawn by the management that workman has abandoned his job of his own is justified. From 
the settled position of law, it would emerge that unauthorized absence compounded with non-communication of the 
reason of absence to the management are unacceptable and workman cannot derive any benefit of doubt. In the instant 
case it appears to me that the workman habitually remained absent during the previous three years and the 
management after warning and stopping his annual increments had no option but to initiate a domestic enquiry for his 


subsequent unauthorized absence. The workman did not rectify his conduct. Reasonable opportunity was given to the 


700 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


workman to represent the case properly and the management produced sufficient evidence to establish their case. 
Management also issued a second show cause Notice to the workman before taking the ultimate decision of 
dismissing him from service of the company. Employer company cannot be accepted to bear such mischievous 
activity of employee for an indefinite period. Therefore, punishment of dismissal of the workman appears to be 
proportionate to the nature of misconduct of the workman. In my view, the workman is neither entitled to 


reinstatement in service nor any benefit of back wages or consequential benefits. 
Hence, 
ORDERED 


that the Industrial Dispute is dismissed on contest against the workman. Dismissed workman is not entitled to 
any relief of reinstatement in service. Management company is directed to disburse all dues to the workman on 
account of his past service, if any. Let copies of Award be communicated to the Ministry for information and 


Notification. 
ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 7 नवम्बर, 2025 
का.आ. 4979.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, t947 (:947 का 4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार ई सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, आसनसोल के पंचाट(एलसी/आर-03/2008) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 03,/44,/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल-22042/335/2007-आई आर (सी.एम-)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक/लिंक अधिकारी 


New Delhi, the 7th November, 2025 


S.O. 979.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Reference.LC/R/03/2008) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management 
of ECL and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 03/07/2025. 


[No. L-2202/335/2007 — IR (CM-ID)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director/Link officer 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM- LABOUR COURT, 
ASANSOL. 
PRESENT: Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 
Presiding Officer, 


C.G.LT-cum-L.C., Asansol. 
REFERENCE CASE NO. 03 OF 2008 
PARTIES: Jayanta Gope. 
Vs. 
Management of Begunia Colliery, BCCL. 
REPRESENTATIVES: 
For the Union/Workman: Mr. Bipul Banerjee, Advocate. 
For the Management of BCCL: Mr. P. K. Das, Advocate. 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 70iI 


INDUSTRY: Coal 
STATE: West Bengal. 
Dated: 25.09.2025 


AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section (l) and Sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Government of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2202/355/2007-IR(CM-II) dated 07.0!.2008 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer, that is the Management of Begunia Colliery under Chanch Victoria Area of Bharat Coking Coal Limited 
and their workman for adjudication by this Tribunal. 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the management of M/s. BCCL in dismissing Sri Jayanta Gope from service 
w.ef. //.05.2006 is legal and justified? If not, to what relief is the workman entitled? ” 


l. On receiving Order No. L-2202/355/2007-IR(CM-II) dated 07.0!.2008 from the Government of India, 
Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, a Reference case was registered on l6.0.2008 and an 
order was passed for issuing notice to the parties through registered post, directing them to appear and submit their 
written statements along with relevant documents in support of their claims. 


2; The Vice President of Colliery Mazdoor Union filed written statement for the dismissed workman on 
8.08.2009. Management filed their written statement on l0.!.2009. Brief fact of the case as disclosed in the written 
statement of the union is that Jayanta Gope was a permanent employee at Begunia Project under Chanch Victoria 
Area of Bharat Coking Coal Limited (hereinafter referred to as BCCL) and was posted as an Underground Loader. 
The workman was unable to attend his duty from 08.09.2004 due to high fever and received medical treatment at 
Colliery Dispensary till 20.09.2004. After he was declared medically fit for duty on 2.09.2004 he was suffering from 
severe weakness and fell down in a drain as a result his left hand was fractured. Family members took him to the Sub- 
Divisional Hospital, Asansol instead of Colliery Dispensary for better treatment. The workman was unable to attend 
his duty and was advised to take rest for eight (8) weeks. After his recovery the Superintendent of Sub-Divisional 
Hospital, Asansol issued a Fit Certificate in favour of Jayanta Gope dated 24..2005 but the Colliery Doctor refused 
to issue any certificate to him to join his duty. When the workman went to resume duty after his treatment the 
Personnel Manager of the Colliery did not permit him to join and issued a Charge Sheet bearing No. l859 dated 
26..2004. The workman replied to the Charge Sheet, stating the cause of his absence but the same was not found 
satisfactory and he was dismissed from service on |.05.2006 without holding any Domestic Enquiry. The order of 
dismissal was issued bearing No. BCCL/XII/BP/06/786 dated |!.05.2006. According to the workman the reason for 
his absence was beyond his control as he was suffering from illness and he was prevented from joining his duty. The 
workman submitted an appeal against the order of dismissal but the management did not consider the same. 


3. The workman informed the matter to the Vice President of Colliery Mazdoor Union (INTUC) and an 
Industrial Dispute was raised before the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C), Asansol under Reference No. 
CMU/UP/2007 dated l6.06.2007. On failure of conciliation proceeding the Government of India, New Delhi made 
reference of an Industrial Dispute to the Central Government Industrial Tribunal -cum- Labour Court, Asansol for 
adjudication. Union contended that the action of the management in dismissing Jayanta Gope from his service is 
highly illegal, discriminatory, whimsical, resulting unfair labour practice. It is further contended that dismissal 
from service for absenting from duty from 2.09.2004 to 26..2004 is without justification due to the fact that the 
workman could not attend duty on account of fracture of his bone and the charge of habitual absence without 
sufficient cause is unexplained. It is inter-alia contended that the workman has been dismissed without any 
opportunity of being heard and the order has been passed without following principles of natural justice. The union 
claimed that the order of termination from service issued by the management of BCCL is mala fide, baseless and 
grossly illegal. It is prayed that the order of dismissal of Jayanta Gope from his service w.e.f. l.05.2006 be set aside 
and the workman be reinstated in service along with payment of back wages and other incidental benefits. 


4. Management refuted the allegations made by the union that the dismissal of the workman was made without 
holding enquiry. According to the management Jayanta Gope was absenting from his duty in unauthorized manner 
from 2.09.2004 without prior permission or sanctioned leave and a Charge Sheet was issued against him on 
26..2004 under Clause 26.l. of the Certified Standing Orders of the company for his willful and habitual absence 
from duty without sufficient cause. The chargesheeted employee failed to submit any satisfactory reply and a 
domestic enquiry was held into the charge. The Enquiry Officer was appointed in accordance with the provisions of 
the Certified Standing Orders of the company. Notice of enquiry was issued to the chargesheeted employee for 
attending the enquiry. Jayanta Gope participated in the enquiry proceeding and reasonable opportunity was provided 
to him to defend his case. The Enquiry Officer after holding the enquiry found the workman guilty of charge levelled 
against him for misconduct. It is stated that the workman is a habitual absentee and in the previous three (3) years he 
attended duty on only two (2) days in the year 2002, eighteen (8) days in the year 2003 and forty-four (44) days in 


7042 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


the year 2004. On previous occasion the workman was chargesheeted and he was allowed to join his duty after 
awarding lighter punishment of stoppage of two SPRA for his misconduct. The workman failed to rectify his conduct 
and his habitual absence continued unabated. 


5५ Management denied that the workman was suffering from acute fever from 08.09.2004 or that he was unable 
to perform his duty due to illness of that he fell down in a drain on 20.09.2004 and sustained injury. According to the 
management the workman never intimated the colliery authority the reasons for his absence. It is asserted that the 
workman has been dismissed form service without any discrimination and the enquiry proceeding was held observing 
the principles of natural justice. According to the management the workman is not entitled to any relief and the 
Industrial Dispute is liable to be dismissed. 


6. The dismissed workman filed an affidavit-in-chief in support of his case and has been examined as Workman 
Witness No. |. In his affidavit-in-chief the workman stated that he fell down in a drain on 2].09.2004 and was under 
the treatment at Sub-Divisional Hospital, Asansol from 2.09.2004 to 24..2004 and thereafter he was declared fit 
for duty w.e.f. 25..2004. It transpires from his statement that he was unable to attend duty from 2.09.2004 to 
24..2004. The workman however failed to produce any document in support of his medical treatment either at the 
Colliery Dispensary or of the Sub-Divisional Hospital, Asansol. According to the workman he went to join his duty 
on 25..2004 but he was not allowed to join his duty. In his affidavit-in-chief the workman stated that he replied to 
the Charge Sheet. No copy of enquiry proceeding nor any second Show Cause Notice was issued to him by the 
management before his dismissal. 


7, In course of cross-examination by the management the workman witness stated that he submitted all his 
medical papers before the colliery management. However, not a single document has been produced by the workman 
to establishthat he was actually receiving medical treatment at the hospital during the period of his absence. 


8. It may be noted that in Paragraph No. (4) of the written statement filed by the union it is claimed that the 
workman was dismissed from the service from .05.2006 without holding any domestic enquiry. This statement does 
not find any support from the affidavit-in-chief and there is no assertion by the workman witness that he did not 
participate in the enquiry proceeding. The only case of the workman is that no second Show Cause Notice was issued 
to him before dismissal. 


9. Mr. Brajanath Banerjee, Assistant Manager (Personnel), Begunia Colliery has been examined as 
Management Witness No. |. He has filed his affidavit-in-chief where he has stated that Jayanta Gope was absent from 
duty in an unauthorized manner from 2.09.2004 without prior permission or sanctioned leave and a Charge Sheet 
was issued under Clause 26.l.l of the Certified Standing Orders for his habitual absence from duty without sufficient 
cause. The management witness has produced the following documents : 


(i) एकए of the Charge Sheet dated 25/26..2004 has been produced as Exhibit M-|. 
(ii) Copy of the reply to the Charge Sheet, as Exhibit M-2. 

(ili) Copy of the appointment letter of the Enquiry Officer, as Exhibit M-3. 

(iv) Copy of the Notice of enquiry dated 5.08.2005, as Exhibit M-4. 
(v) Copy of the Notice of enquiry dated 03.0.2006, as Exhibit M-4/I. 

(vi) Copy of the Enquiry Proceeding, as Exhibit ७-5. 

(vii) Copy of the Findings of the Enquiry Officer, as Exhibit M-6. 


(viii) | Copy of the Note-Sheet of the Project Officer, Begunia Colliery, dated 4/I5.04.2006, proposing 
dismissal of Jayanta Gope from service, Exhibit M-7. 


(ix) Copy of the letter of dismissal dated .05.2006, as Exhibit M-8. 


It is clearly admitted by the management witness in his evidence-in-chief that no second Show Cause Notice was 
issued. The management witness claimed that the order of dismissal is proper and the workman is not entitled to any 
relief. It appears from the record that on the date of examination of management witness on 03.03.2025 no one 
appeared for the union to cross-examine the witness and the witness was discharged without cross-examination. On a 
simple reading of evidence adduced by the management witness it is evident that the statement made by the 
Management Witness No. | remained uncontroverted. 

0. Mr. P. K. Das, learned advocate for the management of ECL advancing his argument submitted that 
admittedly the workman was absent for more than two months without any information to the management of the 
employer company resulting in dislocation and disruption of work. It is argued that on previsions occasion the 
workman habitually remained absent and opportunity was given to him to resume duty and lighter punishment of 
stoppage of increments were imposed. The workman did not rectify his conduct and continued to remain absent on 
various pretext. In the instant case it is argued that the workman failed to produce any document in support of his 
illness. Therefore, it cannot be presumed that he was prevented from attending his duty due to illness. Learned 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 703 


advocate submitted that a fair enquiry proceeding was held in which the workman has participated. The charge 
levelled against him has been established and the Disciplinary Authority has passed the order of dismissal for proper 
reason, therefore, the workman is not entitled to any relief. 


II. Perused the order of reference, pleadings of union as well as management, evidence of both parties and 
documents. Initially, the workman tried to project a case that he was arbitrarily terminated from service on the pretext 
of unauthorized absence without holding any enquiry against him. In course of evidence, it unfolded that a fair 
and proper enquiry proceeding was held by the Enquiry Officer by issuing Notice of enquiry. The workman 
participated in the enquiry proceeding and put his signature on the Enquiry Proceeding (Exhibit M-5). The Enquiry 
Officer in his Findings dated 4.03.2006 (Exhibit M-6) held the workman guilty of the charge beyond reasonable 
doubt. A Note-Sheet was prepared by the management which recommended his dismissal from the company. The 
General Manager who is the Disciplinary Authority approved the proposal for dismissal and a letter of dismissal of 
Jayanta Gope dated .05.2006 was issued (Exhibit M-8). I find that the charge of habitual absence and unauthorized 
absence from duty has been clearly established against the workman which caused dislocation of company’s work and 
inconvenience to the fellow workmen. The workman was dismissed from service with immediate effect and he was 
advised to collect his dues, if any. The evidence of Management Witness No. | is explicit regarding non-issuance of 
second Show Cause Notice. In the instant case the charge against the workman has been proved beyond doubt and the 
union has failed to dislodge the evidence adduced by the management witness. If for argument’s sake the workman 
produced document regarding his medical treatment before the Enquiry Officer and the same were not considered in 
the enquiry proceeding, then he was at liberty to place such document before this Tribunal to establish that his claim 
is justified and the absence from duty for such a long period was beyond his control. The union has failed to adduce 
any trustworthy evidence to prove that the workman had actually received any medical treatment from Sub-Divisional 
Hospital, Asansol. According to the rules a public hospital maintains a record of medical treatment specially in case 
of injury. Non-production of such evidence gives rise to adverse presumption against the workman. 


2. It is true that the management was required to issue a second Show Cause Notice to the workman preceding 
the order of dismissal, especially when the Enquiry Officer and Disciplinary Authority, issuing the order of 
dismissal are two different persons. A Circular bearing No. CIL C-SA(vi)/50774/28 dated 2.05.994 issued by the 
Coal India Limited also provides that the charged employee had to be supplied with Enquiry Proceeding and Enquiry 
Report and a Second Show Cause Notice had to be issued to him before taking any final decision of removing him 
from service. I find that in this case the evidence adduced against the workman is sufficient to hold him guilty of 
charge. Opportunity was provided to him to represent his case. Therefore, the workman was not prevented from 
understanding the charge levelled against him and he was not prejudiced in the procured observed. Consequently, the 
punishment imposed is justified. In my view non-issuance of second Show Cause Notice does not demolish the 
charge substantiated against the workman nor any prejudice is caused to the charged employee for interfering with the 
order of dismissal passed against hm. 


Hence, 
ORDERED 


that the Industrial Dispute is dismissed on contest. Jayanta Gope, the dismissed workman is not entitled to 
any relief of reinstatement or back wages. The dismissed workman is however entitled to the legal dues, if any, for his 
past service. Let an award be drawn up in light of my above findings. Let copies of the Award in duplicate be sent to 
the Ministry of Labour, Government of India, New Delhi for information and Notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 4 नवम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 4980.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4974 (4947 का 4) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार अधीक्षण पुरातत्वविद्‌, भारतीय पुरातत्व सर्वेक्षण, भुवनेश्वर (उड़ीसा) के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और 
अध्यक्ष, भारतीय पुरातत्व सर्वेक्षण श्रमिक संघ, भुवनेश्वर (उड़ीसा) के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह-श्रम न्यायालय, भुवनेश्वर पंचाट (संदर्भ संखया- 29/2022) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में 
दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं. एल-42044/235/2022-आई आर .(डीयू)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the | lth November, 2025 


5.0. 980.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 29/2022) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour—Bhubaneswar, as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to The 


704 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Superintending Archaeologist, Archaeological Survey of India, Bhubaneswar (Orissa) and The President, 
Archaeological Survey of India Workers Union, Bhubaneswar (Orissa), workman. 


[No. L-420/235/2022-IR (DU)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT BHUBANESWAR 

Present: 

Sri Dinesh Kumar Singh, 

Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-cum-Labour Court, 

Bhubaneswar. 

INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 29/2022 
Date of Passing Award — 8“August, 2025 

Between :- 

The Superintending Archaeologist, 

Archaeological Survey of India, 

Samantarapur, Bhubaneswar (Orissa) — 75 002, 

[॥ Party-Management. 
(And) 
The President, 
Archaeological Survey of India Workers Union, 
32, Ashok Nagar, Bhubaneswar (Orissa) — 75 009. 
27 Party-Union. 
Appearances: 
Sri M.M. Mishra, Sr. Secretariat Asst. 
For the |*t Party-Management. 
Sri Naba Mohanty, President. 
For the 274 Party-Union. 
AWARD 


In the present case, a reference was received from the Under Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry 
of Labour & Employment, New Delhi vide order No. L-420] [/235/2022 — IR(DU), dated 8.07.2022 under clause (d) 
of sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 for adjudication of a 
dispute, under the following schedule:- 


“Whether the claim of Archaeological Survey of India Workers Union vide letter dated 4.2.202, to the 
management of Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Bhubaneswar Circle that the management is resorting to unfair 
labour practice in not allowing 0 workers engaged previously by the management to do the job of ASI at different 
site and recruiting fresh workers directly and/or through contractor, is proper, legal and justified? If yes, to what 
relief the disputants are entitled and what directions if any, are necessary in the matter?” 


2. The case of the 2704 party-Union, President Archaeological Survey of India Workers Union in brief is as 
follows:- 


That, the ‘t Party-Management, Superintending Archaeologist, Archaeological Survey of India (in short 
ASI) is an organization established in the year 966 under the Ministry of Culture, Government of India and about 
450 (Four Hundred Fifty) casual workmen had been working under the [7 Party-Management for maintenance of 92 
(Ninety Two) number of historical places in Odisha for last fifteen to twenty years who were directly engaged by the 
[४ Party-Management. As per the DoPT guidelines and tripartite | agreement with the 2™ party-Union by the 
Management of ASI about 350 numbers of casual/daily worker/labourers were brought to the regular and permanent 
category under the |‘t Party-Management and rest of the !l0 number of workmen had been refused employment 
without following any provisions of law since 20l8 which amounts to termination of their services. After that the 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 705 


27 party-Union raised a dispute before the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner, Bhubaneswar and the matter was 
heard. In the mean-time all the !!0 number of workmen sat on peaceful dharana since the date of their disengagement 
with effect from September, 208 till date demanding their engagement in their previous jobs as they have no source 
of income, but the |‘ Party-Management had engaged fresh hands forcibly, taking the help of police personnel. The 
** Party-Management had violated the sub-clause (a) of clause-5 of Fifth schedule of the Industrial Disputes Act by 
victimizing the workmen due to their trade union activities and had also violated sub clause (b) of Clause 5 of Fifth 
Schedule of the Industrial Disputes Act by adopting unlawful activities as because of colourable exercise of the 
management right. The |‘* Party-Management also violated the principles of natural justice by not allowing the 2™ 
party-workmen to work and has also violated Clause 2 of Fifty Schedule by allowing other workmen to do the said 
work. The |*' Party-Management had terminated the services of the 204 party-workmen without serving any notice or 
paying gratuity, compensation, leave payment etc. by violating Section 25-F of the I.D. Act. The act of the ‘ Party- 
Management is quite illegal and unfair which amounts to unfair labour practice by engaging fresh workmen instead of 
274 party-workmen and the same is not legal and proper in the eye of law, so they are entitled to be reinstated in 
service with full back wages. 


A prayer has been made to pass an award in favour of the workmen of the 2"! party-Union. 
3. The * party-Management has appeared and filed its written statement. 
The case of the ‘t Party- Management as per its written statement is as follows:- 


That the ASI has been established in the year 86 having a vital cultural institution with definitive scientific 
inputs and multi-disciplinary set up including conservation, preservation, excavation and exploration of the Centrally 
Protected Monuments/sites having national importance with the Central Government in the Ministry of Culture 
through the ASI. 


The Director General of ASI, New Delhi has delegated powers to the Superintending Archaeologist, ASI, 
Bhubaneswar Circle which is following the instruction/guidelines relating to the establishment and maintenance as 
well as conservation of monuments/sites on the direction of the Director General, ASI, New Delhi. The ASI does not 
constitute industry for the purpose of I.D Act, 947 as the primary objective of the ASI is to implement Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 958 and Rules, 959 and Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, 
972. The primary activities of the ASI are implementation of the above statutory law for maintenance, conservation 
and preservation of Centrally Protected Monuments/Sites and conducting archaeological exploration and excavation 
setting up and requisition of man-powers and horticultural operation in and around monuments, so the activities of 
ASI do not come under the definition of “Industry” for the purpose of Industrial Disputes Act, 947. The 274 party 
workmen were casual labourers and were working seasonal in nature under the specific estimate. After completion of 
the work, according to the estimate under specific Monuments/Sites, casual labourers were disengaged on need basis 
subject to the availability of funds/work. The Management is not competent authority for considering the 
regularization of casual labourers as per demand of the Union since it is a policy matter. The Union has not filed any 
document/circulars in terms of regularization of services of casual labourers as per the claim statement. The Ministry 
of Finance, Government of India has issued General Financial Rules, 20l7 wherein under Rule 97 there is a 
provision of “Outsourcing Services”. The Director General, ASI has issued instruction to all Regional Directors and 
Superintending Archaeologists vide letter dated 0.08.20l7 that man power shall be engaged through outsourcing 
following the GFR provisions, so the Management is duty bound to follow the instructions/guidelines issued by the 
Ministry of Finance. The 2" party-workmen were not engaged for the last ten to fifteen years continuously and they 
were not doing the same and similar nature of work at par with regular employees. The 2™ party-workmen were 
engaged on seasonal basis based on approved estimate against specific works of the Centrally Protected 
Monuments/Sites. After completion of the work the casual labourers were disengaged based on availability of funds 
and works. A meeting of the 2™ party-workmen was held on 8.05.2023 in which the 2™ Party-Union has agreed to 
submit a list of labourers along with circular and guidelines. 


A prayer has been made to pass an award in favour of the | ‘t Party- Management. 


4. The 204 Party-Union has filed rejoinder denying all the averments made in the written statement of the [8 
Party-Management. 
5s On the basis of the pleadings of both the parties following issues are framed. 

ISSUES 


i) Whether the reference is maintainable? 


ii) Whether the claim of the Archaeological Survey of India Workers’ Union vide letter dated 4.2.202] to the 
management of Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Bhubaneswar Circle that the management is resorting to 
unfair labour practice in not allowing (a) workers engaged previously by the management to do the job of ASI 
at different site and recruiting fresh workers directly and/or through contractor is proper legal and justified? 


iii) If yes, to what relief the disputants are entitled and what directions, if any, are necessary in the matter? 


706 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


6. In course of the proceedings, the 274 party-Union has examined one witnesses namely Sri Dilip Kumar 
Pradhan as W.W.-I. 


7. The 274 party-Union proved and exhibited the following documents which are marked as exhibits:- 


Ext.-l :- The letter of Archaeological Survey of India Workers Union addressed to the Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner, Nayapalli, Bhubaneswar on dated 4.2.202I. 


Ext.-2 :- The photocopy of the letter dated 22.09.2020 of the Management of ASI, Bhubaneswar to Joint Director 
General, Conservation, ASI, New Delhi. 


8. The |* Party-Management has examined only one witness as M.W.-l. He is Sri Madan Mohan Mishra. 
9. The |* Party-Management has proved and exhibited the following documents. 


Ext.-A :- The photocopy of the letter dated 22.0.2020 of Superintending, Archaeologist, ASI, Bhubaneswar Circle 
addressed to D.G. ASI, New Delhi relating to sitting Dharana in front of the Bhubaneswar circle of the ASI. 

Ext.-B :- The copy of the Office Memorandum dated 5.09.203 of the Under Secretary to the Government of India, 
relating to ASI and their workmen. 

Ext.-C :- The photocopy of the letter dated 0.08.207 of Addl. Director General (Admn.) ASI, New Delhi addressed 
to all RDs and all Superintending Archaeologist/Dy. Supdt. Archaeologists relating to E-procurement and 
engagement of manpower. 


FINDINGS 
0. For the sake of convenience, the Tribunal thinks it proper to discuss first of all the Issue No. II. 
ISSUE NO. I 
ll. At the outset of discussions it is required to mention here that it is the case of the 2™ Party-Union that all the 


0 workmen who were directly engaged by the |*t Party-Management of ASI, Bhubaneswar were working under 
the Management of ASI, Bhubaneswar for the last fifteen to twenty years as casual workers, but the |7 Party- 
Management had terminated their services in the month of September, 20I8 by resorting unfair labour practice. 
However, it is the case of the I** Party-Management that the concerned workmen were working under the 
Management as casual worker and were engaged against specific work of Centrally Protected Monument through 
Muster Roll and after completion of work the casual workmen were disengaged. 


2. At this stage it is proper to discuss the oral and documentary evidence of both the parties. 


The workman witness No. | Sri Dilip Kumar Pradhan who is one of the disputant workmen in this case has 
categorically deposed that he had joined 2 ASI, Bhubaneswar Circle as casual worker along with !20 number of 
workmen in the year 200l and he discharged his work continuously till 27.09.20I8. He has also adduced that other 
l9 number of workmen had also continuously worked for fifteen to twenty years and the nature of work they were 
discharging were of permanent and perennial in nature, but in the meantime the Management of ASI refused their 
employment in the month of Sept. 20l8 without serving any notice or paying arrear legal dues, such as pay, gratuity, 
compensation leave salary etc. He has also deposed that the I‘ Party-Management had engaged more than 450 
number of out-sourcing workmen through different contractors and they had been working continuously till date, but 
the Management had illegally terminated the services of the 20 casual workmen. He has proved a letter of the ASI 
Workers Union addressed to the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), Bhubaneswar dated 4.2.202] 
which is marked as Ext.-l and photocopy of a letter dated 22.09.2020 of the Management of ASI, Bhubaneswar 
addressed to Joint Director Conservation, ASI New Delhi which is marked as Ext.-2. 


In the cross examination he has deposed that he was engaged under the management of ASI since 200l. He 
has also deposed that in this case !20 workmen had raised this dispute and all of them had worked under the muster 
roll of the Management but no termination letters were issued by the Management. He has further deposed that the 
Management had stopped their engagement without any prior notice and the Management had started engaging 
workmen on contract basis and on that occasion they were not called for by the Management. 


3. The Management Witness No. | Sri Madan Mohan Mishra who is the Senior Secretariat Assistant under the 
Management of ASI, Bhubaneswar Circle has deposed that the management of ASI does not come under the purview 
of the Industrial Disputes Act as it does not constitute as an “industry” for the purpose of I.D. Act. He has also stated 
that the primary objective of the ASI is to implement the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
Act, 958 and Rules, 959 and Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, [972 so that the activities of the ASI, do not come 
under the definition of “Industry” for the purpose of Industrial Disputes Act. He has further stated that the [7 Party- 
Management has not empowered to take any decision relating to any Policy matter and it is only to following the 
guidelines/instruction issued by the competent authority. He has also stated that the workmen were engaged against 
the specific estimate of concerned Centrally Protected Monuments/Site through Muster roll and after completion of 
the work the concerned workmen were disengaged. He has further deposed that the [7 party- Management on receipt 
of instruction from the office of Director General ASI New Delhi communicated by the Addl. Director General 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 5, 2025/कार्तिक 24, 947 707 


(Administration), ASI New Delhi that the man-power should be engaged through different outsourcing agency 
following GFR provisions which should be followed strictly and the man-powers were engaged through out-sourcing 
by following GFR provisions of the maintenance/conservation/horticulture operations at the Centrally Protected 
Monuments. He has proved the copy of the letter dated 22.0!.2020 of Superintendent, Archaeologist, ASI, 
Bhubaneswar as Ext.-A relating to sitting on dharana of workmen in front of Bhubaneswar circle of ASI, office 
memorandum dated 5.09.2003 of the Under Secretary Government of India relating to workmen as Ext.-B and copy 
of the letter dated 0.08.20l7 of Addl. Director General, ASI New Delhi addressed to all RDs and to all 
Superintending Archaeologist/Dy. Archaeologists relating to E-procurement and engagement of man-power 
as Ext.-C. 

In the cross examination he has deposed that he is not aware of the fact that the issue regarding applicability 
of the I.D. Act to the Management of ASI had been raised before the R.L.C.(C), Bhubaneswar and the R.L.C(C) had 
held that the I.D. Act would be applicable to the Management of ASI. He has also deposed that he is not aware that 
the Management of ASI R.L.C.(C) and Dy. Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) were the signatory of the 
Memorandum of Settlement arrived between the Union and the management of ASI. 


4. Now coming to documentary evidence it appears that the Ext.-] and Ext.-A are same. Both the Ext.-] and 
Ext.-A show that the Superintendent, Archaeologist (I/c.) vide letter dated 22.0!.2020 had written a letter to Joint 
Director General (Conservation) informing about the agitating previously engaged casual workers on muster roll 
enclosing a list of !l0 workmen mentioning their engagement at different circles of ASI. The enclosed list shows that 
some of the workmen were working under the |*t Party- Management since 2005. 


I5. Now after analysing the oral and documentary evidence available on the record it is quite apparent that all 
the concerned !0 workmen were engaged as casual labourers under the Management of ASI, Bhubaneswar for past 
fifteen to twenty years before their disengagement in the year 20l8. Further it is also apparent that at the time of 
disengagement of those concerned workmen they were not paid any compensation amount and gratuity or any 
termination benefits. Moreover, it is also apparent that the management of ASI had engaged/recruited fresh workers 
for discharging the work which were being discharged by these workmen while these workmen were not on illegal 
strike. 


6. At this stage, it is relevant to mention Section 25-T of the Industrial Disputes Act which provides about 
unfair labour practice and it reads as follows:- 


Section 25T — Prohibition of unfair labour practice — No employer or workman or a trade union, whether registered 
under the Trade Unions Act, 926 (6 of 926), or not, shall commit any unfair labour practice 


7. Further the Fifth Schedule provides a list of Unfair Labour Practice on the part of the Employers and Trade 
Unions of Employees. The sub-clause (a) and sub-clause (b) of Clause-5 of Fifth Schedule provide to discharge or 
dismiss the workmen by way of victimization and not in good faith, but in colourable exercise of the employers 
representative respectively. Moreover, the clause |2 of the Schedule mentions that to recruit workmen during a strike 
which is not an illegal strike. 


8. Here in the instant case there is categorical evidence that the concerned workmen were disengaged/dismissed 
from their service without any notice or notice pay or compensation or any terminal benefits, so the concerned 
workmen were disengaged/discharged by way of victimization and not in good faith but in the colourable exercise of 
the Managements representative which is in violation of sub-clause (a) and (b) of Clause-5 of Fifth Schedule. 
Moreover, there is also evidence that the Management had recruited workmen on contract basis while the concerned 
workmen were on strike which is not an illegal strike which is in violation of Clause 2 of Fifth Schedule. 


9. After considering all the facts and circumstances of the case the Tribunal finds that the |‘t Party-Management 
of Archaeology Survey of India, Bhubaneswar has resorted to unfair labour practice by not allowing the workmen of 
the 274 party-Union to do the job under A.S.I and recruiting fresh workers is not proper, legal and justified. 


20. In view of the above discussion the Issue No. II is decided in favour of the 277 party-Union. 
ISSUE NO. I 
2I. It is important to mention here that the authorized representative of the Management has made submission 


before the Tribunal that the management of ASI is not covered under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act. 
Further authorized representative of the 2™ party-Union has strongly objected the contention of the authorized 
representative of the Management and has submitted that the management of ASI comes under the provisions of 
definition of Industry as denied under section 20) of the I.D. Act. 


22. In view of such the Tribunal think it proper to quote the definition of industry as mentioned in 2(j) of 
the LD. Act. 


20) — “industry” means any business, trade, undertaking, manufacture or calling of employers and includes any 
calling, service, employment, handicraft, or industrial occupation or avocation of workmen. 


23; It is relevant to mention here that the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case Bangalore Water Supply & 
Sewerage -versus- R. Rajappa & Others reported in AIR 978 SC 969 has been pleased to hold as follows:- 


708 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA NOVEMBER 5, 2025/KARTIKA 24, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


“Industry”, as defined in Section 2(j) of the I.D. Act has a wide import. 


a) Where (i) systematic activity, (ii) organized by co-operation between employer and employee, (the direct and 
substantial element is chimerical) (iii) for the production and/or distribution of goods and services calculated to satisfy 
human wants and wishes (not spiritual or religious but inclusive of material things or services geared to, celestial bliss 
e.g. making, on a large scale, prasad or food), prima facie, there is an “industry” in that enterprise. 


(b) Absence of profit motive or gainful objective is irrelevant, be the venture in the public, joint private or other 
sector. 


(c) The true focus is functional and the decisive test is the nature of the activity with special emphasis on the 
employer-employee relations. 


(d) If the Organization is a trade or business, it does not cease to, be one because of philanthropy animating the 
undertaking. 


24. At this stage it is relevant to mention here that the [7 Party- Management in its written statement has 
categorically mentioned that the primary activities of ASI are implementation of the statutory laws i.e. the Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, [958 and Rules, 959 and Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, 
972 for maintenance, conservation and preservation of Centrally Protected Monuments/Sites and conducting 
archaeological exploration and excavation setting up and requisition of man-powers and horticultural operation and 
around monuments. 


Moreover, it is also the case of the workmen that they had been working under the |‘ Party-Management for 
maintenance of 92 number of historical places in Odisha. 


25, In view of such there is a systematic activity organized by co-operation between the |*' Party-Management 
and the workmen for distribution of services for satisfaction of the human wants and wishes. 

26. Hence, the facts and circumstances of the case fulfils all the tests provided by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in 
the case of Bangalore Watter Supply & Sewerage -Versus- R. Rajappa & Others reported in AIR 978 SC 969. 

27. Hence, the [7 Party-Management is coming under the definition of an “Industry”. 

28. Hence, the Issue No. I is decided in favour of the 274 party-Union. 

ISSUE NO. II 

29. After analysing the oral and documentary evidence available in this case it is quite apparent that the [7 Party- 


Management had resorted to unfair labour practice by not allowing l0 workers engaged previously by the 
management to do the job of ASI at different site and recruiting fresh workers directly through contractor is not 
proper, legal and justified. 

30. It is relevant to mention here that there is evidence of W.W.-| that the workers of this case are not gainfully 
employed and his evidence has not been impeached in his cross examination. 


3. After considering all the facts and circumstances of the case the Tribunal is of the opinion that all the 0 
(One Hundred Ten) workmen are entitled for their reinstatement under the Management of ASI, Bhubaneswar with 
back wages. Hence, this issue is answered in favour of the 2"! Party- Union. 


ORDER 
32. The * Party-Management i.e. the Superintending Archaeologist, Archaeological Survey of India, 
Bhubaneswar is directed to reinstate all the 0 (one hundred ten) workmen on the same post with 50% back wages 
from the date of their termination within a period of one month from the date of publication of the award in the 
official gazette. 
33, The Award is passed accordingly. 
34. Office is directed to send the copy of the Award to the Ministry of Labour & Employment for necessary 
gazette notification. 
35. Office is directed to consign the record. 
Dictated &Corrected by me. 

DINESH KUMAR SINGH, Presiding Officer 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-!0064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-!0054. GORAKHA NATH __ Disitally signed by GoRAKHA 


IATH YADAVA, 


N 
YADAVA Date: 2025..7 :23:58 +0530" 


