रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल०--(एन)04/0007/2003--26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


JN क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-25052026-272850 
CG-DL-E-25052026-272850 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 19] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, मई 25, 2026/7483 4, 1948 (शक) 
No. 19] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, MAY 25, 2026/JYAISHTHA 4, 1948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 25th May, 2026/Jyaishtha 4, 1948 (Saka) 


THE ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS FIRE AND 
EMERGENCY SERVICE REGULATION, 2026 


No. 5 oF 2026 


Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic 
of India. 


A Regulation to provide for the maintenance of a Fire and Emergency Service and to 
make more effective provisions for the fire prevention and fire safety measures 
in various types of buildings and premises in the Union Territory of Andaman 


and Nicobar Islands and for the matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


In exercise of the powers conferred by article 240 of the Constitution, the 
President is pleased to promulgate the following Regulation made by her:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Regulation may be called the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Fire Short title, 
and Emergency Service Regulation, 2026. earn end 


commencement. 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Administrator may, by 
notification, in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


Definitions. 2. In this Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Additional Director’ means the Additional Director of Fire and 
Emergency Service referred to in clause (ii) of section 6; 


(6) “Appellate Authority” means the Appellate Authority referred to in 
sub-section (/) of section 31; 


(c) “Building” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the 


Andaman and Nicobar Islands (Municipal) Regulation, 1994 or the Andaman Reg. 5 of 1994. 
and Nicobar Islands (Panchayats) Regulation, 1994 or the Andaman and Reg. 1 of 1994. 
Nicobar Islands Town and Country Planning Regulation, 1994 or any other Reg. 7 of 1994. 


law for the time being in force in the Union territory in the area in which this 
Regulation is in force and includes places or premises comprising land or 
building, or part of a land or building, whether authorised or otherwise, 
outhouses, if any, pertaining to such building or part thereof and petrol, diesel 
or gas lines, installations or pumps connection therewith; 


(d) “Building bye-laws” means the bye-laws made under the Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands (Municipal) Regulation, 1994 or the Andaman and Reg. 5 of 1994. 
Nicobar Islands (Panchayats) Regulation, 1994 or Town and Country Reg. 1 of 1994. 
Planning Rules and Regulations or any other bye-law for the time being in 
force in the area in which this regulation is in force; 


(e) “bye-law” means fire safety norms or guidelines made by the 
Government under this Regulation; 


(f) “Deputy Director” means the Deputy Director of Fire and Emergency 
Service referred to in clause (iv) of section 6; 


(g) “Director” means the Director of the Fire and Emergency Service 
referred to in clause (7) of section 6; 


(A) “disaster” means disaster as defined in clause (d) of section 2 of the 
Disaster Management Act, 2005; oa Oren 


(i) “emergency” means any serious situation or occurrence, including 
disasters, that happens unexpectedly and demands immediate action or 
response of the emergency service; 


(0) “employee” means a person appointed to the Fire and Emergency 
Service under this Regulation; 


(k) “erector” means a person or an association of persons, whether 
corporate or otherwise, who erects or makes a pandal or any structure for 
occupation of people on a regular or temporary basis; 


(0) “Fire and Emergency Service” means the Andaman and Nicobar Fire 
and Emergency Service; 


(m) “Fire Officer” means a person appointed as Fire Officer under 
section 9; 


(n) “fire prevention and life safety measures” means such measures as 
are necessary for the containment, control and extinguishing of fire and for 
ensuring the safety of life and property as may be prescribed; 


(०) “fire property” means land and building used as fire stations, 
firefighting appliances, equipment, tools implements and things whatsoever 
used for firefighting and other means of transport used in connection with the 
firefighting, uniforms and badges of rank; 


(p) “Fire Safety Officer” means the person appointed as the Fire Safety 
Officer by the owners and occupiers of certain premises and buildings under 
section 28; 


Reg. 5 of 1994. 


Reg. 1 of 1994. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(q) “Fire Station” means a building erected to house the firefighting 
equipment, appliances and staff declared generally or specially by the 
Government to be a fire station for the purpose of this Regulation; 


(r) “Government” means the Union territory Administration of 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands headed by the Administrator; 


(s) “Joint Director” means the Joint Director of Fire and Emergency 
Service referred to in clause (iii) of section 6; 


(0) “local authority” means the authorities constituted under the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands (Municipal) Regulation, 1994 or the Panchayati 
Raj Institutions created under the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (Panchayats) 
Regulation, 1994 or a body or authority created under any other law, which 
may be notified in this behalf by the Central Government or the 
Administration of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, as the case may be; 


(u) “Nominated Authority” means— 


(i) a Fire Officer not below the rank of a station officer nominated 
by the Deputy Director by an order; or 


(ii) any other Municipal Officer, not below the rank of a station 
officer of fire service, nominated by the Government, 


as a Nominated Authority for the purposes of this Regulation; 


(v) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
and the expression “notified” shall be construed accordingly; 


(w) “occupancy” means the principal occupancy for which a building or 
a part of a building is used or intended to be used including subsidiary 
occupancies which are contingent upon it; 


(x) “occupier” means— 
(i) any person who, for the time being, is paying or is liable to pay, 


to the owner the rent or any portion of the rent of the land or building in 
respect of which such rent is paid or is payable; 


(zi) an owner in occupation of, or otherwise using his land or building; 
(iii) a rent-free tenant of any land or building; 
(iv) a licensee in occupation of any land or building; and 


(v) any person who is liable to pay to the owner, damages for the 
use and occupation of any land or building; 


(v) “Official Gazette” means the Union territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands Gazette; 


(z) “owner” means a person who, for the time being, is entitled to receive 
the rent of any land or building, whether on his own account or on account of 
himself and others and includes an agent, trustee, guardian or receiver or any 
other person, or who should so receive the rent or be entitled to receive it if 
the land or building or part thereof were let to a tenant; 


(za) “pandal” means a temporary structure with roof or walls made of 
straw, hay, ulu grass, golpatta, hogla, darma, mat, canvas, cloth or other like 
material which is not adopted for permanent or continuous occupancy; 


(zb) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Government under 
this Regulation and the expression “prescribe” shall be construed accordingly; 


(zc) “Qualified Agency” means a person or an association of persons 
having technical specialisation in the field of Fire or Civil or Mechanical 
Engineering or Technology or Industrial Safety or Disaster Management or 
Chemical Science from a recognised university and has sufficient domain 
knowledge and accomplishments in the field of fire services; 


Function of Fire 
and Emergency 
Service. 


Superintendence 
of Fire and 
Emergency 
Service to vest 
in Government. 


Composition and 
classification of 
Fire and 
Emergency 
Service. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(zd) “Second Appellate Authority” means the Director of the Fire and 
Emergency Service; 


(ze) “specified” means as specified by an order under this Regulation 
and the expression “specify” shall be construed accordingly; 


(2) “Standing Fire Advisory Council” means the advisory body 
constituted by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Central Government to examine 
the technical problems relating to the Fire and Emergency Service; 


(zg) “Union territory” means the Union territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands. 


CHAPTER II 
THE FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE 


3. (1) On and from the date of commencement of this Regulation, the existing 
Andaman and Nicobar Fire Service shall be called as the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands Fire and Emergency Service. 


(2) All officers and subordinate ranks of the Fire and Emergency Service shall 
be liable for posting to any fire station or field formations in the Union territory. 


(3) In case where the emergency service is not related only to fire, the 
decisions and directions of the authority in-charge of the emergency service shall 
prevail. 


4. On and from the date of commencement of this Regulation, the 
superintendence of, and control over, the Fire and Emergency Service shall vest in 
the Government and the Fire and Emergency Service shall be administered by the 
Government in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made 
thereunder. 


5. (1) The Fire and Emergency Service shall consist of the following, 
namely:— 


(a) Director General of Police, ex officio—Director; 


(0) Additional Director General of Police or Inspector General of Police 
or Deputy Inspector General of Police, ex officio—Additional Director; 


(c) Senior Superintendent of Police, ex officio—Joint Director; 
(d) Deputy Director; 

(e) Chief Fire Officer; 

(f) Assistant Divisional Officer; 

(g) Station Officer; 

(h) Sub-Officer; 

(i) Leading Fireman; 

(j) Fireman. 


(2) The existing workshop, Control Room and other field formations shall 
function as per the rules made under this Regulation in accordance with the 
instructions issued by the Standing Fire Advisory Council. 


(3) The number of employees, method of their appointment, grade of post, 
qualification, pay, allowances and other conditions of their service and the matters 
connected therewith shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(4) The uniform and badges of employees shall be such as may be prescribed 
and they shall be in conformity with instruction issued by the Standing Fire 
Advisory Council. 


(5) The employees of the Fire and Emergency Service shall be governed by 
the Central Civil Service Rules as are applicable to the other employees of the 
Government in relation to the terms and conditions of their service and all other 
allied matters. 


(6) Save as otherwise provided by or under this Regulation, every person 
holding office either as a Fire Officer or staff or an employee (by whatever 
designation called) of existing fire service on the date immediately before the 
commencement of this Regulation, shall continue to hold office on the same terms 
and conditions as were applicable to him immediately before such date and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as before and in addition to those as 
are conferred on them by or under this Regulation. 


6. On and from the date of commencement of this Regulation,— 


(i) the Director General of Police, Andaman and Nicobar Islands shall 
be the Director of Fire and Emergency Service, who shall exercise such 
powers and perform such duties and other functions as are specified by or 
under this Regulation; 


(ii) the Additional Director General of Police or Inspector General of 
Police or Deputy Inspector General of Police, Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
shall be the Additional Director of Fire and Emergency Service; 


(iii) the Senior Superintendent of Police, Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
shall be the Joint Director of Fire and Emergency Service; 


(iv) the Deputy Director of Fire and Emergency Service shall be 
appointed as per notified Recruitment Rules made in this behalf and shall 
function as Head of Office. 


7. (1) Subject to the control, directions and superintendence of the 
Government, the Director shall direct and regulate all matters of fire safety and 
prevention, firefighting equipment, machinery and appliances, training, observation 
of persons, events of mutual relations, distribution of duties, study of laws, orders 
and modes of proceedings and all matters of executive detail or the fulfilment of 
duties and maintenance of discipline of fire officers and employees of the Fire and 
Emergency Service under him, as per the relevant Government rules. 


(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Regulation, the Director shall— 
(i) function as the Head of the Department of Fire and Emergency 
Services; 
(ii) keep liaison with the Government for the development of the Fire 
and Emergency Service; 


(iii) frame the policies in relation to the development of the Fire and 
Emergency Service and, on approval by the Government, take steps to 
implement the same; 


(iv) prepare and submit plans and proposals to the Government with 
regard to the periodical review of fire equipment, fire property and fire 
manpower for effective implementation of the Fire and Emergency Service; 


(v) take or cause to be taken such effective steps and measures in cases 
of major fires, house collapse and other emergency services; 


(vi) investigate or cause to be investigated the reason of fire and advise 
the concerned authorities for implementing fire precautionary measures; 


Director, 
Additional 
Director, Joint 
Director and 
Deputy Director 
of Fire and 
Emergency 
Service. 


Power, duties 
and functions of 
Director, 
Additional 
Director, Joint 
Director and 
Deputy Director. 


Setting up of 
Fire Station. 


Appointment of 
Fire Officer. 


Powers, duties 
and functions of 
Fire Officers. 


Issue of 
certificate to 
employees of 
Fire and 
Emergency 
Service. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(vii) enter into agreement, in consultation with the Government with any 
person or agency who employs and maintains personnel or equipment or both 
for firefighting purposes, for the purpose of dealing with fires occurring in any 
area; 


(viii) implement the effective Human Resource Development policies of 
the Government in accordance with the prescribed tasks at each level of fire 
service personnel and for that purpose, he may establish advance training 
centres; 


(ix) represent the Government on National and International forums with 
a view to updating the standards of Fire and Emergency Service in the Union 
territory; and 


(x) perform any other function or duty as may be necessary for carrying 
out the provisions of this Regulation. 


(3) The Additional Director, the Joint Director and the Deputy Director shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as are conferred and imposed upon 
them, by this Regulation or by the rules made thereunder, subject to the control, 
directions and superintendence of the Director. 


8. (1) For the purpose of providing adequate number of officers and staff for 
meeting the needs of Fire and Emergency Service, the Government may, for the 
purpose of securing fire prevention and life safety measures within the Union 
territory, by notification; set up as many Fire Stations and other field formations as 
it deems fit in conformity with the recommendations of Standing Fire Advisory 
Council and Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and 
Implementation Guidelines. 


(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (/) shall define the limits of 
each Fire Station and other field formations as may be necessary for administrative 
and operational efficiency. 


9. (1) For the purposes of this Regulation, the Director may appoint Fire 
Officer not below the rank of Leading Fireman, who shall be officer-in-charge of a 
Fire Station or other field formations as per the size of the Fire and Emergency 
Service as prescribed by the Government. 


(2) The Director may appoint such number of staff to assist the Fire Officer as 
may be prescribed. 


(3) The qualifications for appointment and other conditions of service of the 
officers designated under this Regulation shall be such as may be prescribed. 


10. (J) Subject to the control, direction and superintendence of the Director, 
the Fire Officers shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are conferred 
and imposed upon him by this Regulation or rules or orders made thereunder. 


(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (/), the concerned Fire 
Officer shall be— 


(a) responsible for maintenance of communication system, water 
resources including hydrants within his station areas, and shall be in-charge of 
operations of the Fire and Emergency Service within his area; and 


(b) the Commanding Officer in the case of fighting a fire and preventing 
the fire spread, and the emergency service engaged, shall work under his 
command. 


11. (J) Every employee, appointed to the Fire and Emergency Service shall 
receive a certificate under the seal and signature of the Director and thereupon such 
person shall have the powers, functions and privileges of an employee of the Fire 
and Emergency Service under this Regulation. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(2) The certificate received under sub-section (/) shall cease to have effect 
when the person named therein ceased for any reason to be an employee of the Fire 
and Emergency Service and on his ceasing to be such employee, he shall forthwith 
surrender the certificate to any fire officer empowered by the Director to receive the 
same. 


(3) A certificate referred to in sub-section (/) shall become null and void or 
remain inoperative during the period such person is suspended from the Fire and 
Emergency Service. 


12. Whenever, it appears to the Government that it is necessary or expedient 
to augment the Fire and Emergency Service, it may raise an auxiliary service by 
enrolment of volunteers for such area on such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed. 


13. The powers, functions and privileges vested in a Fire Officer shall remain 
suspended while such Fire Officer is under suspension from office: 


Provided that notwithstanding such suspension, such person shall continue to 
be subject to the control of same authorities to which he would have been if he had 
not been under suspension. 


CHAPTER III 
FIRE AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE 


14. The Fire Officer shall ensure the timely turnouts of fire units to respond to 
fire and emergency related calls in accordance with such Standard Operating 
Procedures as may be determined by the Government. 


15. The Fire Officer shall ensure deployment of the Fire and Emergency 
Service resources, equipment and fire personnel at stand-by duties during any fire 
response or any other emergency as may be prescribed. 


16. The Fire Officer shall ensure planning, organising and staff deployment of 
the staff and ensure regular monitoring of the fire or emergency site. 


17. (/) On the occasion of fire or rescue operation, in any area in which this 
Regulation is in force, the employee may,— 


(i) order any other member of the Fire and Emergency Service to remove 
any person who by his presence interferes with or impedes the operation for 
extinguishing the fire or for saving life or property; 


(ii) close any street or passage in or near which a fire is being fought or 
rescue operation is in progress; 


(iii) require the Authority in-charge of water supply in the area to 
regulate the water mains so as to provide water at a specified pressure at the 
place where fire has broken out and utilise the water of any stream, cistern, 
well or tank or of any available source of water, public or private, for the 
purpose of extinguishing or limiting the spread of such fire and carrying out 
rescue operations; 


(iv) exercise the same powers for dispersing an assembly of persons 
likely to obstruct the firefighting operations, as if he is an officer of a Police 
Station and shall be entitled to the same immunities and protection as an 
officer of a Police Station; 


(v) detain a person who wilfully obstructs and hinders Fire and 
Emergency Service personnel in firefighting and rescue operations and 
handover him over to a police officer or at the nearest Police Station without 
delay along with a brief note giving the time, date and reason of detention; and 


Auxiliary Fire 
and Emergency 
Service. 


Effect of 
suspension of 
Fire Officer. 


Response to 
calls. 


Personnel and 
scale of 
equipment. 


Operation 
management. 


Powers of 
employees of 
Fire and 
Emergency 
Service on 
occasion of fire 
or rescue. 


Power to arrange 
for water during 
emergency. 


Duty to arrange 
water supply. 


Power to enter 
into agreement 
for water supply. 


No compensation 
for interruption 
of water supply. 


Exemption of 
charges for 
water consumed. 


Preventive 
measures. 


Fire prevention 
and life safety 
measures in 
pandals to be 
self-regulatory. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(vi) take such other measures as may appear to him to be necessary for 
extinguishing the fire or for the protection of life or property, or for both. 


(2) The employee shall break into or through or pull down, any premises for 
the passage of hose or appliances or cause them to be broken into or through or 
pulled down, doing as little damage as possible for the purpose of extinguishing fire 
and carrying out rescue operation. 


CHAPTER IV 
WATER SUPPLY 


18. It shall be lawful for the Fire Officer to draw water from any source in the 
area which he considers necessary during firefighting operations and on such 
occasions as may be required and the authority or owner or occupier having control 
over such water source shall supply water for that purpose at such rates as may be 
prescribed. 


19. (1) The Fire Officer shall take all reasonable measures for securing that an 
adequate supply of water shall be available for the use in the event of fire. 


(2) The Fire Officer shall ensure that the water demand for firefighting in the 
area is in accordance with Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering 
Organization (CPHEEO) Manual. 


(3) The Local Authority and Andaman Public Works Department shall 
provide all assistance in meeting the water demand for firefighting as per 
sub-sections (/) and (2). 


20. The Fire Officer may enter into an agreement with an agency for meeting 
the demand of water supply and emergent need of water as per such procedures and 
terms and conditions for the payment as may be prescribed. 


21. No authority or in-charge of water supply in any area shall be entitled to 
any claim for compensation for damage by reason of any interruption of supply of 
water caused in compliance with clause (iii) of sub-section (/) of section 17. 


22. No charge shall be made by any local authority for water consumed in 
firefighting operations by the Fire and Emergency Service. 


CHAPTER V 
GENERAL MEASURES FOR FIRE PREVENTION AND EMERGENCY LIFE SAFETY MEASURES 


23. (1) The Government may, by notification, require owner or occupier of 
premises or goods in any area, which in its opinion, are likely to cause risk of fire, 
to take such precautions as may be provided therein. 


(2) The Deputy Director shall ensure that provision for Fire Services 
Management, Prevention and Preparedness including preparation of Fire Hazard 
Response Mitigation Plan is as per the guidelines issued by the National Disaster 
Management Authority. 


24. (1) The erectors of pandals shall be deemed to be self-regulatory for taking 
fire prevention and life safety measures under this Regulation. 


(2) The erector of a pandal shall display a declaration regarding compliance 
of fire prevention and life safety measures in such form as may be prescribed. 


(3) It shall be lawful for the Nominated Authority to enter and inspect the 
pandal with a view to verify the correctness of the declaration so made by the erector 
under sub-section (2) and to point out the shortcomings, if any, with directions to 
rectify them within a specified time and if the directions of the Nominated Authority 
are not complied with within the time so given, the Nominated Authority shall 
remove the pandal in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


25. (1) Where a notification has been issued under sub-section (/) of 
section 23, it shall be lawful for the Nominated Authority to direct the removal of 
encroachments or objects or goods likely to cause a risk of fire or any obstruction 
to firefighting, to a place of safety, by means of a notice served in such manner as 
he may think fit, and on failure of the owner, occupier or erector, as the case may 
be, to do so, the Nominated Authority may, report the matter to the Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate, in whose territorial jurisdiction the premises or building or pandal is 
situated, requesting to decide the matter: 


Provided that where the Nominated Authority considers such encroachments 
or objects or goods to be an imminent cause of risk of fire or obstruction to 
firefighting, he may direct Station House Officer having jurisdiction in the area to 
seize or remove the encroachments or objects or goods forthwith and report the 
matter to the Sub-Divisional Magistrate accordingly. 


(2) On receipt of a report under sub-section (/), the Sub-Divisional Magistrate 
shall give, by means of a notice served in such manner as he may think fit, an 
opportunity of showing cause against the removal of encroachments or objects or 
goods likely to cause a risk of fire or obstruction to firefighting. 


(3) After giving the owner or occupier or erector, as the case may be, an 
opportunity of making representation under sub-section (2), the Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate after considering the representation, may withdraw the notice or make 
an order to seize, detain or remove such encroachments or objects or goods. 


(4) The person charged with the execution of the order as made in 
sub-section (3) shall forthwith make an inventory of the objects and goods which he 
seizes under such order, and shall give a notice in writing as may be prescribed in 
this behalf, to the person in whose possession the objects or goods were at the time 
of seizure, that the said objects or goods shall be sold as mentioned therein, if the 
same are not claimed within the period stipulated in the said notice. 


(5) On the failure of the person in whose possessions the objects or goods were 
at the time of seizure to claim the seized objects and goods pursuant to notice given 
under sub-section (4), the Sub-Divisional Magistrate shall sell such objects or goods 
through public auction. 


26. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the bye-law and any other law 
for the time being in force in the Union territory, the owner or the occupier, who are 
either individually or jointly responsible, of a building or part thereof as specified 
in this Regulation, shall ensure and provide fire prevention and life safety measures 
therein: 


Provided that the owner or the occupier, as the case may be, shall— 
(i) provide firefighting and life safety measures; 


(ii) maintain the fire prevention and life safety measures in operational 
condition at all times. 


(2) Any person proposing to construct a building as mentioned in 
clauses (a) and (b) of this sub-section or pursuant to the rules made in this behalf, 
shall apply for approval of the fire and life safety measure along with the building 
plan to the Nominated Authority in this behalf, in such form along with such fee as 
may be prescribed, in case of — 


(a) multi-storied buildings having more than fifteen-metre height; 
(5) special buildings including— 


(i) hotel or resort or eating houses, apartment exceeding 500 square 
metres of floor area on adding area of all floors, educational, assembly, 
institutional, business, mercantile, hazardous industry or factory, 
storage; 


Removal of 
encroachments 
or objects or 
goods likely to 
cause risk of fire 
or any 
obstruction to 
firefighting. 


Owner or 
occupiers 
liability to 
provide fire 
prevention and 
life safety 
measures. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(ii) mixed occupancies, where any of above buildings have floor 
area more than 500 square metres on adding area of all floors. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force 
in the Union territory, no authority shall issue the occupancy certificate, unless it is 
satisfied that the owner or occupier, either individually or jointly, has complied with 
the provisions as provided in sub-section (2). 


(4) Without prejudice to the existing Building bye-laws applicable and 
enforcement of bye-laws by the local authority, the owner or occupier, as the case 
may be, shall obtain “fire safety certificate” from the Fire and Emergency Service 
for the buildings mentioned in sub-section (2), which shall be valid for five years 
from the date of issue of such certificate. 


(5) The owner or occupier, as the case may be, shall furnish to the Qualified 
Agency or Nominated Authority, a self-certified certificate in such form as may be 
prescribed, regarding the compliance of the fire prevention and life safety measures 
in his building or part thereof, as required by or under the provisions of this 
Regulation while applying for fire safety certificate. 


(6) The owner or occupier, after receipt of fire safety certificate, shall furnish 
a certificate in such form as may be prescribed, once a year in the month of July 
regarding the maintenance of fire protection system in good and efficient condition 
as provided in sub-section (/). 


Fire safety 27. (1) The Qualified Agency or the Nominated Authority, as the case may be, 

certificate. shall scrutinise the compliances with regard to the requirement of section 26 made 
by owners or occupiers or applicant, as the case may be, either independently or 
jointly and after making necessary enquiry, if any, issue fire safety certificate within 
a period of one month from the date of receipt of the application subject to the 
condition that all necessary required documents, designs, drawing, and the like shall 
be submitted by the owner or occupier or applicant. 


(2) If the owner or occupier, as the case may be, fails to comply with the 
directions issued by the Qualified Agency or the Nominated Authority, the fire 
safety certificate, issued under sub-section (/), shall be cancelled after giving the 
owner or occupier or applicant, an opportunity of hearing to show cause. 


(3) The owner or occupier of the building or premises whose fire safety 
certificate has been cancelled due to default on his part, shall not be entitled to 
occupy the building or premises on the ground of non-compliance of fire prevention 
and life safety measures. 


(4) No person shall tamper with, alter, remove or cause any injury or damage 
to any fire prevention and life safety equipment installed in any such building or 
part thereof or instigate any other person to do so. 


(5) For the purposes of section 26 and this section, the manner of selecting the 
Qualified Agency, and the responsibilities of such Qualified Agency, shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 


Appointment 28. (J) To ensure effective fire prevention and life safety measures of the 

रा oo of factory or building or premises as may be specified by an order by the Government 
1re 9a . : . . . ४. & roe 

Officer. हे in this behalf, every owner and occupier or occupiers individually or jointly, as the 


case may be, shall— 


(i) appoint a Fire Safety Officer, having such qualifications and 
experience as may be prescribed; 


(ii) send the compliance report to the Nominated Authority. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


(2) The Fire Safety Officer appointed under sub-section (/) shall be issued the 
enrolment certificate by the Nominated Authority under his signature and seal of the 
office, in such form as may be prescribed. 


(3) In case of any vacancy of the Fire Safety Officer appointed under 
sub-section (/), either on resignation or otherwise, the owner and occupier or 
occupiers, as the case may be, shall be required to immediately appoint another 
person as the Fire Safety Officer. 


(4) In case of the non-appointment of the Fire Safety Officer, as provided 
under sub-section (/), the Nominated Authority may take such steps as he deems 
necessary, which includes report to the Labour Commissioner for the closure of the 
factory and in other cases to the relevant authority for necessary action under 
relevant law. 


(5) The Fire Safety Officers shall undergo training at Fire and Emergency 
Service Training Institute as may be identified by the Government in this behalf: 


Provided that a person who has already undergone such training at the 
National Fire Service College, Nagpur or at any other equivalent institution 
recognised by the Government, shall not be required to undergo such training. 


29. (1) The Nominated Authority may, after giving three hours’ notice to the 
occupier, or if there is no occupier, to the owner of any place or building or part 
thereof, enter and inspect such place or building or part thereof at any time between 
sunrise and sunset where such inspection appears necessary for ascertaining the 
adequacy or contravention of fire prevention and life safety measures. 


(2) The Nominated Authority shall be provided with all possible assistance by 
the owner or occupier, as the case may be, of such place or building or part thereof 
for carrying out the inspection under sub-section (/). 


(3) The owner or occupier or any other person shall not obstruct or cause any 
obstruction to the entry of a person empowered or authorised under this section into 
or upon any land or building and shall not abuse such person after such entry for 
inspection. 


(4) When any such place or building or part thereof used as a human dwelling 
is entered under sub-section (3), due regard shall be paid to the social and religious 
sentiments of the occupiers, and where any flat, apartment or a part of such building 
is in the actual occupancy of any woman, who, according to the custom does not 
appear in public, notice shall be given to her that she is at liberty to withdraw, and 
every reasonable facility shall be afforded to her for withdrawing. 


(5) Where the inspection is carried out by the Nominated Authority under the 
preceding provisions of this section, he shall give a report of any such inspection to 
the Nominated Authority. 


(6) The Nominated Authority shall, after completion of the inspection of the 
place or building or part thereof under this section, record his views on the 
deviations from or the contraventions of, the requirements with regard to the fire 
prevention and life safety measures or the inadequacy or non-compliance of such 
measures provided or to be provided therein with reference to the height of the 
building or the nature of activities carried on in such place or building or part thereof 
and issue a notice to the owner or occupier of such building or part thereof directing 
him to undertake such measures within such time as may be specified in the notice. 


30. Any person who possesses any information regarding an outbreak of fire 
shall communicate the same without delay to the nearest Fire Station. 


Power of 
inspection. 


Information on 
outbreak of fire. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


CHAPTER VI 
APPEALS 


Appeals. 31. (J) Any person aggrieved by any notice or order of the Nominated 
Authority issued or made under this Regulation may prefer an appeal to the 
Appellate Authority, who is an officer not below the rank of Deputy Director, within 
a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice or order: 


Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain an appeal after the expiry 
of the said period of thirty days if he is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for 
not filing it within that period. 


(2) An appeal to the Appellate Authority shall be made in such form and 
manner and shall be accompanied by a copy of the notice or order appealed against 
and by such fees as may be prescribed. 


(3) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Appellate Authority may file an 
appeal within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, to the 
Second Appellate Authority and the decision of the Second Appellate Authority 
shall be final and binding on the parties. 

CHAPTER VII 


FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE TRAINING 


Functioning of 32. (1) The existing Fire and Emergency Service Training Centre shall provide 
; ire and courses of instruction in the prevention and extinguishment of fire for the fire 
mergency 


Service Traiitg service personnel, private candidates and other Government and Non-Government 
Centre. establishments and may close down or re-establish any such training centre in 
accordance with recommendations of Standing Fire Advisory Council. 


(2) The training centre referred to in sub-section (/) shall also provide training 
of specialised courses to private candidates or organisations as well as the Fire and 
Emergency Service of other States. 


(3) The Government shall prescribe such procedure as it may deem fit for 
providing a course of instruction in the prevention and extinguishment of fire. 


(4) Subject to the observance of the general rules applicable to other 
employees of the Government in relation to training, employees of the Fire and 
Emergency Service may be given training in the field of scientific and modern 
techniques of fire protection and fire safety measures, and allied matters in any 
institute, within or out of India at the cost and expense of the Government. 


Community 33. (J) The Fire and Emergency Service shall render assistance and 
preparedness. consultations to the communities in matters related to fire prevention, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Fire Officer as authorised by the Deputy Director shall conduct 
awareness programmes on preventive measures on fire and other emergencies. 


CHAPTER VIII 
LEVY OF FIRE TAX, FEE AND OTHER CHARGES 


Levy of fire tax. 34. (1) There shall be levied a fire tax on lands and buildings which are situated 
in any area in which this Regulation is applicable and on which property tax, by 
whatever name called, is levied by any local authority in that area. 


(2) The fire tax shall be levied over and above the property tax at such rates as 
may be specified. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


35. (1) The authority empowered to assess, collect and enforce payment of 
property tax under the law authorising the local authority of the area to levy such 
tax shall, on behalf of the Government, assess, collect and enforce payment of the 
fire tax in the same manner as the property tax is assessed, collected and enforced. 


(2) The Government may determine and earmark such portion of the total 
proceeds of fire tax to meet the cost of collection of fire tax. 


(3) The net amount of fire tax collected under this Regulation reduced by the 
cost of collection of the fire tax, shall be deposited as mentioned in section 37, in 
such manner and at such intervals, as may be prescribed. 


36. (1) Where employees of the Fire and Emergency Service are sent beyond 
the limits of any area in which this Regulation is in force, in order to extinguish a 
fire in the neighbourhood of such limits on the request of any local body or Fire and 
Emergency Service authority, they shall be paid such fee as may be prescribed. 


(2) The fee referred to in sub-section (/) shall be payable, within one month 
of the service of a notice of demand, by the Deputy Director of the local body or the 
Fire and Emergency Service authority, as the case may be, and if it is not paid within 
that period, it shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue. 


(3) No fee shall be levied for extinguishing the fire and rescue operations 
within the Union territory. 


(4) The Government shall, by notification, specify the fee for deployment of 
members of the Fire and Emergency Service along with equipment and appliances 
for stand-by-duty for a specific duration. 


37. The proceeds of fees, fire tax and penalties recovered under this 
Regulation, shall be credited to the Government account under the head “Fire 
Protection and Control”. 


CHAPTER IX 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND COMPENSATION 


38. Whoever contravenes any provisions of this Regulation or any rule or 
notification made or issued thereunder except as provided specifically in this 
Regulation, shall without prejudice to any other action taken against him under this 
Regulation and the rules made thereunder, be liable to a penalty which may extend 
to ten thousand rupees and where the contravention is a continuing one with a further 
penalty which may extend to one thousand rupees for every day after the first during 
which such contravention continues. 


39. Whoever contravenes any provision of Chapter IV or the rules made 
thereunder shall, without prejudice to any other action taken against him under this 
Regulation and rules made thereunder, be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees, or with both and where the contravention is a continuing one with a further 
fine which may extend to three thousand rupees for every day after the first during 
which such contravention continues. 


40. Notwithstanding any action which may be taken under the provisions of 
this Regulation, any member of the Fire and Emergency Service who— 


(i) is found to be guilty of any violation of duty or wilful breach of any 
provision of this Regulation or any rule or order made thereunder; or 


(ii) is found to be abdication of responsibility; or 


(iii) withdraws or abstains from the duties of his office without permission 
or without having given previous notice for fifteen days or more; or 


Mode of 
assessment, 
collection, etc., 
of fire tax. 


Fee on 
deployment of 
Fire and 
Emergency 
Service. 


Deposit of fees, 
charges, fire tax 
and penalties, 
etc. 


Penalty for 
contravention of 
Regulation, 
other than 
Chapter IV. 


Penalty for 
contravention of 
provisions of 
Chapter IV. 


Violation of 
duty. 


Penalty in case 
of non- 
appointment of 
Fire Safety 
Officers under 
section 28. 


Penalty for 
failure to give 
information. 


Penalty for 
failure to take 
precautions. 


Penalty for 
wilfully 

obstructing 
firefighting, 


rescue operation. 


Penalty for false 
report. 


Penalty for 
contravention of 
section 56. 


Offences by 
companies. 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(iv) being on leave fails without reasonable cause to report himself for 
duty on expiration of such leave; or 


(v) accepts any other employments or office or engages himself in 
business in contravention of the provisions of the Central Civil Services 
(Conduct) Rules 1964, 


shall be liable under the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) 
Rules, 1965. 


41. (J) If any owner or occupier or an association of such owners and 
occupiers of a building or premises fails to appoint Fire Safety Officers under 
section 28 within a period of thirty days of the receipt of a notice given in this behalf 
by the Nominated Authority each one of them shall be deemed to be in default 
jointly and severally. 


(2) When the person liable for appointment of such Fire Safety Officers is 
deemed to be in default, such sum not less than ten rupees per square metre and not 
exceeding fifty rupees per square metre of area owned or occupied by him including 
in the common areas in the premises as determined by the Government under this 
Regulation, may be recovered from him by way of penalty for each month of default 
or part thereof. 


42. Any person who without adequate justification, fails to communicate 
information in his possession regarding an outbreak of fire shall be deemed to have 
committed an offence punishable under section 211 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023. 


43. Whoever fails without reasonable cause to comply with any of the 
requirements specified in section 23 or section 26 or makes any false declaration 
towards compliance of fire prevention and life safety measure or of a direction 
issued in this behalf shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with 
both and where the offence is a continuing one with a further fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees for every day after the first during which such offence 
continues. 


44. Any person who wilfully obstructs or interferes with any member of the 
Fire and Emergency Service, who is engaged in firefighting operations, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with 
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both. 


45. Any person who knowingly gives or causes to be given a false report of 
the outbreak of a fire to any person authorised to receive such report by means of a 
statement, message or otherwise shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to 
twenty-five thousand rupees. 


46. Any person who removes the seal referred to in section 56, except under 
an order made by the Chief Fire Officer, shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to 
twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both. 


47. (1) Where an offence under this Regulation has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge 
of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such 
person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without 
his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission 
of such offence. 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/) where any offence 
under this Regulation has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to 
any neglect on the part, of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 


Explanation —F or the purposes of this section, the expressions— 


(i) “Company” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 


(ii) “Director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 


48. (/) Any offence committed under this Regulation, may either before or 
after the institution of prosecution, be compounded by the Nominated Authority and 
for such amount as may be prescribed: 


Provided that no offence shall be compoundable which is committed by failure 
to comply with a notice, order or requisition issued by or on behalf of the 
Government or of any of the officers authorised under this Regulation and until the 
same has been complied with. 


(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (/), the 
offender if in custody, shall be discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken 
against him in respect of such offence. 


49. (J) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Regulation, except on a complaint in writing received from the Nominated 
Authority in this behalf. 


(2) No court inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate of second class shall try 
an offence punishable under this Regulation. 


50. (/) Any person whose property catches fire on account of an action of his 
own or of his agent, done deliberately or negligently shall be liable to pay 
compensation to any other person suffering damage to his property on account of 
fire or any action taken under section 17 of this Regulation by an officer mentioned 
therein or any person acting under the authority of such officer. 


(2) All claims under sub-section (/) shall be preferred to the Appellate 
Authority, within a period of thirty days from the date when the damage was caused. 


(3) The Appellate Authority shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard 
to the concerned persons, may determine the amount of compensation and pass an 
order in this regard while fixing the liability of the persons for paying such 
compensation. 


(4) The order passed under sub-section (3) shall have the force of decree of a 
civil court and shall be implemented within thirty days from the date of receipt of 
the order. 


CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 


51. The Joint Director may, with the previous approval of the Government, 
enter into an agreement with any Fire and Emergency Service or the Authority 
which maintains the said Fire and Emergency Service, beyond the limits of any area 
in which this Regulation is in force for providing personnel or equipment or both, 
for firefighting purposes, on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by or 
under the agreement on reciprocal basis in public interest. 


Compounding of 
offences. 


Cognizance of 
offences. 


Liability of 
property owner 
to pay 
compensation. 


Reciprocal 
firefighting 
arrangements 
with other Fire 
and Emergency 
Service. 


Declaration of 
Fire and 
Emergency 
Service as 
technical 
service. 


Deployment to 
other area. 


Employment on 
other duties. 


Power to obtain 
information. 


Power to seal 
building or 
premises. 


Police officers 


and others to aid. 


Death of 
member of Fire 
and Emergency 
Service. 


Officers to be 
public servants. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


52. Without prejudice to the provisions of any other law on the subject, the 
Government may, by notification, declare the Fire and Emergency Service as 
technical service. 


53. The Joint Director or any officer authorised by the Government in this 
behalf may, on the occasion of a fire or other emergency in any neighbouring area 
in which this Regulation is not in force, order the deployment of the employees of 
the Fire and Emergency Service with necessary appliances and equipment to carry 
out firefighting operations in such neighbouring area and thereupon all the 
provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder shall apply to such 
areas, during such period of fire emergency or during such period as the Joint 
Director may specify in this behalf. 


54. It shall be lawful for the Government or any officer authorised by it in this 
behalf, to employ the Fire and Emergency Service in any rescue, salvage or other 
works for which it is suitable by reason of its training, appliances and equipment. 


55. The Fire Officer authorised by general or special order in this behalf may, 
for the purpose of discharging his duties under this Regulation, require the owner or 
occupier of any building or other property as may be specified in such order, to 
supply information with respect to the features of such building or other property as 
may be specified therein, the available water supplies and means of access thereto 
and any other material particulars, and such owner or occupier shall furnish all the 
information in his possession. 


56. (1) Where an inspection under section 29 is conducted and it appears to 
the Nominated Authority that the condition of any building or premises is dangerous 
to life or property, he shall, without prejudice to any action taken under this 
Regulation, by order, require the person in possession or occupation of such building 
or premises to remove themselves from such building or premises forthwith. 


(2) If an order made by the Nominated Authority under sub-section (/) is not 
complied with, the Nominated Authority may direct any police officer having 
jurisdiction in the area to remove such persons from the building or premises and 
such officer shall comply with such directions. 


(3) After the removal of the persons under sub-section (/) or sub-section (2), 
as the case may be, the Nominated Authority shall report to the Chief Fire Officer 
and Chief Fire Officer shall seal the building or premises with approval of the 
Director and no person shall remove such seal except under an order made by the 
Chief Fire Officer with the approval of the Director. 


57. In firefighting operations or any other duties relating to seizure, detention 
or removal of any goods involving risk of fire, it shall be the duty ofa police officer 
or employees of the police force to assist and aid to the Nominated Authority in the 
performance of such duties under this Regulation. 


58. In the event of death of a member of the Fire and Emergency Service (other 
than a Gazetted officer), while discharging his duties, the Government shall pay 
adequate amount to the legal heir as funeral expenses or such amount as the 
Government may, by an order, determine. 


59. Every employee of the Fire and Emergency Service, acting under the 
provisions of this Regulation, shall be deemed to be a public servant within the 
meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


60. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Regulation or any rules made thereunder. 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


61. The Government may call for such returns, reports and statements on any 
subject connected with fire prevention and fire safety, the maintenance of order and 
the performance of duties by the employees of the Fire and Emergency Service and 
the same shall be furnished immediately. 


62. The provisions of this Regulation shall be in addition to and not in 
derogation of any other law for the time being in force in the Union territory: 


Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, when 
anything in relation to the fire prevention and life safety measures is required to be 
done or approved under this Regulation, shall not be deemed to have been 
unlawfully done or approved by reason only of the fact that permission, approval or 
sanction required under such other law therefor has not been obtained. 


63. The Government may, by notification, direct that any power exercisable 
by it under this Regulation shall, subject to such conditions, if any, be exercisable 
by any of the officers of the Government. 


64. Any amount payable under this Regulation shall be recovered as arrears of 
land revenue. 


65. Where the Fire Officer, who is in-charge of a firefighting or any 
emergency operation requires firefighting equipment and appliance or property of 
any other authority or any institution or individual, he may by order requisition such 
equipment or property for the purpose of extinguishing fire or any other emergencies 
in any area and take possession thereof from the authority or any institution or 
individual, as the case may be. 


66. The Government may, by notification and subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Regulation for carrying out the purposes of this Regulation. 


67. Every rule made under this Regulation shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


68. (J) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Regulation, the Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Regulation as may 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing such difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from 
the commencement of this Regulation. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 


AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


Calling of 
returns, reports, 
statements, etc. 


Application of 
other laws not 
barred. 


Delegation of 
powers. 


Recovery of 
dues. 


Requisition of 


firefighting 
property. 


Power to make 
tules. 


Laying of rules. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


GORAKH Disitally signed 
by GORAKHA 
A NATH satHyapava 


Date: 2026.05.25 


YADAVA 20:01:25 +0530 


MGIPMRND—275 GI—25.05.2026 


