रजिस्ट्री de Se एल" (एन)04/0007/2003- 26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


JN क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-05062026-273174 
CG-DL-E-05062026-273174 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं० 22] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, जून 5, 2026/ज्येष्ठ 15, 1948 (शक) 
No. 22] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, JUNE 5, 2026/JYAISHTHA 15, 1948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 5th June, 2026/Jyaishtha 15, 1948 (Saka) 


THE LAKSHADWEEP EXCISE REGULATION, 2026 
No. 7 07 2026 
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of India. 


A Regulation to provide for regulating the manufacture, possession, import, export, 
transport, purchase, sale and consumption of liquor and levy of excise duty on 
them, in the Union territory of Lakshadweep and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


In exercise of the powers conferred by article 240 of the Constitution, the 
President is pleased to promulgate the following Regulation made by her:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (J) This Regulation may be called the Lakshadweep Excise 
Regulation, 2026. 


(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Administrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In this Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(1) “Administrator” means the Administrator of the Union territory of 
Lakshadweep appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution; 


(2) “alcohol” means ethyl alcohol of any strength and purity having the 
chemical composition C2HsOH; 


(3) “alcoholic beverage” means a beverage or a liquor or a brew 
containing more than 0.5 per cent. above the ethanol limit used in the 
production of alcoholic beverage, which shall be of agricultural origin, 
provided that its limit shall be zero in case of alcohol-free beer; 


(4) “Appellate Authority” means the Appellate Authority referred to in 
section 84; 


(5) “authorised officer” means an officer authorised by the 
Administrator to exercise such powers and perform such duties and functions 
under the provisions of this Regulation and the rules framed thereunder; 


(6) “beer” means an alcoholic beverage prepared from malt or grain with 
or without addition of sugar and hops and includes black beer, ale, stout, porter 
and such other substance as may be specified by the Administrator, by 
notification. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this clause, “hops” mean ripened 
cones of female hop plant used for giving flavour to malt liquor; 


(7) “black jaggery” means coarse brown sugar made from palm trees or 
cane juice ordinarily unfit for human consumption, but contains sufficient 
quantity of fermentable sugar for manufacture of ethyl alcohol; 


(8) “blending” means mixing of two or more spirits of different strengths 
and different qualities; 


(9) “bottle” means a bottle for excisable articles of such type or 
description as may be or as may have been permitted by the Excise 
Commissioner from time to time and includes can and pouch; 


(10) “brewery” means premises where beer is manufactured and 
includes every place therein where beer is stored or wherefrom it is issued; 


(11) “compounding” means the manufacture of alcoholic beverage by 
addition to spirit of a flavouring or colouring matter or both; 


(12) “contagious disease” means a communicable disease that can 
spread rapidly from person to person through direct contact (touching a person 
who has the infection), indirect contact (touching a contaminated object), or 
droplet contact (inhaling droplets made when a person who has the infection 
coughs, sneezes, or talks); 


(13) “country liquor or traditional liquor’ means plain or spiced spirit 
which has been manufactured in India from material recognised as base for 
country or traditional spirit, namely, mahua, rice, gur, molasses or other 
traditional spirit; 


(14) “denaturant” means any substance completely miscible in spirit and 
of such a character that its addition renders the material, or any aqueous 
dilution of it, non-potable; 


(15) “Deputy Commissioner” means the Deputy Commissioner 
appointed or designated under section 5; 


(16) “District Excise Officer” means the District Excise Officer 
appointed or designated under section 5; 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(17) “Excise Commissioner’ means the officer appointed or designated 
as Excise Commissioner by the Administrator under section 3; 


(18) “Excise Officer” means any officer or person appointed or invested 
with powers under this Regulation; 


(19) “excise revenue” means revenue derived or derivable from any 
payment, duty, fee, tax, confiscation or fine imposed or ordered under this 
Regulation, or of any other law for the time being in force relating to liquor, 
but does not include fine imposed by a Court of law; 


(20) “export” means to take out of the Union territory of Lakshadweep 
to any other State or Union territory within the country; 


(21) “foreign liquor’’ means any liquor imported by land, sea or air, into 
India; 


(22) “Government’”’ means the Union territory Administration of 
Lakshadweep; 


(23) “import” means to bring into the Union territory of Lakshadweep 
from any other State or Union territory of the country; 


(24) “Indian liquor” means liquor manufactured in India by process 
of distillation or using alcohol obtained by distillation, such as, whisky, 
brandy, rum, gin, vodka, but does not include country liquor or fermented 
liquor. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this clause, ‘fermented liquor” 
means liquor obtained by the process of fermentation and includes beer, ale, 
stout, porter wine and any other similar liquor; 


(25) “licence” means a licence granted under this Regulation; 


(26) “liquor” means any alcoholic beverage and includes whisky, 
brandy, beer, wine, toddy, vodka, gin, tequila, country liquor, arrack and 
intoxicating liquid consisting of or containing alcohol besides any similar 
substance which the Administrator may, by notification, declare to be liquor 
for the purposes of this Regulation; 


(27) “malt” means germinated barley; 


(28) “manufactory” means any distillery, brewery, winery or any 
establishment distilling, brewing, manufacturing, blending or bottling liquor. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,— 


(a) “distillery” means premises where spirit is manufactured and 
includes every place therein where it is stored or wherefrom it is issued; 


(6) “winery” means premises where wine is manufactured and 
includes every place therein where wine is stored or wherefrom it is 
issued; 


(29) “manufacture” includes any process,— 


(a) incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured 
liquor; or 


(6) whether natural or artificial, by which any liquor is produced 
or prepared and also re-distillation and every process for the 
rectification, reduction, flavouring, blending or colouring of liquor; or 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(c) which, in relation to liquor, involves packing or repacking in a 
bottle or unit package, or labelling or re-labelling of bottles or unit 
package, including the declaration or alteration of maximum retail price 
on it, or adoption of any other treatment on the liquor for sale to 
consumers: 


Provided that labelling of bottles or unit packages, imported into India 
or into the Union territory of Lakshadweep, to comply with statutory 
requirements, shall not be construed as manufacture; 


(30) “manufacturer” means any person who manufactures Indian liquor 
and includes a manufacturer of alcohol subject to excise duty under the Central 
Excise Act, 1944; 


(37) “maximum retail price” means the maximum price at which the 
liquor may be sold to the ultimate consumer and shall include all taxes, freight, 
transport charges, commission or trade margin payable to dealers, including 
charges towards marketing, delivery, packing, forwarding and the like, as the 
case may be; 


(32) “molasses” means heavy dark coloured viscose liquid produced 
from residual syrup, drained away in the final stage of the manufacture of gur 
or sugar including khandasari sugar from sugarcane or gur, when liquid as 
such or in any form or admixture containing sugar which can be fermented; 


(33) “notification”? means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
of the Union territory of Lakshadweep and the term “notify” or “notified” shall 
be construed accordingly; 


(34) “permit” means an authorisation granted under this Regulation and 
the rules made thereunder; 


(35) “police station” means the police station having jurisdiction over 
the place or any other place, which the Administrator may, by notification, 
declare to be a police station for the purposes of this Regulation; 


(36) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Administrator 
under this Regulation; 


(37) “special duty”’ means a tax on the import of any excisable article, 
being an article on which countervailing duty as is mentioned in entry 51 of 
List II in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, is not imposable on the 
ground merely that such article is not being manufactured or produced in the 
territory; 


(38) “spirit” means any liquor containing alcohol obtained by 
distillation, whether denatured or not; 


(39) “still” means an apparatus for distillation or manufacture of spirits 
and includes any part thereof; 


(40) “transport” means to move from one place to another within the 
Union territory of Lakshadweep; 


(41) “Union territory” means the Union territory of Lakshadweep; 


(42) “warehouse” means a place where storage of liquor is permitted and 
includes a relevant part of manufactory; and 


(43) “wine” shall be the un-distilled alcoholic beverage produced by the 
partial or complete alcoholic fermentation of the juice of fresh sound ripe 
grapes, including grape juice concentrate, restored or un-restored pure 
condensed grape must, and raisins: 


1 of 1944. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Provided that a vintage wine is a wine made from grapes, of which at 
least 85 per cent. were grown in a particular year and labelled as such and the 
yield of the season of wine from a vineyard is a vintage wine. 


CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT AND CONTROL 


3. The Administrator may, by notification, appoint or designate an officer as 


the Excise Commissioner who shall be the chief controlling authority for 
administration of this Regulation in the Union territory. 


4. The Excise Commissioner shall exercise and perform the following powers 


and functions, namely:— 


(a) to regulate, control and monitor the manufacture, possession, import, 
export, transport, sale, purchase and consumption of liquor; 


(6) to curb illegal trade in liquor and illicit distillation; 


(c) to protect excise revenues of the Union territory and ensure prompt 
recovery; 


(d) to submit returns and information as required by this Regulation or 
the rules made thereunder, upon all matters concerning excise; 


(e) to ensure social well-being through education for responsible 
drinking; 
(f) to take adequate steps for imparting training to the excise staff in 


preventive and detective work; 


(g) to coordinate in matters covered under this Regulation with other 
authorities; 


(A) to introduce e-governance in various aspects of excise administration 
and to maintain the national network information on manufacture, possession, 
transport, sale, import or export of liquor. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this clause, “e-governance” means 
information and communication technology to promote efficient and 
cost-effective services to the public; 


(i) to submit to the Administrator an annual report on the administration 
of this Regulation in such form as may be prescribed; and 


(j) to perform such other functions and to exercise such other powers as 
may, from time to time, be entrusted or delegated to him by the Administrator. 


5. The Administrator may appoint or designate such number of Deputy 


Commissioners, District Excise Officers and such other officers and staff as he may 


deem 


fit for the purpose of performing the functions under this Regulation. 


6. (J) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (J) of section 12, the 


Administrator may issue licence or permit to any Government Corporation, or 
Government company, or Government agency, or any autonomous body owned or 
controlled by the Government, for the purposes of import and retail vending of 
liquor in the Union territory. 


(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (/), the Deputy Commissioner 


shall be the licensing authority who shall exercise all powers and functions under 
this Regulation, subject to the general control and supervision of the Excise 
Commissioner. 


Appointment of 
Excise 
Commissioner. 


Powers and 
functions of 
Excise 
Commissioner. 


Appointment of 
officers and 
staff. 


Excise 
Administration. 


Delegation and 
withdrawal of 
powers. 


Investing 
persons with 
special powers. 


Reward for 
exemplary 
performance. 


Prohibition of 
manufacture, 
sale, import, 
export, etc., of 
liquor. 


Grant of letter of 
intent, licence or 
permit. 


Qualification for 
grant of licence 
or permit. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(3) The Deputy Commissioner shall, within the limits of his jurisdiction, 
exercise such other powers and perform such duties and functions as are assigned 
by or under the provisions of this Regulation subject to such control as the 
Administrator or the Excise Commissioner may from time to time, direct. 


(4) The District Excise Officer and other subordinate officers shall assist the 
Deputy Commissioner in exercising his functions. 


7. (1) The Administrator may, by order, delegate his powers to the Excise 
Commissioner, subject to such limitations and conditions as may be specified in 
such order. 


(2) The Excise Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner may, by order, 
delegate their powers under this Regulation to any subordinate officer, subject to 
such limitations and conditions as may be specified in such order. 


(3) The Administrator or Excise Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner, 
as the case may be, may, by order, withdraw from any officer or person, any or all 
the powers delegated to subordinate officers under this section. 


8. The Administrator may, by notification, invest the power with any officer 
of the Union territory, not being an Excise Officer, to perform all or any of the 
powers or functions of any Excise Officer under this Regulation. 


9. The Excise Commissioner may grant such reward to such officers and 
employees under this Regulation and also to such informers for such work, subject 
to such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER III 
LICENCE AND PERMIT FOR MANUFACTURE, POSSESSION, SALE, ETC., OF LIQUOR 


10. (J) No person shall construct or establish any manufactory or warehouse 
or bottle, or possess, sell, collect, transport, transit, import, export or purchase any 
liquor, or use, keep or have in his possession any still, utensil, implement, apparatus, 
label, cork, capsule or seal, for manufacture of any liquor except under the authority 
and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a letter of intent, licence or 
permit granted under this Regulation or the rules made thereunder: 


Provided that possession of labels, corks or capsules by its printer or 
manufacturer, as the case may be, shall not amount to illegal possession constituting 
an offence if the label, cork or capsule is printed or manufactured under the authority 
from the holder of the licence to manufacture liquor under this Regulation. 


(2) No person shall engage in the manufacture of alcohol exclusively for 
industrial use unless he is registered with the Excise Commissioner in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 


11. Every letter of intent, licence or permit under this Regulation shall be 
granted on payment of such fees, for such period, and subject to such terms and 
conditions and in such form and shall contain such particulars, as may be prescribed. 


12. (/) While considering an application for grant of a licence or permit, the 
authorised officer shall ensure that the applicant— 


(a) is a citizen of India; 
(8) is above eighteen years of age; 


(c) is not a defaulter, or blacklisted, or debarred from holding an excise 
licence; 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(d) submits an affidavit as a proof for the following, namely:— 


(i) that he possesses or has an arrangement for taking on rent a 
suitable premises for conducting the business and the said premises is 
located more than fifty meters away from any medical institution, 
educational institution, religious institution, women hostel, orphanage, 
hospital, primary health centre or community health centre; 


(ii) that the premises have not been constructed in violation of any 
law for the time being in force; 


(iii) that he possesses a good moral character and has no criminal 
background nor has been convicted of any offence punishable under this 
Regulation or any other law for the time being in force; 


(iv) that he shall not employ any salesman or worker or 
representative who has criminal background or suffers from any 
infectious or contagious diseases or is below eighteen years of age; 


(v) that he does not owe any public dues or dues to the 
Administration; 


(vi) that he is solvent and has the necessary funds or has made 
arrangements for the necessary funds, for conducting the business; and 


(vii) that the details of funds for conducting the business shall be 
made available to the authorised officer, if so required. 


(2) The licence or permit shall be liable for cancellation if any statement made 
in the affidavit or any document produced with the application is found to be false 
or forged. 


13. Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, the authority granting a 
licence under this Regulation may require the licensee to— 


(a) give security for the observance of the terms of his licence; and 


(6) execute a counterpart agreement in conformity with the tenure of his 
licence. 


14. (J) No licence or permit granted under this Regulation shall be deemed to 
be invalid by reason merely of any technical defect, irregularity or omission in the 
licence or permit, or in any proceeding conducted prior to grant thereof. 


(2) The decision of the licensing authority, on the technical defect, irregularity 
or omission shall be conclusive and binding. 


15. (/) Whenever the authority which granted a licence or permit under this 
Regulation considers that such licence or permit should be withdrawn for any 
reason, it may do so, on expiry of a period of twenty-one days’ notice of its intention 
to do so forthwith, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
assigning the reasons therefor in writing. 


(2) If any licence or permit is withdrawn, the licensee or the permit holder shall 
be paid such sum, by way of compensation, as the authority who granted licence or 
permit may direct and refund any fee paid in advance or deposit made by the licensee 
in respect thereof, after deducting the amount recoverable by the Government. 


16. (7) Subject to such restrictions, as may be prescribed, the authority who 
granted licence or permit under this Regulation may, after giving reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, suspend or cancel the licence or permit, in the following 
circumstances, namely:— 


(a) if the licence or permit is transferred or sublet by the holder thereof 
without the permission of the said authority; or 


Power to take 
security and 
counterpart 
agreement. 


Technical 
defects in 
licence and 
permit. 


Power to 
withdraw 
and permit. 


Power to 
suspend or 
cancel licence 
and permit. 


Bar to right of 
renewal and 
compensation. 


Surrender of 
licence or 
permit. 


Transfer of 
licence or 
permit. 


Grant of 
exclusive 
privilege of 
manufacturing, 
etc., of any 
liquor. 


Removal of 
liquor from 
manufactory 
warehouse, etc., 
on payment of 
duty. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(b) if any excise revenue payable by the holder thereof is not duly paid; or 


(c) in the event of any breach of the terms and conditions of such licence 
or permit by the holder or by his employee or agent; or 


(d) if the holder of the licence or permit, or the agent or employee of 
such holder, is convicted of an offence punishable under this Regulation or 
under any other law for the time being in force, relevant to and connected with 
excise matters or relating to excise revenue or of any cognizable and 
non-bailable offence; or 


(e) if the purpose for which the licence or permit was granted ceases to 
exist; or 


(f) if the licence or permit has been obtained through misrepresentation 
or fraud. 


(2) When a licence or permit held by such person is cancelled under 
sub-section (/), the authority referred to therein may cancel any other licence or 
permit granted to such person under this Regulation or under any other law relating 
to excise revenue. 


(3) In the case of cancellation or suspension of licence or permit under 
sub-section (/), the fee payable for the balance of the period for which any licence 
or permit shall have been valid but for such cancellation or suspension, may be 
recovered from the licensee who held the licence before such cancellation or 
suspension as excise revenue. 


(4) The holder of a licence or permit shall not be entitled to any compensation 
for the cancellation or suspension thereof nor shall be entitled to refund of any fee 
paid or deposit made, if any, in respect thereof. 


17. No person, to whom a licence or permit has been granted, shall be entitled 
to claim right of any renewal thereof, and no claim shall lie for damages or otherwise 
in consequence of any refusal to renew a licence or permit on the expiry of the period 
for which the same remains in force. 


18. No holder of a licence or permit granted under this Regulation shall 
surrender his licence or permit except on the expiration of one month’s notice, m 
writing, given by him to the Deputy Commissioner, of his intention to surrender the 
same on payment of the fee payable for such licence or permit for the whole period 
for which it shall have been valid but for the surrender: 


Provided that if the Deputy Commissioner is satisfied that there are sufficient 
reasons for surrendering the licence or permit, he may remit to the holder thereof 
the sum so payable or any portion thereof, on surrender. 


19. The licence or permit granted under this Regulation shall not be 
transferable except with the prior approval of the Excise Commissioner or any 
officer authorised by him in this behalf, subject to such terms and conditions, as may 
be prescribed. 


20. Subject to the provisions of this Regulation and subject to such terms and 
conditions, as may be prescribed, the Excise Commissioner may grant to any person, 
a licence or lease, or both, either jointly or severally, for the exclusive privilege or 
for manufacture, supplying by wholesale or sale by retail, or both, any liquor within 
any local area. 


21. No liquor shall be removed from any manufactory, warehouse or other 
place of storage established under this Regulation, unless duty and fee payable have 
been paid or a bond, as may be prescribed, has been executed for the payment 
thereof. 


Sec. 1] 


22. No person, or licensed vendor, or his employee or agent, shall sell or 
deliver any liquor to any person under the age of twenty-one years whether for 
consumption by self or of others. 


23. No licensee shall employ or permit to be employed in his premises any 
person under the age of eighteen years or who is suffering from any contagious 
disease. 


24. The District Magistrate or any other officer authorised by him may, by a 
notice in writing to the licensee, require that any shop in which any liquor is sold 
shall be closed at such times or for such period as he may think necessary, for 
preservation of public peace: 


Provided that the closure days in the licensing year shall not exceed seven days 
in all or more than three days continuously at any given time: 


Provided further that if the Excise Commissioner or an officer authorised by 
him in this behalf is of the opinion that any particular shop or all shops in any 
particular area shall be closed for a period exceeding seven days in a licensing year, 
or more than three days continuously at any given time, he may, with the prior 
sanction of the Administrator, permit to do so. 


CHAPTER IV 
EXCISE REVENUE 


25. The excise revenue shall be levied and recovered under the following 
heads, namely: — 


(a) duty; 

(b) licence fee; 

(c) label registration fee; and 
(d) import or export fee. 


26. (1) There shall be levied and collected in the manner provided by this 
Regulation and the rules made thereunder, at such rates, not exceeding the rates set 
forth in the Schedule, as the Administrator may, by notification, specify, a duty of 
excise or a countervailing duty or a special duty, as the case may be, on all liquor of 
the descriptions notified by the Administrator from time to time, being 
manufactured or produced in, or imported into, the Union territory, from the person 
so manufacturing or producing or importing: 


Provided that no such duty shall be levied on toddy when used for the 
manufacture of jaggery, vinegar, yeast or neera, or when drunk as such. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this section, it is hereby declared that in 
any notification issued under this section, it shall not be necessary to specify 
separately the rate of countervailing duty or special duty and, unless otherwise 
provided in such notification expressly, any rate specified in such notification as the 
rate of excise duty in respect of any description of liquor shall be deemed to be also 
the rate of countervailing duty or a special duty, as the case may be, in respect of 
such description of liquor. 


(2) There shall be levied and collected a fee for issue of licence or permit 
subject to such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed. 


(3) There shall be levied and collected the import, export or transport duties 
assessed in such manner as may be prescribed. 


27. (1) All duties, fees, taxes, fines payable to the Government under this 
Regulation may be recovered from the persons liable to pay the same, or from his 
surety, or his agent, as if they were arrears of land revenue. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


Prohibition of 
sale to certain 
persons. 


Prohibition of 
employment of 
certain persons. 


Closure of shops 
for preservation 
of public peace. 


Nature and 
components of 
excise revenue. 


Excise duty. 


Recovery of 
duty and levies 
on property of 
defaulter. 


Interest payable 
for failure to pay 
excise revenue. 


Power to reduce 
or waive interest 
in certain cases. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(2) In the event of default by any person to whom a licence or permit has been 
granted under this Regulation, his manufactory, warehouse, shop or premises and 
all fittings, apparatus, stocks of liquor or materials for the manufacture of the same, 
held therein, shall be liable to be attached towards any claim for excise revenue 
or in respect of any loss incurred by the Government through such default and be 
sold to satisfy such claim, which shall be a first charge upon the proceeds of such 
sale. 


(3) Where the duty due is not levied or not paid or short-levied or short-paid 
or erroneously refunded,— 


(a) the District Excise Officer may, within a period of three years from 
the relevant date, serve notice on the person chargeable with the duty of excise, 
which has not been levied or paid, or which has been short-levied or 
short-paid, or to whom the refund has erroneously been made, requiring him 
to show cause why he should not pay the amount specified in the notice: 


Provided that where the service of the notice is stayed by an order of a 
Court, the period of such stay shall be excluded in computing such period of 
three years. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “relevant date” means,— 


(४) in cases in which duty of excise has not been paid or has been 
short-levied or short-paid, the date on which the duty is to be paid under 
this Regulation or the rules made thereunder; 


(ii) in a case where duty of excise is provisionally assessed under 
this Regulation or the rules made thereunder, the date of adjustment of 
duty after the final assessment thereof; and 


(iii) in a case where the duty of excise has been erroneously 
refunded, the date of such refund; and 


(6) the District Excise Officer shall, after considering the representation, 
if any, made by the person on whom notice is served under clause (a), 
determine the amount of duty of excise due from such person (not being in 
excess of the amount specified in the notice) and thereupon such person shall 
pay the amount so determined. 


28. If the duty of excise payable by a person under this Regulation or the rules 
made thereunder is not paid within time, he shall be liable to pay on the sum due, a 
simple interest at the rate of twelve per cent. per annum from the day next following 
the day on which such payment became due: 


Provided that where the duty determined to be payable is reduced or increased 
by the Appellate Authority or the Court, the interest shall be payable on such 
reduced or increased amount of duty, as the case may be. 


29. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation, the Excise 
Commissioner may, on an application made in this behalf by a person, with the 
approval of the Administrator and after recording his reason for so doing, reduce or 
waive the amount of any interest payable by him under this Regulation, if he is 
satisfied that— 


(a) to do otherwise would cause genuine hardship to the person having 
regard to the circumstances of the case; and 


(6) the person has cooperated in any proceeding for the recovery of any 
amount due from him. 


Sec. 1] 


30. Notwithstanding that a writ petition has been preferred or a suit or other 
proceeding has been instituted in any Court, or any appeal has been filed before any 
Court or Tribunal or before the Excise Commissioner, or a revision has been filed 
before the Administrator, any sum due to the Government under this Regulation as 
a result of demand or order made or passed by any officer or authority empowered 
in this behalf by or under this Regulation, shall be payable in accordance with such 
demand or order unless and until such payment has been stayed by such Court or 
Tribunal or Excise Commissioner or Administrator. 


31. Every licensee shall maintain such accounts and submit to the concerned 
officers such returns in such forms, containing such particulars relating to stock, 
apparatus, excise duty or fee payable or paid, and such other information at such 
interval, as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER V 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 


32. Whoever manufactures, imports, exports, transports or removes any 
liquor, in contravention of any of the provisions of this Regulation or of any rule 
made, or notification or order issued, thereunder, or of any condition of licence or 
permit granted or issued thereunder, shall be punishable,— 


(a) where the liquor involved in the offence is less than such value, as 
may be prescribed, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
one year, but which may extend to five years, and with fine which shall not be 
less than fifty thousand rupees or five times of the value of liquor, whichever 
is higher; 


(6) where the liquor involved in the offence exceeds such value, as may 
be prescribed, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, 
and with fine, which may extend to one lakh rupees or five times of the value 
of liquor, whichever is higher. 


33. Whoever constructs or works in any manufactory or warehouse, in 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Regulation, or of any rule made, or 
notification or order issued, thereunder, or of any condition of licence or permit 
granted or issued thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees, or with both. 


34. Whoever bottles any liquor for the purposes of sale, in contravention of 
any of the provisions of this Regulation, or of any rule made, or notification or order 
issued, thereunder, or of any condition of licence or permit granted or issued 
thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year, and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or five times of the 
value of liquor, whichever is higher. 


35. Whoever uses, keeps or possesses any materials, still, utensils, implements 
or apparatus whatsoever for the purposes of manufacturing any liquor, in 
contravention of any provisions of this Regulation, or of any rule made, or notification 
or order issued, thereunder, or of any condition of licence or permit granted or issued 
thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both. 


36. Whoever possesses any material or film, either with or without Union 
territory logo or wrapper or any other thing in which liquor can be packed, or any 
apparatus or implement or machine for the purpose of packing any liquor, in 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Regulation, or of any rule made, or 
notification or order issued, thereunder, or of any condition of licence or permit 
granted or issued thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees, or with both. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


Excise revenue 
to be paid 
irrespective of 
pendency of any 
writ petition, 
suit, etc. 


Accounts and 
returns. 


Offences 
relating to 
manufacture, 
sale, import, etc. 


Offences 
relating to 
manufactory or 
warehouse. 


Offences 
relating to 
bottling of liquor 
for sale. 


Offences 
relating to uses, 
keeps or 
possession, etc. 


Offences 
relating to 
possessing any 
material or film, 
etc., for packing 
liquor. 


Offences 
relating to sale, 
transport, 
possession or 
buying of liquor 
beyond 
prescribed 
quantity. 


Punishment for 
not holding valid 
licence or 
permit. 


Punishment for 
rendering 
denatured spirit 
fit for human 
consumption. 


Punishment for 
mixing noxious 
substance with 

liquor. 


Order to pay 
compensation. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


37. Whoever sells, transports, possesses or buys any liquor beyond such 
quantity, as may be prescribed, in contravention of any of the provisions of this 
Regulation, or of any rule made, or notification or order issued, thereunder, or of 
any condition of licence or permit granted or issued thereunder, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, and with fine 
which may extend to one lakh rupees or five times of the value of liquor, whichever 
is higher. 


38. If any offence referred to in sections 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 and 37 is committed 
by a person not holding valid licence or permit under this Regulation, he shall be 
liable to twice the fine provided for such offence. 


39. Whoever renders or attempts to render fit for human consumption any 
spirit which has been denatured, or has in his possession any spirit in respect of 
which he knows or has reason to believe that any such attempt has been made, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years, 
but which may extend to three years, and with fine which may extend to two lakh 
rupees or five times of the value of liquor, whichever is higher. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this section, “denatured spirit” means the 
spirit with an added denaturant to render it effectively and permanently unfit for 
human consumption. 


40. Whoever mixes or permits to be mixed with any liquor sold or 
manufactured or possessed by him, any noxious drug or any foreign ingredient, 
likely to cause disability or grievous hurt or death to human being, shall be 
punished,— 


(a) if as a result of such an act, death is caused to any person, with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may 
extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine, which may 
extend to ten lakh rupees; or 


(8) if as a result of such an act, disability or grievous hurt is caused to 
any person, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven 
years but which may extend to ten years, and with fine which may extend to 
five lakh rupees; or 


(c) if as a result of such an act, any other consequential injury is caused 
to any person, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year 
and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to two lakh fifty thousand 
rupees; or 


(d) if as a result of such an act, no injury is caused to any person, with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months and with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees or five times the value of liquor, whichever is higher. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this section, the expression “grievous hurt” 
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 116 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023. 


41. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, the Court, when passing an order under this Regulation may, if it is 
satisfied that death or injury has been caused to any person due to consumption of 
liquor sold in any place, order the manufacturer or seller, whether or not he is 
convicted of an offence, to pay, by way of compensation, an amount not less than 
three lakh rupees to the legal representatives of each deceased, or two lakh rupees 
to the person to whom grievous injury has been caused, or twenty thousand rupees 
to the person for any other consequential injury: 


Provided that where such liquor is sold in a licensed shop, the liability to pay 
the compensation under this section shall be on the licensee. 


45 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] 


(2) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub-section (/) may, within a 
period of thirty days from the date of order, prefer an appeal to the High Court: 


Provided that no appeal shall be filed by the accused unless the amount 
ordered to be paid under sub-section (/) is deposited by him in the Court: 


Provided further that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry 
of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in time. 


42. Whoever sells, or keeps, or exposes for sale, as foreign liquor which he 
knows or believes it to be Indian liquor, shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to six months, and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees 
or five times the value of liquor, whichever is higher. 


43. Whoever has in his possession, any liquor, knowing that it shall be liable 
to penalty for having unlawfully imported, transported or manufactured, or 
knowingly avoids payment of duty for possession of liquor, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees, or five times the value of liquor, whichever is higher. 


44. (1) Ifa chemist, druggist, apothecary or keeper of a dispensary, allows any 
liquor which has not been bonafidely medicated for medicinal purposes to be 
consumed on his business premises by any person, he shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees. 


(2) If any person consumes liquor on a business premises referred to in 
sub-section (/), he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. 


45. Whoever consumes liquor in a public place, in contravention of the any of 
the provisions of this Regulation, or of any rule made, or notification or order issued, 
thereunder, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees. 


46. Whoever consumes liquor in public place and creates nuisance, in 
contravention of the any of the provisions of this Regulation, or of any rule, 
notification or order made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months, and with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees. 


47. Whoever permits drunkenness or allows assembly of anti-social elements, 
on the premises of liquor establishments in contravention of the any of the 
provisions of this Regulation, or of any rule made, or notification or order issued, 
thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months, and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 


48. Whoever prints, publishes or gives an advertisement in any media soliciting 
use of any liquor, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both: 


Provided that this section shall not apply to catalogue or price list or 
advertisement generally or specially approved by the Excise Officer for the purposes 
of display at the points of sale for consumer information and education. 


49. Any person who unlawfully releases or abets escape of any person arrested 
under this Regulation, or abets the commission of offence under this Regulation, or 
engages himself in a criminal conspiracy for contravention of the any of the provisions 
of this Regulation, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 


50. If any licence holder or any person acting in his behalf, sells or delivers 
any liquor to any person apparently under the age of twenty-one years or employs 
any person under the age of eighteen years, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


Offences 
relating to 
selling Indian 
liquor as foreign 
liquor. 


Punishment for 
possession of 
liquor unlawfully 
imported or for 
non-payment of 
duty, etc. 


Punishment for 
allowing 
consumption of 
non-medicated 
liquor. 


Punishment for 
consumption of 
liquor in public 
place. 


Offences relating 
to consumption of 
liquor in public 
place and creates 
nuisance. 


Offences relating 
to anti-social 
element at liquor 
establishments. 


Offences relating 
to advertisement. 


Punishment for 
abetment and 
conspiracy. 


Punishment for 
employing 
persons under age 
of eighteen years 
or selling liquor 
to persons under 
age of twenty-one 
years. 


Punishment for 
assault and 
obstruction. 


Liability of 
employer for 
offence 
committed by 
employee or 
agent. 


Punishment for 
manufacture, 
sale or 
possession by 
one person on 
account of 
another. 


Punishment for 
misconduct of 
licence. 


Offences for 
breach of 
conditions of 
licence. 


Punishment for 
not submitting 
returns. 


Punishment for 
non-payment of 
excise duty or 
fee. 


Offences 
relating to false 
statement made 
in declaration or 
affidavit or 
periodic returns. 


Allowing 
premises, etc., to 
be used for 
commission of 
offence. 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


51. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023, any person who assaults or threatens to assault or obstructs or 
attempts to obstruct any Excise Officer in the discharge of his official duties, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, and 
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 


52. The holder of a licence or permit granted or issued under this Regulation, 
shall be liable for any offence committed by his employee or his agent, unless he 
proves that due and reasonable precautions were exercised by him to prevent 
commission of such offence. 


53. (1) Where any liquor has been manufactured or sold or is possessed by 
any person on account of any other person and such other person knows, or has 
reason to believe, that such manufacture or sale was or that such possession is, on 
his account, such liquor shall, for the purposes of this Regulation, be deemed to 
have been manufactured, sold or to be in the possession of such other person. 


(2) Nothing in sub-section (/) shall absolve any person who manufactures, 
sells or has possession of any liquor on account of another person, from liability to 
any punishment under this Regulation for unlawful manufacture, sale or 
possession of such liquor. 


54. Whoever, being the holder of a licence or permit granted or issued under 
this Regulation, or being in the employment of such holder and acting on his 
behalf, fails to produce such licence or permit on demand by any Excise Officer or 
any other officer duly empowered to make such demand, shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 


55. Whoever, being the holder of a licence or permit granted or issued under 
this Regulation, or being in the employment of such holder and acting on his 
behalf, wilfully does or omits to do anything in breach of any of the conditions of 
his licence or permit otherwise than provided in this Regulation, or fails to print 
the maximum retail price on the label or tampers with it, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, and with fine which 
may extend to one lakh rupees. 


56. Whoever, being the holder of a licence or permit granted or issued under 
this Regulation, or being in the employment of such holder and acting on his 
behalf, fails to submit returns, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
one lakh rupees, and ten thousand rupees per day for any subsequent delay. 


57. (1) If any person fails to pay any duty or fee under this Regulation, he 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year 
and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 


(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (/), the person referred to therein shall also be 
liable to pay interest on delayed payment and damages at such rates as may be imposed. 


58. Whoever, in any declaration or affidavit or periodic return made to an 
Excise Officer, makes a statement which is false or found to be false, after due 
verification or which he believes to be false or does not believe it to be true, 
touching any point material to the object for which the statement is made or used, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, 
and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 


59. Whoever, being a licensee and having the control or use of any house, 
room, enclosure, space, animal or conveyance, knowingly permits it to be used for 
commission by any other person of an offence punishable under any of the 
provisions of this Regulation, shall be punishable in the same manner as if he had 
himself committed the said offence. 


45 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


60. Whoever attempts to commit any offence punishable under this 
Regulation, shall be liable for half the punishment provided for such offence 
under this Regulation. 


61. Any Excise Officer or other person, who with vexatious intention and 
without reasonable ground for suspicion, — 


(a) enters or searches or causes to be entered or searched any closed place 
under the guise of exercising any power conferred by this Regulation; or 


(0) seizes the movable property of any person on the pretext of 
seizing or searching for any article liable to confiscation under this 
Regulation; or 


(c) searches, detains or arrests any person; or 
(d) exceeds his lawful powers under this Regulation, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees. 


62. Any Excise Officer who, without lawful excuse, refuses to perform, or 
withdraws himself from the duties of his office, unless expressly allowed to do 
so in writing by the Excise Commissioner, or unless he has given to his superior 
officer two months’ notice in writing of his intention so to do, or who shall be 
guilty of cowardice, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees, or with both. 


63. Whoever, does any act in contravention of any of the provisions of this 
Regulation, or any rule made, or notification or order issued, thereunder and 
punishment for such contravention has not been provided under this Regulation, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or five times the 
value of the liquor, whichever is higher. 


64. (/) In a prosecution under section 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 or section 37, it 
shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the accused person has 
committed the offence punishable under that section in respect of any liquor, 
still, utensil, implement or apparatus, for the possession of which he is unable to 
account satisfactorily. 


(2) Where any animal, vessel, cart or other vehicle is used in the 
commission of any offence under this Regulation, and is liable to confiscation, 
the owner thereof shall be deemed to be guilty of such offence and such owner 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly unless he 
satisfies the Court that he had exercised due care in the prevention of the 
commission of such an offence. 


65. If any person, after having been previously convicted of an offence 
punishable under this Regulation, subsequently commits and is convicted for the 
same offence, he shall be liable to twice the punishment provided for the first 
conviction subject to the maximum punishment provided for such offence and 
with twice the fine amount provided under the first conviction, or with both. 


66. Where at any time during the trial of any offence under this Regulation 
alleged to have been committed by any person, not being the manufacturer, 
distributor or dealer of any liquor, the Court is satisfied, on the evidence 
adduced before it, that such manufacturer, distributor or dealer is also concerned 
with that offence, then, the Court may, notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section (3) of section 358 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, 
proceed against him under the respective provisions of this Chapter. 


Offences 
relating to 
attempt to 
commit offence. 


Punishment for 
making vexation 
search, seizure, 
detention or 
arrest. 


Punishment for 
refusing to 
perform or 
withdraw from 
duty. 


Punishment for 
offences not 
otherwise 
provided for. 


Presumption as 
to commission 
of offence in 
certain cases. 


Enhanced 
punishment after 
previous 
conviction. 


Power of Court 
to implead 
manufacturer, 
etc. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


Commission of 67. (/) If the person committing an offence under this Regulation is a 

offence by : हे 5 

Conaniess company, the company and every person who at the time the offence is committed 
was in-charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business 
at the time of the commission of the offence, shall be deemed to be guilty of such 
offence, and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that where a company has different establishments or branch, the 
concerned Chief Executive and the person in-charge of such establishment, branch 
or unit, nominated by the company as responsible for the conduct of business, 
shall be liable for that offence in respect of such establishment, branch or unit: 


Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of 
such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence 
under this Regulation has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or that the commission 
of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, 
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this section,x— 


(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 


(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 


Procedure after 68. (/) The authorised Excise Officer shall, after investigation of any offence 


ee in committed under this Regulation, send his report to the Deputy Commissioner. 
case of offences. 


(2) The Deputy Commissioner shall, after scrutiny of the investigation report 
sent to him under sub-section (/), decide within such period as may be prescribed, 
and on the basis of the gravity of offence, that the matter be referred to— 


(a) a Court of ordinary jurisdiction in case of offences punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years; or 


(0) a special Court in case of offences punishable with imprisonment 
for a term exceeding three years, where such Special Court is established, 
and in case no Special Court is established, such cases shall be tried by a 
Court of ordinary jurisdiction. 


(3) The Deputy Commissioner shall communicate his decision to the 
concemed Excise Officer, who shall launch prosecution before a Court of ordinary 
jurisdiction or a Special Court, as the case may be. 


Procedure for 69. (7) Any other contravention under this Regulation shall be adjudicated 
adjudication in by an Adjudicating Officer. 

case of other 

contraventions. (2) The Administrator shall, by notification, appoint an officer not below the 


rank of an Additional District Magistrate of the district where the alleged 
contravention occurred, to be the Adjudicating Officer for adjudication in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Adjudicating Officer shall, after giving the person a reasonable 
opportunity for making representation in the matter, and if, on such inquiry, he is 
satisfied that the person has contravened the any of the provisions of this Regulation 
or any rule made, or notification or order issued, thereunder, impose such penalty as 
he thinks fit in accordance with the provisions relating to that contravention. 


45 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


(4) The Adjudicating Officer shall have the powers of a Civil Court and all 
the proceeding before him shall be deemed to be— 


(a) a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 229 and 267 of 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; 


(6) a Court for the purposes of sections 384 and 385 of the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 


(5) While adjudicating the quantum of penalty under this Chapter, the 
Adjudicating Officer shall have due regard to the provisions of section 71. 


70. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, the offences punishable under sections 44, 45, 54, 56 and 
61 may either before or after the institution of any proceeding, be compoundable 
under this Regulation. 


(2) Any person who is reasonably suspected of having committed an offence 
specified under sub-section (/) may apply to the District Excise Officer for 
compounding of the offence. 


(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (2), the District Excise 
Officer, having regard to the circumstances of the case, may at his discretion order 
for compounding of the offence on payment of such sum of money by way of 
compounding fee or compensation for the offence, in accordance with such 
guidelines as may be prescribed. 


(4) On payment by the person such sum of money specified under 
sub-section (3), no proceeding shall be instituted or continued against such person 
in any Criminal Court: 


Provided that the sum of money fixed as compounding fee or compensation 
by the District Excise Officer under this section shall not be less than five times 
but not more than ten times the duty involved or the value of liquor, apparatus, 
vehicle and other material, whichever is higher: 


Provided further that where liquor, apparatus, vehicle or other material is 
seized, the same shall not be released but shall be disposed of in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(5) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any 
prosecution, such composition shall be brought by the District Excise Officer in 
writing, to the notice of the Court in which the prosecution is pending and on such 
notice of the composition of the offence being given, the person in relation to 
whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged. 


71. While adjudging the quantum of fine or penalty under this Chapter, the 
Court or the Adjudicating Officer, as the case may be, shall have due regard to the 
following, namely:— 


(a) the amount of gain or unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, 
made as a result of the contravention; 


(6) the amount of loss caused or likely to cause to the Government or 
any person as a result of the contravention; 


(c) the repetitive nature of the contravention; 
(d) whether the contravention is without his knowledge; and 


(e) any other relevant factor. 


Compounding of 
certain offences. 


General 
provisions 
relating to 
determination of 
fine or penalty. 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


Seti things 72. Whenever an offence punishable under this Regulation has been 
हम committed, the following things shall be liable to confiscation, namely:— 

(a) any liquor, material, still, utensil, implement apparatus in respect of 
or by means of which such offence has been committed; 

(6) any liquor unlawfully imported, transported, manufactured, sold or 
brought along with, or in addition to any liquor, liable to confiscation under 
clause (a); 

(c) any receptacle, package, or covering in which anything liable to 
confiscation under clause (a) or clause (0) is found, and the other contents, if 
any, of such receptacle package or covering; and 

(d) any animal, vehicle, vessel, or other conveyance used for carrying 
liquor. 

Confiscation by 73. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation or any other 
pees . é law for the time being in force, where anything liable for confiscation under 
ommissioner 1n 


section 72 is seized or detained under the provisions of this Regulation, the officer 
seizing or detaining such property shall, without any unreasonable delay, produce 
the said seized property before the Deputy Commissioner. 


certain cases. 


(2) On production of the property seized under sub-section (/), the Deputy 
Commissioner, if satisfied that an offence has been committed under this 
Regulation, may, whether or not a prosecution is instituted for the commission of 
such offence, order for confiscation of such property, or otherwise he may order 
for its return to the rightful owner. 


(3) While making an order of confiscation under sub-section (2), the Deputy 
Commissioner may also order that such of the properties to which the order of 
confiscation relates, which, in his opinion, cannot be preserved or are not fit for 
human consumption, be destroyed. 


(4) Whenever any confiscated article has to be destroyed under this section, 
it shall be destroyed in the presence of the Excise Officer ordering the confiscation 
or forfeiture, as the case may be, or in the presence of an Excise Officer not below 
the rank of an Inspector. 


(5) Where the Deputy Commissioner, after passing an order of confiscation 
under sub-section (2), is of the opinion that it is expedient in the public interest so 
to do, he may order the confiscated property or any part thereof to be sold by 
public auction or dispose it of otherwise. 


(6) The Deputy Commissioner shall submit a report of all particulars of 
confiscation to the Excise Commissioner within a period of one month of such 
confiscation. 


(7) Any liquor, mahua flowers or molasses and any other property if 
confiscated in a case compounded under section 70 or in respect of which an 
offence has been committed and the offender is not known or cannot be found, 
shall be disposed of in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Order of 74. (1) The order of any confiscation under section 73 shall not prevent 
confiscation and imposition of any other punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable 
destruction not under this Regulation. 

to interfere with 

लत (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 


in force, the non-production of confiscated property before the trial Court due to 
disposal of such property, shall not affect the proceeding under this Regulation: 


Provided that the samples of liquor and the photographs of the confiscated 
property may be preserved to meet the evidentiary requirements. 


46 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


75. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Regulation, when any article, animal 
or thing is duly confiscated either by order of Court or otherwise, such article, 
animal or thing shall be made over to the Deputy Commissioner for disposal in 
such manner and on payment of such fees, as may be prescribed. 


(2) When an order for confiscation of any property has been passed under 
section 73 and such order has become final in respect of the whole or any portion 
of such property, such property or portion thereof, as the case may be, shall vest in 
the Administrator, free from all encumbrances. 


CHAPTER VI 
DETECTION, INVESTIGATION AND TRIAL OF OFFENCES 


76. The Excise Commissioner or any authorised Excise Officer may, by 
order, require any person or any establishment deemed reasonably connected with 
any unlawful handling of liquor, to furnish to him such information as may be 
specified in that order. 


77. (1) Whenever any liquor is manufactured, exported, imported or 
transported, collected, possessed or sold, in contravention of any provisions of this 
Regulation, the owner or occupier of the land or building or his agent, and every 
officer of police and land revenue department, local bodies and block development 
office shall, in the absence of reasonable excuse, be bound to give notice of the 
fact to a Magistrate or to an officer of the Excise Department as soon as the fact 
comes to their knowledge. 


(2) Every Excise Officer shall be bound to give immediate information to his 
immediate superior, of all breaches of any of the provisions of this Regulation, 
which may come to his knowledge under sub-section (/) or otherwise. 


78. (1) The authorised Excise Officer may search any place, or seize any 
article, or arrest or detain any person, if there is a reasonable doubt that such place, 
article or person is involved in commission of any offence under this Regulation: 


Provided that no search shall be deemed to be irregular by reason only of the 
fact that witness for the search is not inhabitant of the locality in which the place 
searched is situated. 


(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Regulation, the provisions 
of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 relating to search, seizure, arrest, 
detention, summons and investigation shall apply, as far as may be, to all actions 
taken under this Regulation. 


79. Every officer-in-charge of a police station shall take charge of and keep 
in safe custody, pending the orders of a Magistrate or of the Deputy 
Commissioner, all articles seized under this Regulation, which may be delivered to 
him and shall allow any officer of the Excise Department who may accompany 
such articles, to affix his seal to such articles and to take samples of and from them 
and all samples so taken shall also be sealed with the seal of the officer-in-charge 
of the police station. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “‘officer-in-charge’’ means 
the Excise Officer authorised to supervise and control manufactory or warehouse. 


80. All offences under this Regulation shall be cognizable and the provisions 
of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall apply to them. 


81. The offences punishable under this Regulation with imprisonment of two 
years and more, shall be non-bailable and the provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, with respect to non-bailable offences, shall apply to those 
offences. 


Confiscated 
articles to vest in 
Administrator. 


Power to obtain 
information. 


Landholders, 
officers and 
others to give 
information. 


Power of arrest, 
search and 
seizure. 


Duty of police to 
accept seized 
articles. 


Offences under 
this Regulation 
to be cognizable. 


Certain offences 
to be 
non-bailable. 


Power of Court 
to try cases 
summarily. 


Security for 
good conduct 
and abstaining 
from committing 
offences. 


Appeals to 
Appellate 
Authority. 


Procedure in 
appeal. 


Order of 
Appellate 
Authority. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


82. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, the Magistrate shall have the power to try summarily in accordance 
with the provisions contained in sections 285 to 288 of that Sanhita, all or any of 
the offences which are punishable under this Regulation with imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding six months, or with fine, or with both. 


83. (/) Whenever any person is convicted of an offence punishable under 
this Regulation and the Court convicting him is of the opinion that such person 
habitually commits or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of such 
offence and that it is necessary to require such person to execute a bond for 
abstaining from the commission of any such offence, the Court may, at the time of 
passing sentence on such person, order him to execute a bond for a sum 
proportionate to his means, with or without sureties, for abstaining from the 
commission of such offence during such period, not exceeding three years, as it 
thinks fit to fix. 


(2) The bond referred to in sub-section (/) shall be in such form in terms of 
the provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and shall, in so far 
as they are applicable, apply to all matters connected with such bond as if it were a 
bond to keep the peace ordered to be executed under section 125 of that Sanhita. 


(3) If the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, the bond so executed 
under this section shall become void. 


(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or 
by the High Court when exercising its power of revision. 


CHAPTER VII 
APPEAL AND REVISION 


84. (/) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order passed under this 
Regulation by an Excise Officer, may appeal to the Deputy Commissioner. 


(2) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Deputy 
Commissioner, may appeal to the Excise Commissioner. 


(3) An appeal under this section shall be filed within a period of thirty days 
from the date of receipt of such decision or order together with self-attested copy 
thereof: 


Provided that a further period of thirty days may be allowed, if the appellant 
establishes that sufficient cause prevented him from filing the appeal within the 
said period of thirty days. 


85. (/) At the hearing of an appeal, an appellant may be allowed to go into 
any ground not specified in the grounds of appeal or take additional evidence 
where necessary, if it is established that such omission was not wilful or 
unreasonable. 


(2) The Appellate Authority may, after making such further inquiry as may 
be necessary, pass such order, as he thinks fit, just and proper, confirming, 
modifying or annulling the decision or order appealed against, as the case may be. 


(3) The appeal shall be heard and decided within a period of six months from 
the date on which such appeal is filed: 


Provided that if an appeal is not decided within the period specified, the 
relief prayed for in the appeal shall be deemed to have been granted. 


86. (/) The order of the Appellate Authority disposing of the appeal shall be 
in writing and shall state the points for determination, the decision thereon and the 
reasons for the decision. 


46 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


(2) The Appellate Authority shall communicate the order passed by him to 
the appellant and the Excise Officer or Deputy Commissioner, as the case may be, 
whose order formed the subject matter of appeal. 


87. The Excise Commissioner may, at any time within six months from the 
date of the order, with a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, 
amend any order passed by him and shall make such amendments if the mistake is 
brought to his notice by any of the parties to the appeal: 


Provided that an amendment which has the effect of enhancing an 
assessment or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the liability of the other 
party, shall not be made under this section unless the Excise Commissioner has 
given notice to the appellant of his intention so to do and has granted him an 
opportunity of being heard. 


88. (7) The Excise Commissioner may, on his own motion, call for the 
record of any proceeding in which an officer subordinate to him has taken any 
decision or passed an order under this Regulation, including those related to the 
grant, issue or refusal to grant a licence, for the purpose of satisfying himself as to 
the legality or propriety of any such decision or order and may make such inquiry 
or cause such inquiry to be made and, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, 
pass such order thereon as he thinks fit. 


(2) No order, which is prejudicial to any person, shall be passed under this 
section unless the person has been given an opportunity of being heard. 


(3) The Excise Commissioner shall communicate the order passed by him 
under sub-section (/) to such person and the Excise Officer or Deputy 
Commissioner, whose order formed the subject matter of revision. 


(4) No order under this section shall be passed by the Excise Commissioner 
in respect of any issue, if an appeal against such issue is pending before the 
Deputy Commissioner. 


(5) No order under this section shall be passed after the expiry of a period of 
six months from the date on which the order sought to be revised has been passed. 


89. (1) Where in any appeal under this Chapter, the decision or order 
appealed against relates to any duty or fee demanded or any penalty or fine levied 
under this Regulation, the person desirous of appealing against such decision or 
order shall, pending the appeal, deposit with the Excise Officer, the duty or fee as 
demanded or the penalty or fine levied, if such amount exceeds one lakh rupees. 


(2) Where in any particular case, the Appellate Authority is of the opinion that 
the appellant has a prima facie case in his favour and deposit of duty demanded or 
penalty levied would cause undue hardship to such person, the Appellate Authority 
may dispense with such deposit and stay its recovery subject to such conditions as he 
may deem fit to impose so as to safeguard the interest of revenue. 


(3) Where an application is filed for dispensing with the deposit of duty or 
fee demanded or penalty or fine levied under sub-section (2), the Appellate 
Authority shall, where it is possible so to do, decide such application within a 
period of thirty days from the date of its filing. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), no recovery 
action shall be initiated against the appellant until the application under 
sub-section (3) has been decided by the Appellant Authority. 


90. (J) Any Government Corporation or Government company or 
Government agency or any autonomous body owned or controlled by the 
Government referred to in sub-section (/) of section 6, is aggrieved by the order of 
the Administrator may file an appeal to the High Court. 


Power of Excise 
Commissioner to 
rectify mistakes 
apparent from 
record. 


Revision of 
orders by Excise 
Commissioner. 


Deposit of duty 
or fee demanded 
or penalty of 
fine levied, 
pending appeal. 


Appeal to High 
Court. 


Sums due to be 
paid 
notwithstanding 
appeal before 
High Court. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(2) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from an order passed in appeal by 
the Excise Commissioner, if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a 
substantial question of law. 


(3) The Government or the other party aggrieved by any order passed by the 
Excise Commissioner may file an appeal to the High Court and such appeal under 
this sub-section shall be— 


(a) filed within a period of sixty days from the date on which the order 
appealed against is received by the Government or the other party; 


(b) accompanied by a fee of ten per cent. of the amount involved or 
two thousand rupees, whichever is higher, where such appeal is filed by the 
other party; 


(c) in the form of a memorandum of appeal precisely stating therein the 
substantial question of law involved. 


(4) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is 
involved in any case, it shall formulate that question. 


(5) The appeal shall be heard only on the question so formulated, and the 
respondent shall, at the hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case 
does not involve such question: 


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to take away or 
abridge the power of Court to hear, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the 
appeal on any other substantial question of law not formulated by it, if it is 
satisfied that the case involves such question of law. 


(6) The High Court shall decide the question of law so formulated and 
deliver such judgment thereon containing the grounds on which decision is 
founded and may award such cost as it deems fit. 


(7) The High Court may determine any issue which— 
(a) has not been determined by the Excise Commissioner; 


(b) has been wrongly determined by the Excise Commissioner, by reason 
of a decision of such question of law as is referred to in sub-section (2). 


(8) An Appeal under this section shall be heard by a bench of not less than 
two judges of the High Court, and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion 
of such judges or of the majority, if any, of such judges. 


(9) Where there is no such majority, the judges shall state the point of law 
upon which they differ and the case shall, then, be heard upon that point only by 
one or more of the other judges of High Court and such point shall be decided 
according to the opinion of the majority of the judges who have heard the cases 
including those who first heard it. 


(10) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the provisions of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to the appeals to the High Court shall as far as may 
be, apply in cases of appeal under this section. 


91. Notwithstanding that an appeal has been preferred to the High Court, 
sums due to the Government as a result of an order passed by the Excise 
Commissioner shall be payable in accordance with the order so passed: 


Provided that nothing contained in this section or Chapter shall affect the 
inherent powers of the High Court for granting stay on the recovery of such 
amount. 


5 of 1908. 


Sec. 1] 


CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


92. Every person, who manufactures or sells any liquor under a licence 
granted under this Regulation, shall— 


(a) supply himself with such measures, weights and instruments as the 
Excise Commissioner may specify in this behalf, and keep the same in good 
condition; and 


(6) on the requisition of any Excise Officer, at any time to measure, 
weight or test any liquor in his possession in such manner as the said Excise 
Officer may require. 


93. The Administrator may, by notification, declare as to what shall be 
deemed to be liquor for the purposes of this Regulation or the rules made 
thereunder. 


94. The Administrator may issue such order and take such measures as may 
be deemed appropriate to regulate drinking of liquor or to enforce prohibition of 
such drinking in the whole or any part of the Union territory. 


95. The Administrator may make rules to regulate movement, possession and 
sale of molasses, black jaggery, mahua flower, etc., indicating terms and 
conditions as are necessary and expedient to prevent their misuse for illicit 
distillation. 


96. No advertisement, direct or surrogate, shall be made for promoting 
consumption of liquor: 


Provided that the Excise Commissioner may, at his discretion, allow such 
advertisement which is educative and promotes responsible drinking. 


97. The Administrator may, by notification, declare in respect of the whole 
of the Union territory or to any local area comprised therein, as regards to 
purchasers generally or any specified class of purchasers and generally or for any 
specified occasion, the maximum or minimum quantity, or both, of a liquor, which 
for the purposes of this Regulation, may be sold by retail and by wholesale. 


98. No suits for damages shall lie in any Civil Court against the 
Administrator or any officer or person for any act done in good faith, or ordered to 
be done in pursuance of this Regulation or of any other law for the time being in 
force relating to excise revenue. 


99. (1) The Administrator may, by notification, make rules not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Regulation, for carrying out the provisions of this Regulation. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the form in which an annual report shall be submitted by the Excise 
Commissioner under clause (i) of section 4; 


(6) the terms and conditions for grant of reward to the officers and 
employees, and informers for the work under section 9; 


(c) the manner of registration for the purpose of manufacture of alcohol 
exclusively for industrial use under sub-section (2) of section 10; 


(d) the fees, period, terms and conditions and form, for grant of licence 
or permit under section 11; 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


Measures, 
weights and 
testing 
instruments. 


Power of 
Administrator to 
declare what 
shall be deemed 
to be liquor. 


Power of 
Administrator to 
regulate drinking 
and to enforce 
prohibition. 


Powers of 
Administrator to 
regulate 
molasses, black 
jaggery, mahua 
flower, etc., to 
prevent misuse. 


Power to 
regulate 
advertisement. 


Power of 
Administrator to 
declare limit of 
sale by retail and 
by wholesale. 


Bar of certain 
suits. 


Power of 
Administrator to 
make rules. 


Laying before 
Parliament. 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(e) the conditions for security and counterpart agreement under section 13; 


(f) the restrictions on power of the licensing authority to suspend or 
cancel licence or permit under sub-section (/) of section 16; 


(g) the terms and conditions subject to which transfer of licence or 
permit may be made under section 19; 


(A) the terms and conditions for granting of licence or lease under 
section 20; 


(i) the bond to be executed for removal of liquor from manufactory, 
warehouse, etc., under section 21; 


(j) the terms and conditions for collection of fee for issue of licence or 
permit under sub-section (2), and the manner of assessment of import, export 
and transport duties under sub-section (3), of section 26; 


(k) the returns, forms and the particulars and such other information to 
be submitted by the licensee under section 31; 


(J) the value of liquor which may be less than or exceed under clauses (a) 
and (6), respectively, of section 32; 


(m) the quantity of the liquor to be sold, transported, possessed or 
bought by the manufacturer under section 37; 


(n) the period within which any major offence may be referred by the 
Deputy Commissioner under sub-section (2) of section 68; 


(०) the manner of adjudication by an Adjudicating Officer under 
sub-section (2) of section 69; 


(p) the guidelines for compounding under sub-section (3) and the 
manner in which the liquor, apparatus, vehicle or other material seized shall 
be disposed of under sub-section (4) of section 70; 


(q) the manner in which any liquor, mahua flowers or molasses and 
any other confiscated property shall be disposed of under sub-section (7) of 
section 73; 


(r) the manner and fees for disposal of confiscated property under 
sub-section (/) of section 75; 


(s) the regulation of movement, possession and sale of molasses, black 
jaggery, mahua flower, etc., under section 95; 


(0) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed under this 
Regulation. 


100. Every rule made, or notification or order issued, under this Regulation 


shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
notification or order, or both Houses agree that the rule or notification or order 
should not be made, the rule or notification or order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule or notification or order. 


Reg. 5 of 1979. 
Reg. 5 of 1979. 


10 of 1897. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


101. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Regulation, the Administrator may, by order published in Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Regulation, as may 
appear to it to be necessary, for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Regulation. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


102. (1) The Lakshadweep Prohibition Regulation, 1979 is hereby repealed. 


(2) The repeal of the Lakshadweep Prohibition Regulation, 1979 (herein 
referred to as the repealed Regulation),— 


(a) shall not affect the previous operation of the repealed Regulation or 
the rules made thereunder in respect of anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder; 


(5) shall not affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, 
accrued or incurred under the repealed Regulation or the rules made or 
orders issued thereunder; and 


(c) the provisions of the repealed Regulation shall continue to apply to 
any proceeding, inquiry or appeal pending immediately before the 
commencement of this Regulation, as if the repealed Regulation has not been 
repealed. 


(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of 
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply with regard to the effect of 
repeal. 


103. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, regulation and rules 
prevailing at the time of this Regulation is brought into force, if such provision of 
law, regulation and rule is repugnant to, or inconsistent with any of the provision 
of this Regulation, cease to be operative to the extent of such repugnancy or 
inconsistency. 


104. Any custom or usage prevailing at the time of this Regulation is brought 
into force, if such custom or usage is repugnant to, or inconsistent with any of the 
provision of this Regulation, cease to be operative to the extent of such 
repugnancy or inconsistency. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


Regulation to 
override other 
laws. 


Regulation to 
override custom 
or usage. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


THE SCHEDULE 


(See section 26) 


81. No. Description of Liquor Rate 
(1) (2) (3) 
1 Indian made Foreign Liquor and 400% of the last 
Foreign Liquor selling price 
2 Wine 80% of the last 


selling price 


3 Beer 200% of the last 
selling price 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 
GORAKH Distaty signed 
ANATH 0० 
YADAVA 140436+0530 
MGIPMRND—288GI(S4)—05-06-2026. 


