रजिस्ट्री te डी० Uer—( TH) 04/0007/2003—26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


प्यारत का Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


Ooh. -ST. Wet.-37.-5052026-272606 
CG-DL-E-5052026-272606 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — asl 
PART II — Section I 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


a 6] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, मई 5, 2026/वैशाख 25, 948 (शक) 
No. 6] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, MAY 5, 2026/VAISAKHA 25, 948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the /5॥ May, 2026/Vaisakha 25, 948 (Saka) 


THE LAKSHADWEEP FIRE AND EMERCENCY SERVICE 
REGULATION, 2026 
No. 3 oF 2026 


Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic 
of Inida. 


A Regulation to provide for the maintenance of Fire and Emergency Service and 
to make more effective provisions for fire prevention and fire safety 
measures in various categories of buildings and premises in the Union 
territory of the Lakshadweep and the matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


In exercise of the powers conferred by article 240 of the Constitution, the 
President is pleased to promulgate the following Regulation made by her:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


l. () This Regulation may be called the Lakshadweep Fire and Emergency 
Service Regulation, 2026. 


(2) It extends to the Union territory of the Lakshadweep. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Administrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


2. In this Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “administrator” means the administrator of the Union territory of 
the Lakshadweep appointed by the President under article 239 of the 
Constitution; 


(6) “appellate authority” means an officer above the rank of Fire 
Officer appointed by the Government, by notification; 


(c) “building” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in any law 
for the time being in force in the area in which this Regulation is in force and 
includes places or premises comprising of land or building, or part of a land 
or building, whether authorised or otherwise, out houses, if any, pertaining to 
such building or part thereof and installations of petrol, diesel or gas lines or 
pumps; 


(d) “building bye-laws” means the bye-laws or rules or regulations 
made under any municipal law or any other law for the time being in force in 
the area in which this Regulation is in force and includes the development 
and control rules or regulations, by whatever name called; 


(e) “bye-law” means the fire safety regulations, norms or guidelines 
made by the Government under this Regulation; 


(f) “Director or Chief Fire Officer’ means the Director or Chief Fire 
Officer of the fire and emergency service appointed under sub-section (/) of 
section 7; 


(g) “disaster” means the disasters as defined in clause (d) of section 2 
of the Disaster Management Act, 2005; 


(A) “emergency” means any serious situation or occurrence, including 
disasters, occurring unexpectedly and demanding immediate action or 
response of the fire and emergency service; 


(i) “employee” means a person appointed to the fire and emergency 
service; 


(j) “erector’ means a person or association of persons, whether 
incorporated or otherwise, who erects or makes a pandal or any structure for 
the occupation of people on a regular or temporary basis; 


(k) “fire and emergency service” means the Lakshadweep fire and 
emergency service constituted under section 3; 


(J) “Fire Officer or Station Fire Officer or Station Officer” means an 
officer appointed as such under sub-section (/) of section 0; 


(m) “fire prevention and life safety measures” means such measures as 
may be necessary for the containment, control, and extinguishing of fire and 
for ensuring the safety of life and property, including such other measures as 
may be prescribed; 


(n) “firefighting property” means land and building used as 
fire stations, firefighting appliances, equipment, tools, implements 
and other articles whatsoever used for firefighting and other means of 
transport used in connection with the firefighting, uniforms and badges 
of rank; 


(०) “Fire Safety Officer” means the officer appointed as Fire Safety 
Officer under sub-section (/) of section 5; 


53 of 2005. 


Sec. |] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(p) “fire station” means a fire station established under sub-section (/) 
of section 9; 


(4) “fund” means the Fire Prevention and Life Safety Fund constituted 
under section 39; 


(r) “Government” means the Union territory administration of 
Lakshadweep; 


(s) “local authority” means a district panchayat or gram panchayat 
constituted under any law for the time being in force; 


(0) “nominated authority” means any officer of the rank of a Station 
Fire Officer or Station Officer of fire and emergency service nominated by 
the Government for the purposes of this Regulation; 


(u) “notification” means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette, and the expression “notify” or “notified” shall be construed 
accordingly; 


(v) “occupancy” means the principal occupancy for which a building or 
part thereof is used or intended to be used, including subsidiary occupancies 
which are contingent upon it; 


(w) “occupier” means— 


(i) an owner in occupation of, or otherwise using, his land or 
building; 


(ii) any person who, for the time being, is paying or is liable to 
pay to the owner, the rent or any portion of the rent of the land or 
building in respect of which such rent is paid or is payable; 


(iii) a licensee in occupation of any land or building; 


(iv) any person who Is liable to pay damages to the owner for the 
use and occupation of any land or building; and 


(v) a rent-free tenant of any land or building; 


(x) “Official Gazette” means the Gazette of the Union territory of 
Lakshadweep; 


(v) “owner” means a person who, for the time being, is entitled to 
receive the rent of any land or building,— 


(i) whether on his own account or on account of himself and 
others; or 


(ii) as an agent, trustee, guardian or receiver; or 


(iii) any other person, who may receive the rent or be entitled to 
receive it, if the land or building or part thereof is let out to a tenant; 


(z) “pandal” means a temporary structure with a roof or walls made of 
straw, hay, ulu grass, golpatta, hogla, darma, mat, canvas, cloth or such other 
like material which is not used for permanent or continuous occupancy; 


(za) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this 
Regulation; 


(zb) “qualified agency” means a person or an association of persons 
having technical specialisation in the field of fire,— 


(a) civil or mechanical engineering; or 


(6) technology, industrial safety, disaster management or 
chemical science, 


Establishment 
and declaration 
of fire and 
emergency 
service. 


Superintendence 
of fire and 
emergency 
service to vest in 
Government. 


Composition of 
fire and 
emergency 
service. 


Terms and 
conditions of 
employees of 
fire and 
emergency 
service. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


from a recognised university, having domain knowledge and accomplishments in 
the field of fire services or emergency services; 


(zc) “second appellate authority” means an officer appointed by the 
Government, who is higher in rank than the appellate authority; 


(zd) “specified” means specified by an order under this Regulation, and 
the expression “specify” shall be construed accordingly; 


(ze) “Standing Fire Advisory Council” means the advisory body 
constituted by the Ministry of Home Affairs by notification to examine the 
technical problems relating to a fire and emergency service and to make 
recommendations to the Government of India in the matter including the 
standardisation of firefighting equipment through the Indian Standard 
Institutions; and 


(zf) “Union territory” means the Union territory of Lakshadweep. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES 


3. (7) With effect from such date as the Government may, by notification, 
appoint, there shall be established a fire and emergency service for the Union 
territory. 


(2) The Government may, by notification, declare any fire brigade of the Union 
territory, by whatever name called, as part of the fire and emergency service: 


Provided that the private fire and emergency service maintained for 
providing fire protection coverage to a specific building or industry by the owner 
thereof shall not form part of the fire and emergency service. 


(3) In order to assist in any disaster, all fire services shall be considered as 
emergency services. 


(4) In case the emergency service is not related to fire only, the authority 
in-charge of the fire and emergency service shall take action. 


4. The superintendence of, and control over, the fire and emergency service 
throughout the Union territory shall vest in the Government, and the fire and 
emergency service shall be administered by the Government in accordance with 
the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder. 


5. (J) The fire and emergency service shall consist of the following 
members, namely:— 


(a) Director or Chief Fire 
Administrator-ex officio; 


(b) Deputy Chief Fire Officer; 


Officer as designated by the 


(c) Station Fire Officer or Station Officer (Fire Service); 
(d) Sub-Fire Officer; 
(e) Leading Fireman. 


(2) The existing workshop, control room and other field formations of the 
fire and emergency service shall function in the manner as may be prescribed. 


6. (/) The number of employees, method of their recruitment, level of post, 
qualification, pay, allowances and other conditions of their service and the matters 
connected therewith shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(2) The uniform and badges of employees shall be such as may be prescribed 
and shall be in conformity with the recommendation of the Standing Fire Advisory 
Council. 


(3) The employees of the fire and emergency service shall be governed by 
Central Civil Service Rules as apply to the other employees of the 
Government in relation to the terms and conditions of their service and all other 
allied matters. 


(4) Save as otherwise provided by or under this Regulation, every person 
holding office either as a Fire Officer or staff or an employee of existing fire 
service on the date immediately before the commencement of this Regulation, 
shall continue to hold office on the same terms and conditions as applied to him 
immediately before such date and shall exercise such powers and perform such 
duties as before and in addition to those as are conferred on them by or under this 
Regulation. 


(5) All officers and employees of the fire and emergency service shall be 
liable for posting to any branch of the fire and emergency service at any location 
within the Union territory. 


7. (7) The Government may, by notification, appoint a Director or Chief Fire 
Officer of the fire and emergency service with such qualification and experience 
as may be prescribed, who shall exercise such powers and perform such duties and 
other functions as are specified by this Regulation or as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Government may, by notification, appoint such other officers and 
employees as may be necessary to assist the Director or Chief Fire Officer. 


(3) The Jurisdiction of the Director or Chief Fire Officer so appointed shall 
extend to the whole of the Union territory in matters relating to fire and emergency 
service, 


8. (/) The Director or Chief Fire Officer shall, subject to the superintendence 
and control of the Government, direct and regulate matters relating to fire safety 
and prevention, firefighting equipment, machinery and appliances, training, events 
of mutual relations, distribution of duties, study of laws, orders and modes of 
proceedings and all matters of executive details or the fulfilment of duties and 
maintenance of discipline of fire officers and employees of the fire and emergency 
service, in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made 
thereunder, any other applicable rules and instructions applicable to the officers 
and employees of the Union territory. 


(2) The Director or Chief Fire Officer shall be the head of the office and 
shall,— 


(a) correspond with the Government for the development of the fire 
and emergency service; 


(6) formulate the policies in relation to the development of fire and 
emergency service in the Union territory and, on approval by the 
Government, take steps to implement the same; 


(c) prepare and submit plans and proposals to the Government relating 
to the periodical review of fire equipment, firefighting property and 
fire manpower for effective implementation of the fire and emergency 
Service; 


(d) take or cause to be taken such effective steps and measures in cases 
of major fires, house collapse and other emergency services as deemed 
necessary; 


Appointment of 
Director of fire 
and emergency 
service. 


Power, duties 
and functions of 
Director or Chief 
Fire Officer. 


Establishment of 
Fire Stations. 


Appointment of 
Fire Officer. 


Powers and 
functions of Fire 
Officers. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(e) investigate or direct investigation of the cause of the outbreak of 
fire and advise the concerned authorities for implementation of fire 
precautionary measures; 


(f) depute such number of officers and employees as may be necessary 
to assist any Fire Officer of the fire and emergency service; 


(g) enter into agreement, after prior approval of the Government, with 
any person or agency that employs and maintains personnel or equipment or 
both for firefighting purposes, for the purpose of dealing with fires occurring 
in any area; 


(A) implement the effective human resource development policies as 
per the job requirements specified at each level of fire service personnel, and 
for that purpose, he may establish advance training centres; 


(i) represent the Government at the national and international forums 
with a view to update the standard of the fire and emergency service in the 
Union territory; and 


(j) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties and 
functions as conferred or imposed on him by or under this Regulation or as 
may be prescribed. 


(3) The Assistant Director or Deputy Chief Fire Officer and such other 
officers, as may be appointed by the Government, shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as are conferred and imposed upon them, by this Regulation 
or by the rules made thereunder, subject to the control, directions and 
superintendence of the Director or Chief Fire Officer. 


CHAPTER III 
ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE STATIONS 
9. (/) The Government may, for the purposes of securing fire prevention and 
life safety measures, by notification, establish as many fire stations and other field 
formations as it deems fit in conformity with the recommendations of the Standing 


Fire Advisory Council and Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation 
and Implementation Guidelines. 


(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (/) shall define the limits and 
extent of the fire stations and other field formations as may be necessary for 
administrative and operational efficiency. 


0. (/) The Government may, by notification, appoint a Fire Officer for each 
fire station, who shall be the officer-in-charge of the fire station and shall hold 
charge of the fire station as per the strength of the fire and emergency service as 
may be prescribed by the Government. 


(2) The method of recruitment, qualifications and other terms and conditions 
of service of the Fire Officer shall be such as may be prescribed. 


l. (J) Subject to the control, direction and superintendence of the Director 
or Chief Fire Officer, the Fire Officer shall exercise such powers and perform such 
functions as may be conferred upon him under this Regulation, and the rules made 
thereunder. 


(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (/), the Fire Officer 
shall be in-charge of operations of the fire and emergency service within his area 
and shall be responsible for maintenance of communication system, water 
resources including hydrants within his station areas, and in the case of fire 
prevention, disaster and emergency, the Fire Officer or an employee who is the 
senior most in rank, in their respective jurisdiction, shall, act as commanding 
officer for that purpose and other fire and emergency service employees shall 
work under him and abide by his direction. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


2. (/) Every employee, appointed to the fire and emergency service shall 
receive a certificate under the seal and signature of the Director or Chief Fire 
Officer, and thereupon such person shall have the powers, functions and privileges 
of an employee of the fire and emergency service under this Regulation. 


(2) The certificate referred to in sub-section (/) shall cease to have effect 
when the employee named therein ceases for any reason to be an employee, and on 
his ceasing to be such employee, he shall forthwith surrender the certificate to any 
officer empowered to receive the same. 


(3) The certificate of appointment shall become invalid when the person 
named therein ceases to belong to the fire and emergency service or shall remain 
inoperative during the period such person is suspended from the fire and 
emergency service. 


3. (J) Where it appears to the Government that it is necessary to augment 
the fire and emergency service, it may raise an auxiliary service by the enrolment 
of volunteers for such area and on such terms and conditions, as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) Every such volunteer shall receive a certificate, in such form as may be 
prescribed, as member of the fire and emergency service, shall— 


(a) have the same powers and protection; 
(5) be liable to all such duties and penalties; and 
(c) be subordinate to the same authorities. 


4. The powers, functions and privileges vested in a Fire Officer shall 
remain suspended while such Fire Officer is placed under suspension: 


Provided that the Fire Officer shall continue to be under the control of same 
authorities during the period of his suspension as he would have been, if he had 
not been, placed under suspension. 


CHAPTER IV 
FIRE SAFETY OFFICER 
5. (J) To ensure effective implementation of fire prevention and life safety 
measures for the factory, buildings or premises as may be specified by an order by 


the Government in this behalf, every owner and occupier or occupiers individually 
or jointly, as the case may be, shall— 


(a) appoint a Fire Safety Officer, within such period, having such 
qualification and experience, as may be prescribed; and 


(6) send the compliance report to the nominated authority. 


(2) The nominated authority shall issue an enrolment certificate to the Fire 
Safety Officer, under his signature and seal, in such form as may be prescribed. 


(3) In case of any vacancy of the Fire Safety Officer appointed under 
sub-section (/), either on resignation or otherwise, the owner and occupier or 
occupiers as the case may be, shall immediately appoint another person as the Fire 
Safety Officer. 


(4) If the Fire Safety Officer referred to in sub-section (3) is not appointed 
within the prescribed period, the nominated authority, may take such steps as it 
deems necessary, including report to the Labour Commissioner for the closure of 
the factory and in other cases to the concerned authority, as the case may be, for 
necessary action under the relevant law. 


(5) The Fire Safety Officer shall undergo such training at the Fire and 
Emergency Service Training Institute as may be specified by the Government in this 
behalf: 


Issue of 
certificate to 
employees. 


Auxiliary fire 
and emergency 
service. 


Effect of 
suspension of 
Fire Officer. 


Appointment, 
power and 
functions of Fire 
Safety Officer. 


Response to 
calls. 


Deployment of 
personnel and 
equipment. 


Operation 
management. 


Powers of 
employees of 
fire and 
emergency 
service during 
fire or rescue 
operations. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Provided that a person who has already undergone such training at the 
National Fire Service College, Nagpur or at any other equivalent institution 
recognised by the Government for the purpose, shall not be required to undergo 
such training. 


CHAPTER V 
FIRE AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE 


6. The Fire Officer shall ensure the timely turnouts of fire units to respond 
to fire and emergency related calls in accordance with such Standard Operating 
Procedures as may be specified by the Government. 


7. The Director, Chief Fire Officer or Fire Officer shall ensure deployment 
of fire and emergency service resources, equipment and fire personnel at stand-by 
duties during any fire response or any other emergency in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


8. The Director, Chief Fire Officer or Fire Officer shall ensure the planning, 
organising and deployment of the staff, maintaining details of such planning and 
deployment of the employee and shall ensure the regular monitoring of the fire or 
emergency site. 


9. In the event of a fire rescue operation in any area in which this 
Regulation is in force, any member of the fire and emergency service, who is 
in-charge of firefighting operations on the spot, may,— 


(a) remove or order any member of the fire and emergency service to 
remove any person who, by his presence, interferes with or impedes the 
operation for extinguishing the fire or for saving life or property; 


(b) close any street or passage in or near which a fire is being 
extinguished or rescue work is in progress; 


(c) for the purpose of extinguishing fire and carrying out a rescue 
operation, break into or through or pull down any premises for the passage of 
hose or appliances or cause them to be broken into or pulled down, causing 
minimum damage as possible for extinguishing fire: 


Provided that the owner or occupier, as the case may be, of any such 
premises shall be paid such reasonable compensation to the extent of the 
damage caused in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) require any authority in-charge of water supply in the area to 
regulate the water mains, to provide water at a specified pressure at the place 
where fire has broken out and utilise the water of any stream, cistern, well or 
tank or of any available source of water, public or private, for the purpose of 
extinguishing or limiting the spread of such fire and carrying out rescue 
operations in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(e) exercise the same powers for dispersing an assembly of persons 
likely to obstruct the firefighting operations, as if he were an officer 
in-charge of a police station and as if such an assembly were an unlawful 
assembly and shall be entitled to the same immunities and protection as such 
officer, in respect of the exercise of such powers; 


(f) detain a person who wilfully obstructs and hinders fire and 
emergency service personnel in firefighting and rescue operations, and shall 
hand him over to a police officer or at the nearest police station without 
avoidable delay, along with a brief note giving date, time and reasons of such 
detention; 


Sec. |] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(g) enter into agreement with any person who employs and maintains 
personnel or equipment or both for firefighting purposes, to secure on such 
terms as may be prescribed for the purpose of dealing with fires occurring in 
any area; and 


(४) take such measures as may appear to him to be necessary for 
extinguishing the fire or for the protection of life and property, or with both. 


20. The Director or Fire Officer may draw water from any source in the area 
which he considers necessary during firefighting operations and on such occasions 
as may be required, and the authority or owner or occupier having control over 
such water source shall supply water for that purpose at such rates, as may be 
prescribed. 


2l. (J) The Director or Fire Officer shall take all reasonable measures for 
securing an adequate supply of water for use in the event of fire. 


(2) The Director, Chief Fire Officer or Fire Officer shall ensure that the 
water demand for firefighting in the area is in accordance with the Central Public 
Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation Manual, 999. 


(3) The Local Authority and Lakshadweep Public Works Department shall 
provide all assistance for meeting the water demand for firefighting as per 
sub-sections (/) and (2). 


22. The Director or Fire Officer may enter into an agreement with any 
agency for meeting the demand of water supply in an emergency on such terms 
and conditions, as may be prescribed. 


23. No authority in charge of water supply in any area shall be entitled to any 
claim for compensation for damage by reason of any interruption of supply of 
water caused in compliance with clause (व) of section 9. 


24. No charge shall be made by any local authority for water consumed in 
firefighting operations by the fire and emergency service. 


CHAPTER VI 
PREVENTIVE MEASURES 


25. (/) The Government may, by notification, require the owner or occupier 
of any buildings or premises in any area or of any class of building or premises 
that are likely to be at risk of fire or likely to cause risk of fire, to take such 
precautions as may be specified in such notification. 


(2) The Director, Chief Fire Officer or Fire Officer shall ensure that 
provisions for fire services management, prevention and preparedness, including 
preparation of the fire hazard response mitigation plan, are in accordance with the 
guidelines issued by the National Disaster Management Authority. 


26. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation, the erector of 
a pandal shall take all fire prevention and life safety measures referred to in 
this section. 


(2) The erector shall display at a prominent place in the pandal, a declaration 
under his signature to the effect that he has taken all fire prevention and life safety 
measures, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The nominated authority may enter and inspect the pandal to verify the 
correctness of the declaration so made under sub-section (2) and in case of any 
default, it may direct the erector to rectify the same within the specified time and 
in case of non-compliance of directions within the specified time, shall remove the 
pandal in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Power to arrange 
for water supply 
during 
emergency. 


Duty of Director 
or Fire Officer to 
arrange water 
supply. 


Power to enter 
into agreement 
for water supply. 


Authority not to 
claim 
compensation 
for damage. 


Local authority 
not to charge for 
water 
consumption. 


Preventive 
measures. 


Erector of a 
pandal to take 
fire prevention 
and life safety 
measures. 


False declaration 
to be punishable 
offence. 


Removal of 
encroachments, 
objects or goods 
likely to cause 
risk of fire or 
any obstruction 
to firefighting. 


Liability of 
owner or 
occupiers of 
building to 
provide fire 
prevention and 
life safety 
measures. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


27. If any erector falsely declares that he has complied with the prescribed 
fire prevention and life safety measures in the pandal under sub-section (2) of 
section 26, he shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under 
section 49. 


28. (J) Where a notification has been issued under sub-section (/) of 
section 25, it shall be lawful for the nominated authority to issue direction to the 
owner or occupier or erector, as the case may be, for removal of the objects, goods 
or encroachments, if any, that are likely to cause fire or any obstruction to 
firefighting to a place of safety, by means of a notice served in such manner as he 
may think fit. 


(2) If the owner, occupier or erector, as the case may be, fails to comply with 
the precautions under sub-section (7) of section 25 or directions under 
sub-section (3) of section 26, the nominated authority may, report the matter to the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate, in whose territorial jurisdiction the premises or 
building or pandal is situated, for adjudication. 


(3) Where the nominated authority considers objects or goods or 
encroachments referred to in sub-section (/) to be an imminent cause of risk of fire 
or obstruction to firefighting, he may seize or remove the objects or goods or 
encroachment forthwith and report the matter to the Sub-Divisional Magistrate. 


(4) On receipt of a report under sub-section (2) or (3), the Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate shall issue a notice to the owner or occupier or erector, as the case may 
be, in such manner as he may think fit, giving such owner or occupier or erector, 
an opportunity for making representation against the removal of encroachment or 
objects or goods likely to cause a risk of fire or obstruction to firefighting. 


(5) After giving the owner, occupier or erector, as the case may be, a 
reasonable opportunity of making representation under sub-section (4), the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate after considering the representation, may withdraw the 
notice or pass an order directing any person to seize, detain or remove such objects 
or goods or encroachments within such time from the date of order. 


(6) The person charged with the directions under sub-section (5) shall, make 
an inventory of the objects and goods that are seized under such order and give 
notice in such form as may be prescribed, to the person in possession thereof at the 
time of seizure, that the said objects or goods shall be sold if the same are not 
claimed within the period stipulated in the said notice and inform the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate about the seizure. 


(7) If the person from whom the objects and goods were seized under 
sub-section (5) fails to claim the seized objects and goods pursuant to notice given 
under sub-section (6), the Sub-Divisional Magistrate may sell such objects and 
goods by public auction. 


29. (/) Without prejudice to the provisions of the bye-laws or any other 
law for the time being in force in the Union territory, the owner or occupier, 
who is either individually or jointly responsible for a building or part 
thereof, shall provide fire prevention and life safety measures as may be 
prescribed: 


Provided that the owner or the occupier, as the case may be, shall— 


(a) provide firefighting and life safety installations or measures as 
provided in such bye-law; 


(8) maintain the fire prevention and life safety measures in operational 
condition at all times, in the manner and specifications as specified in such 
bye-law. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l] 


(2) Any person proposing to construct a building as mentioned in clauses (a) 
and (5) or pursuant to the rules made in this behalf, shall apply for approval of the 
fire and life safety measure along with the building plan to the nominated authority 
in this behalf, in such form along with such fee as may be prescribed, in case of — 


(a) multi-storied buildings having more than fifteen-metre height; 
(5) special buildings including,— 


(i) hotel or resort or eating houses, apartment exceeding five 
hundred square metres of floor area on addition of the area of all floors, 
educational institutions, buildings for assembly, business or mercantile 
buildings, industry or factory, buildings for storage, godowns or 
buildings used for storage of hazardous materials; 


(ii) mixed occupancies, where any of the buildings referred to in 
clause (a) or clause (b) have a floor area of more than five hundred 
square metres, on the addition of the area of all floors. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force in the Union territory, no authority shall grant or issue electricity or water 
connections, or an occupancy certificate, in respect of any building or premises, 
unless the owner or occupier thereof has obtained a Fire Safety Certificate in 
accordance with the provisions of this Regulation: 


Provided that the owner or occupier of the building referred to in 
sub-section (2) shall, prior to the grant of building plan approval, obtain a 
provisional Fire Safety Certificate, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, 
and shall, prior to the grant of a completion certificate, obtain a Fire Safety 
Certificate from the nominated authority. 


(4) Without prejudice to the existing building bye-laws, the owner or 
occupier of the buildings specified in sub-section (2) and the notification issued 
under sub-section (/) of section 25 shall obtain a Fire Safety Certificate from the 
fire and emergency service which shall be valid for five years, unless cancelled 
earlier by the nominated authority, from the date of issue of certificate: 


Provided that after the expiry of a period of thirty months from the date of 
issue of the Fire Safety Certificate, the owner or occupier, as the case may be, 
shall submit to the nominated authority a self-declaration or certification, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed, relating to the operational fitness and 
adequacy of the fire safety equipment and firefighting system installed in the 
premises. 


(5) While applying for a Fire Safety Certificate, the owner or occupier, as the 
case may be, shall furnish to the nominated authority, a certificate certifying the 
compliance of the fire prevention and life safety measures in his building or part 
thereof, issued by a qualified agency, in such form as may be prescribed. 


(6) The owner or occupier, as the case may be, after receipt of the Fire Safety 
Certificate shall furnish a declaration, in such form as may be prescribed, once a 
year in July, regarding the efficient maintenance of fire prevention and life safety 
measures as mentioned in sub-section (/). 


(7) No person other than the qualified agency shall carry out the work of 
providing fire prevention and life safety measures or performing such other 
related activities required to be carried out in any place or building or part 
thereof. 


(8) For the purpose of this section, the manner of selecting the qualified 
agency and the functions of such qualified agency shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


Issue of Fire 
Safety Certificate 
and its renewal. 


Power of 
inspection of 
nominated 
authority. 


Communication 
of information 
on outbreak of 
fire. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


30. (J) The nominated authority shall, upon receipt of an application, 
scrutinise the compliances required under section 29 and other provisions of this 
Regulation, documents and particulars submitted by the owner or occupier, and 
after following such procedure, as may be prescribed and after making such 
verification as may be necessary, issue Fire Safety Certificate within a period of 
thirty days from the date of receipt of the application. 


(2) If the owner or occupier, as the case may be, fails to comply with the 
directions issued by the Fire Officer, the Fire Safety Certificate, issued under 
sub-section (/), shall be cancelled after giving the owner or occupier a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 


(3) The owner or occupier of the building, whose Fire Safety Certificate has 
been cancelled under sub-section (2), shall not be entitled to occupy the building. 


(4) No person shall tamper with, alter, remove or cause any injury or damage 
to any fire prevention and life safety equipment installed in any such building or 
part thereof or instigate any other person to do so. 


3. (J) The nominated authority may, after giving three hours’ notice to the 
occupier, or if there is no occupier, to the owner of any place or building or part 
thereof, enter and inspect such place or building or part thereof, at any time 
between sunrise and sunset where such inspection appears necessary for 
ascertaining the adequacy of fire prevention and life safety measures or the 
contravention thereof: 


Provided that the nominated authority may enter and inspect any place or 
building, at any time, if an industry is operating or an entertainment programme is 
going on at such place or building, if it appears to him to be necessary and 
expedient to do so, to ensure the safety of life and property. 


(2) The owner or occupier, as the case may be, of such place or building or 
part thereof shall provide all possible assistance to the nominated authority for 
carrying out the inspection under sub-section (/). 


(3) The owner or occupier or any other person shall not obstruct or cause any 
obstruction to the entry of a person empowered under this section, into or upon 
such place or building. 


(4) When any such place or building or part thereof referred to in 
sub-section (/) is being used as a human dwelling and is entered, due regard shall 
be paid to the social and religious sentiments of the occupier, and where any flat, 
apartment, place or building or part thereof is in the actual occupancy of a woman, 
who, according to the custom does not appear in public, prior notice intimating her 
that she is at liberty to withdraw from such place or building, and every reasonable 
facility for such withdrawal shall be given to her. 


(5) Where the inspection is carried out by the nominated authority under 
sub-section (/), it shall give a report of such inspection to the Director. 


(6) The nominated authority shall, after completion of the inspection, record 
his views on the deviations from or the contraventions of, the requirements 
concerning the fire prevention and life safety measures or the inadequacy or 
non-compliance of such measures provided or to be provided therein with 
reference to the height of the building or the nature of activities carried on in such 
place or building or part thereof and issue a notice to the owner or occupier of 
such place or building directing him to undertake such measures within such 
period as may be specified in the notice. 


32. Any person who possesses any information regarding an outbreak of fire 
shall communicate the same without delay to the nearest fire station. 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


CHAPTER VII 
FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE TRAINING INSTITUTE 
33. The Government may,— 


(a) establish and maintain one or more training institutes in the Union 
territory for providing courses of instruction in the prevention and 
extinguishment of fire for the fire and emergency service personnel, private 
candidates and other Government or non-Government establishments and 
may close down or re-establish any such training centre in accordance with 
recommendations of the Standing Fire Advisory Council; 


(6) extend the training facilities referred to in clause (a) and provide 
training in specialised courses to private candidates or organisations, as well 
as the fire and emergency service of other States, on payment of such 
charges, as may be prescribed; 


(c) provide a course of instruction on prevention and extinguishment of 
fire in accordance with such procedure and on payment of such fee as may 
be prescribed; and 


(d) subject to the observance of any rules applicable to other employees 
of the Government in relation to training, the employees of the fire and 
emergency service may be given training in the field of scientific and 
modern techniques of fire protection and fire safety measures, and allied 
matters in any institute, within or outside India, at the cost and expense of 
the Government. 


34. The Director or Fire Officer shall conduct community awareness and 
training programmes on preventive measures relating to fire and other 
emergencies, and the fire and emergency service shall render assistance and 
consultation to the communities in such matters relating to fire prevention in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER VIII 
LEVY OF FIRE TAX AND OTHER CHARGES 


35. (/) There shall be levied a fire tax on lands and buildings on which 
property tax, by whatever name called, is levied by any local authority in that area. 


(2) The fire tax shall be levied over and above the property tax at such rates 
as may be prescribed. 


(3) No tax shall be levied on any building vested in or under the control or 
possession of the Government or public authority owned by the Government. 


36. (/) The authority empowered to assess, collect and enforce payment of 
property tax under the law authorising the local authority of the area to levy such 
tax shall, on behalf of the Government and subject to any rules made under this 
Regulation, assess, collect and enforce payment of the fire tax in the same manner 
as the property tax is assessed, enforced or collected. 


(2) Such portion of the total proceeds of the fire tax as the 
Government may determine shall be deducted to meet the cost of collection of the 
fire charges. 


37. (7) Where employees of the fire and emergency service are deployed 
beyond the limits of any area under this Regulation, to extinguish a fire in the 
neighbourhood of such limits, then the State Government or local body or fire and 
emergency service authority on whose request they were sent, shall be liable to 
pay such fee as may be prescribed. 


Establishment of 
fire and 
emergency 
training institute. 


Community 
preparedness. 


Levy of fire tax. 


Mode of 
assessment, 
collection and 
levy of fire tax. 


Fee on 
deployment of 
fire and 
emergency 
service within or 
beyond limits of 
Union territory. 


Recovery of 
dues. 


Constitution of 
fund. 


Requisition of 
firefighting 
property. 


l4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) The fee referred to in sub-section (/) shall be payable within a period of 
one month from the date of service of notice of demand by the Director, Chief Fire 
Officer or Fire Officer, and in case of non-payment within the said period, it shall 
be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue. 


(3) No fee shall be levied for extinguishing the fire and carrying out rescue 
operations within the Union territory. 


(4) Where employees of the fire and emergency service are deployed for the 
purposes other than firefighting within the Union territory on the direction of the 
Director or Fire Officer for rendering special services such as attending duties of 
fire protection at large assemblies or gathering along with firefighting equipment 
for stand-by duty, subject to safe use of equipment, if it can be spared or for 
imparting fire safety training on the written request of any person, shall be liable to 
pay such fee, in advance, as may be prescribed. 


38. Any amount payable under this Regulation in any form shall be 
recovered as arrears of land revenue. 


CHAPTER Ix 
FIRE PREVENTION AND LIFE SAFETY FUND 


39. (/) The Government may, by notification, constitute a fund to be called 
the Fire Prevention and Life Safety Fund. 


(2) The proceeds of fire tax, fee and penalties other than fines recovered 
under this Regulation, shall be credited to the said Fund after deduction of the 
expenses of collection and recovery therefrom. 


(3) The fund shall be utilised for the purposes of fire community 
preparedness, training and procurement of firefighting equipment, subject to such 
conditions and in such manner as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER X 
REQUISITIONING OF FIREFIGHTING PROPERTY 


40. (/) The Director, Chief Fire Officer or Fire Officer, who is in-charge of a 
firefighting operation, may, if in his opinion it is necessary for the purpose of 
extinguishing fire in any area, requisition and take possession of any firefighting 
property in the possession of any local authority or any institution or individual. 


(2) As soon as the firefighting operations are over, the Director or Fire Officer 
in-charge of the firefighting operation, as the case may be, shall release the property 
referred to in sub-section (/) from requisition and restore the same to the local 
authority, institution or individual from whose possession such property was taken. 


(3) Where any firefighting property is requisitioned under sub-section (/), 
the owner of such property shall be paid compensation which shall be determined 
in accordance with the following principles, namely: — 


(a) where the amount of compensation is fixed by an agreement 
between the Director or Fire Officer and the owner of the firefighting 
property, it shall be paid in accordance with such agreement; 


(6) where the parties fail to reach an agreement under clause (a), the 
Director or Fire Officer, who is in-charge of firefighting operation, shall 
refer the matter to the Sub-Divisional Magistrate having jurisdiction over the 
area in which the firefighting property was kept and the Magistrate shall 
after hearing the parties and such other persons as he deems necessary, 
determine the amount of compensation taking into consideration the rent 
payable for such firefighting property and such order of the Magistrate 
determining the amount of compensation shall be final. 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY I5 


CHAPTER XI 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 


4l. Whoever contravenes any provisions of sections 20 to 24 of this 
Regulation or the rules made thereunder, shall, without prejudice to any other 
action taken against him under this Regulation or rules made thereunder, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with 
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both, and where the 
offence is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to three 
thousand rupees for every day after the first day during which such offence 
continues. 


42. Notwithstanding any action which may be taken under the provisions of 
this Regulation, any member of the fire and emergency service who,— 


(a) is found to be guilty of any violation of duty or wilful breach of any 
provision of this Regulation or any rule or order made thereunder; or 


(5) is found to be guilty of abdication of duty; or 


(c) withdraws or abstains from the duties of his office without 
permission or without having given prior notice for fifteen days or more; or 


(d) being on leave fails without reasonable cause to report himself for 
duty on the expiration of such leave; or 


(e) accepts any other employment or office or engages himself in 
business in contravention of the provisions of the Central Civil Services 
(Conduct) Rules, 964, 


shall be liable under the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and 
Appeal) Rules, 965. 


43. (/) If any owner, occupier or an association of such owners and occupier 
of a building or premises fails to appoint Fire Safety Officers referred to in 
section 5, within the period as may be prescribed, on the receipt of a notice given 
in this behalf by the nominated authority or the Fire Officer, as the case may be, 
each one of them shall be deemed to be in default jointly and severally. 


(2) If the person referred to in sub-section (/) is deemed to be in default, he 
shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be less than ten rupees and not 
exceeding fifty rupees per square metre of area owned or occupied by him 
including the common areas in the premises as determined by the Government, 
which shall be recovered from him by way of penalty for each month of default or 
part thereof. 


(3) The amount referred to in sub-section (2) shall be recovered as an arrear 
of land revenue. 


44. (J) Any person whose property catches fire on account of his own act or 
his agent, done deliberately or negligently, shall be liable to pay compensation to 
any other person suffering damage to his property on account of any action taken 
under section 8 by any officer mentioned therein or any person acting under the 
authority of such officer. 


(2) All claims under sub-section (/) shall be referred to the Appellate 
Authority, within a period of thirty days from the date on which damage 
was caused. 


(3) The Appellate Authority, shall, after giving the party an opportunity of 
being heard, determine the amount of compensation and pass an order fixing the 
liability of the person for such default and the amount of compensation to be paid 
by him. 


Penalties for 
contravention of 
certain 
provisions. 


Penalty for 
violation of 
duty. 


Penalty in 

case of 
non-appointment 
of Fire Safety 
Officers. 


Liability of 
property owner 
to pay 
compensation. 


Failure to give 
information. 


Punishment for 
failure to take 
precautions. 


Penalty for 
wilfully 

obstructing 
firefighting, 


rescue operation. 


Punishment for 
giving false 
report. 


Punishment for 
furnishing false 
certificate. 


Punishment for 
contravention of 
provisions of 
this Regulation 
where no 
punishment has 
been provided. 


Offences by 
companies. 


l6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(4) The order passed under sub-section (3) shall have the force of decree of a 
civil court and shall be implemented within thirty days from the date of receipt of 
the order. 


45. Any person, legally bound to communicate information in his 
possession regarding an outbreak of fire, who fails to communicate the said 
information, without reasonable justification, shall be deemed to have committed 
an offence punishable under clause (a) of section 2ll of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023. 


46. Whoever fails, without reasonable cause, to comply with any of the 
requirements specified in the notification issued under sub-section (/) of 
section 25, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both 
and where the offence is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees for each day after the first day during which such offence 
continues. 


47. Any person who wilfully obstructs or interferes with any member of the 
fire and emergency service while discharging his duty shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with a fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both. 


48. Any person who knowingly gives or causes to be given a false report of 
the outbreak of a fire to any person authorised to receive such report, by means of 
a statement, message or otherwise, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to 
twenty-five thousand rupees. 


49. If any qualified agency referred to in sub-section (5) of section 29 
furnishes false certificate or declaration that maintenance of fire prevention and 
life safety measures as specified in sub-section (/) of section 25 or as required 
under sub-section (2) of section 26 have been complied, every person who, at the 
time the offence was committed, was in-charge of, and responsible for the agency 
and the conduct of the business of the agency shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and liable for punishment: 


Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of 
such offence. 


50. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Regulation or any rule 
made or notification issued thereunder for which no punishment or penalty 
has been provided shall, without prejudice to any other action taken 
against him under this Regulation or the rules made thereunder, be liable 
to a penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees and where the 
contravention is a continuing one with a further penalty which may extend to 
one thousand rupees for every day after the first day during which such 
contravention continues. 


5l. (J) Where an offence under this Regulation has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in-charge 
of, and responsible for the company and the conduct of the business of the 
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render such person 
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence, to prevent the commission of 
such offence. 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where any 
offence under this Regulation has been committed by a company and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to, any negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer 
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 


(5) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 


52. (/) Any offence, whether committed before or after the commencement 
of this Regulation, punishable under sections 44 and 45 or any rule made 
thereunder, may, before the institution of prosecution, be compounded by such 
officers of the fire and emergency service and for such amount as the Government 
may, by notification, specify in this behalf: 


Provided that no offence shall be compoundable which is committed by 
failure to comply with a notice, order or requisition issued by or on behalf of the 
Government or of any of the officers authorised under this Regulation and until the 
same has been complied with. 


(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (/), the 
offender, if in custody, shall be discharged and no further action shall be taken 
against him in respect of such offence. 


53. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the 
provisions of this Regulation or any rules made thereunder. 


54. No court shall take cognisance of an offence under this Regulation, 
except on the complaint of, or upon information received from, the Director, Chief 
Fire Officer or the officer authorised by him in this behalf. 


55. No court inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try 
an offence punishable under this Regulation. 


CHAPTER XII 
APPEALS 


56. (/) Any person aggrieved by any notice or order of the nominated 
authority issued or made under this Regulation may prefer an appeal to the 
Appellate Authority within a period of thirty days from the date of the order 
appealed against: 


Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain an appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient 
ground for not filing such appeal within the said period. 


(2) An appeal under sub-section (/) shall be made in such form and manner 
and shall be accompanied by a copy of the notice or order appealed against and on 
payment of such fees as may be prescribed. 


(3) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Appellate Authority may prefer 
an appeal before the second Appellate Authority, within a period of thirty days 
from the date of the order, and the decision of the second Appellate Authority 
thereon shall be final and binding on the parties. 


Compounding of 
offences. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Cognisance of 


offences. 


Jurisdiction. 


Appeals. 


Firefighting 
arrangements 
with other fire 
and emergency 
service. 


Declaration of 
fire and 
emergency 
service as 
technical 
service. 


Deployment in 
other area. 


Deployment on 
other duties. 


Power to obtain 
information. 


Power to 
disconnect 
electricity and 
water supply or 
seal building. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


CHAPTER XIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


57. The Director may, in the public interest, with the prior approval of the 
Government, enter into an agreement with any fire and emergency service or the 
authority which maintains the said fire and emergency service, beyond the limits 
of any area in which this Regulation is in force for providing personnel or 
equipment or both, for firefighting purposes, on reciprocal basis, on such terms 
and conditions as may be specified under the said agreement. 


58. Without prejudice to the provisions of any other law for the time being in 
force, the Government may, by notification, declare the fire and emergency 
service as a technical service. 


59. The Director or any Fire Officer authorised by the Government in this 
behalf may, in the event of a fire or other emergency in any neighbouring area in 
which this Regulation does not extend, order the deployment of the employees of 
the fire and emergency service with necessary appliances and equipment to carry 
out firefighting operations in such neighbouring area and thereupon all the 
provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder shall apply to such 
areas, during the period of fire emergency or during such period as the Director or 
Chief Fire Officer may specify, on such charges as may be prescribed. 


60. The Government or any officer authorised by it in this behalf, may, 
deploy the fire and emergency service in any rescue, salvage or other operation for 
which it is suitable by reason of its training, appliances and equipment. 


6. The Director or an employee of the fire and emergency service, 
authorised by general or special order in this behalf may, for the purpose of 
discharging his duties under this Regulation, may by order require the owner or 
occupier of any building or other property, to supply such information with respect 
to the features of such building or other property as may be specified therein, the 
available water supplies and means of access thereto and any other material 
particulars, and such owner or occupier shall furnish all the information in his 
possession to the Director, Chief Fire Officer or such employee. 


62. (/) Where, it appears to the Director either suo motu or on receipt of a 
report from the nominated authority referred to in sub-section (5) of section 3], 
that the condition of any building is dangerous to life or property, he shall, without 
prejudice to any action taken under this Regulation, by order, require the person in 
possession or occupation of such building to remove themselves from such 
building or premises immediately. 


(2) If an order made by the Director under sub-section (/) is not complied 
with, the Director may direct,— 


(a) the authority concerned to disconnect the supply of electricity or 
water, as the case may be, in the building referred to in sub-section (J); 


(0) any police officer having jurisdiction in such an area shall remove 
such persons from the building, and such officer shall comply with such 
directions. 


(3) After the removal of the persons referred to in sub-section (/) or 
sub-section (2), as the case may be, the nominated authority shall declare the 
building unfit from fire safety point of view and shall report immediately to the 
concemed Sub-Divisional Magistrate, who shall seal the building or the premises 
immediately, with the aid of police assistance, if necessary. 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(4) No person shall remove such seal except under an order made by the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate. 


63. Any person who removes the seal, referred to in sub-section (3) of 
section 62, except under an order made by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with a fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both. 


64. In firefighting operations or any other duties related to seizure, detention 
or removal of any goods involving risk of fire, disconnection of electricity, water 
supply or sealing of a building, it shall be the duty ofa police officer or employees 
of the police force to assist and aid the nominated authority in the performance of 
such duties under this Regulation. 


65. (/) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, on and from the date of the commencement of this Regulation, 
the existing fire and emergency service of the Union territory shall be deemed to 
be the fire and emergency service constituted under this Regulation; and every 
person holding the office of either Fire Officer or an employee of such service in 
the Union territory, on and before the promulgation of this Regulation, shall be 
deemed to have been appointed and holding office under this Regulation. 


(2) All proceedings pending before any Fire Officer of the existing Union 
territory fire and emergency service, immediately before the commencement of 
this Regulation shall be deemed to be proceedings pending before him under this 
Regulation. 


66. In the event of death of a member of the fire and emergency service other 
than a Gazetted Officer, while on duty, the Government shall immediately pay to 
the next of kin of the said member as funeral expenses, such amount as may be 
prescribed as the Government may, by an order, determine. 


67. Every officer and employee of the Fire and Emergency Service, acting 
under this Regulation, shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning 
of clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


68. The Government may call for any returns, reports and records relating to 
fire prevention and fire safety, the maintenance of order and the performance of 
duties by the Director, nominated authority, Fire Officer, employees or 
subordinate operational staff, and the same shall be furnished immediately. 


69. (/) The Government may, by notification and subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Regulation for carrying out the purposes of this Regulation. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) other measures under clause (m) of section 2; 


(6) the manner of function of existing workshop, control room and 
other field formations under sub-section (2) of section 5; 


(c) the number of employees, method of their appointment, level of 
post, qualifications, pay, allowances, terms and conditions of service and the 
other matters connected therewith under sub-section (/) of section 6; 


(d) the uniform and badges of employees under sub-section (2) of 
section 6; 


(e) the qualifications and experience and powers, duties and other 
functions of Director or Chief Fire Officer of fire and emergency service under 
sub-section (/) of section 7; 


Penalty for 
removal of seal. 


Police officers 
and employees 
are to assist and 
aid. 


Existing fire and 
emergency 
service to be 
deemed to be 
fire and 
emergency 
service 
constituted 
under 
Regulation. 


Final expenses 
to next of kin in 
case of death of 
member of fire 
and emergency 
service. 


Officers and 
employees to be 
public servant. 


Power of 
Government to 
call for returns, 
reports, 
statements, etc. 


Power to make 
rules. 


20 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(f) other powers, duties and functions of Director or Chief Fire Officer 
under clause (7) of sub-section (2) of section 8; 


(g) the strength of the fire and emergency service under sub-section (/) 
of section 0; 


(४0) the method of recruitment, qualifications and other terms 
and conditions of service of the Fire Officer under sub-section (2) of 
section 0; 


(i) the auxiliary service, the area and the terms and conditions under 
sub-section (/) of section 3; 


(j) the form of certificate under sub-section (2) of section 3; 


(k) the qualifications and experience and time limit for appointment of 
the Fire Safety Officer under clause (a) of sub-section (/) and the form of 
enrolment certificate under sub-section (2), of section 5; 


(0) the manner of deployment of the fire and emergency service 
resources, equipment and fire personnel at stand-by duties during any fire 
response or any other emergency under section 7; 


(m) the compensation payable and the manner thereof under clause (c), 
the manner of extinguishing or limiting the spread of fire and carrying out 
rescue operations under clause (d) and the terms of an agreement under 
clause (g), of section 9; 


(n) the rates payable for drawing water under section 20; 
(०) the terms and conditions under section 22; 


(p) the fire prevention and life safety measures and the manner of 
displaying the declaration under sub-section (2) and the manner of removing 
the pandal under sub-section (3), of section 26; 


(q) the form of notice under sub-section (6) of section 28; 


(r) the fire prevention and life safety measures under sub-section (J), 
the form and the fee under sub-section (2), form and manner of obtaining a 
provisional fire safety certificate under sub-section (3), the form and manner 
of self-declaration or certification under sub-section (4), form of 
certificate to be issued by qualified agency under sub-section (5), the form of 
declaration under sub-section (6) and the manner of selecting the 
qualified agency and functions thereof under sub-section (8), of 
section 29; 


(s) the procedure under sub-section (/) of section 30; 


(0) the charges payable under clause (6) and the procedure and fee 
payable for course of instruction on prevention and extinguishment of fire 
under clause (c), of section 33; 


(u) the matters in respect of which the fire and emergency service shall 
render assistance and consultation to the communities and the manner 
thereof under section 34; 


(v) the rate of fire tax to be levied under sub-section (2) of section 35; 


(w) the fee payable by the State Government or the local body or the 
fire and emergency service authority under sub-section (/) and the fee 
payable under sub-section (4), of section 37; 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2. 


(x) the conditions and the manner of utilisation of fund under 
sub-section (3) of section 39; 


(v) the time period for appointment of Fire Safety Officer under 
sub-section (/) of section 43; 


(z) the form and manner and fees payable under sub-section (2) of 
section 56; 


(za) the charges payable under section 59; 
(zb) amount payable under section 66. 


70. (J) The Government may, by notification, direct that any power Power of 
exercisable by it under this Regulation shall, subject to such conditions, if any, be lea का 
exercisable by any officer not below the rank of Secretary to the Government. 


(2) The Director or Chief Fire Officer may, by order, direct that any power 
conferred or any duty imposed on him by or under this Regulation shall, in such 
circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, 
be exercised and, performed by any officer of the fire and emergency service 
specified in the said order. 


7. If immediately before the day on which this Regulation comes into force Repeal and 
in the Union territory, there is in force in the Union territory any law or rule Savini: 
having the force of law which corresponds to this regulation, such corresponding 
law, in so far as it relates to any matter for which provision has been made in this 
Regulation shall on that day stand repealed: 


Provided that such repeal shall not be deemed to limit, modify or derogate 
from the general responsibility of any local authority— 


(i) to provide and maintain such water supply and fire hydrants for 
firefighting purposes as may be directed by the Government from 
time to time; 


(ii) to make bye-laws for the regulation of dangerous trades; 


(iii) to order any of its employees to render aid in fighting a fire when 
reasonably called upon to do so by any member of the fire service; and 


(iv) generally, to take such measures as will reduce the likelihood of 
fire or prevent the spread of fire. 


72. (J) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Power to remove 
Regulation, the Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 06765: 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Regulation as may 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from 
the date of commencement of this Regulation. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


73. Every rule made and every order issued under this Regulation shall be Laying of rules 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. deci heed 


74. (/) The provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder shall ea हल 2 7 
fe . . . . . . . . Verridin: €। 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other . other he 
law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any 
other law. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, when anything in relation to the fire prevention and life safety measures 
is required to be done or approved under this Regulation, any such thing shall not 
be deemed to have been unlawfully done or approved by reason only of the fact 
that the permission, approval or sanction required under such other law has not 
been obtained. 


(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (/), the provisions of this 
Regulation shall be in addition to, and not, save as expressly provided 
hereinabove, be in derogation of the provisions of any relevant law for the time 
being in force in any area in which this Regulation is in force. 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 


AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054. 


MGIPMRND—]53 GI—5.05.2026 


GORAKHA Dea sors 
NATH NATH YADAVA 


Date: 2026.05.5 


YADAVA 22:39:35 +05'30' 


