रजिस्ट्री Ge Sle एल० 


(एन)04/0007/2003---23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


प्यारत a रॉलपन 
The Gazette of Gudia 


Och. -S7. Wet. -37.-902024-2563 
CG-DL-E-902024-2563 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा --- खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


we 26] नई दिल्ली, शुक्रवार, दिसम्बर 8, 2023/ अग्रहायण 7, 945 (शक) 
No. 26] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, DECEMBER 8, 2023/AGRAHAYNA 7, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में first पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


RAJYA SABHA 


The following Bills have been introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 8th December, 
2023:— 
Britt No. LXXVI or 2022 
A Bill to repeal the Waqf Act, 995. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Waqf (Repeal) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. This Waqf Act, 995 is hereby repealed. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Repeal of Act 
43 of 995. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Waqf Act, 954 was predicated on the management of waqf; i.e. holding certain 
property and preserving it for the confined benefit of certain philanthropy and prohibiting 
any use or disposition of it outside that specific objective and had sought itself to be a 
measure towards public welfare and as a benevolent institution. Subsequently, some infirmities 
pertaining to the management of the waqf was felt and the Wakf Act, 954 was later repealed 
and the new Waqf Act was passed in 995 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act") giving more 
powers to waqf boards. Amendments were later introduced in the year 203, thereby arming 
the waqf with limitless and absolute autonomy in the matters relating to it. 


Due to these powers, the Waqf Boards is now the third largest owner of land after the 
Indian Armed Forces and the Railways and their share of land has doubled since 2009. The 
enabling provisions enshrined in section 40 of the Waqf Act, 995 gives powers to the Board 
to acquire, issue notices or hold an enquiry into the ownership of the property that it has 
reasons to believe belongs to the Waqf. The board is allowed to conduct an independent 
enquiry into the matter and arrive at a conclusion regarding the ownership of the contended 
property. The decision of the board is final unless revoked by a specific order of the Tribunal 
and the only remedy available to the aggrieved is to approach the Tribunal with a suit which 
is barred by a limitation of only one month. There appears to be no cogent reason as to why 
the Act itself should make an exception from the established principles of the Limitation 
Act, !963. Appeals to the orders of the Tribunal are not maintainable in other Court of Law. 
Further, the burden of proof regarding the ownership of a land contended to be a property of 
Wagdf falls on the person holding the possession of that land. Should the incumbent fail to 
prove his title to the satisfaction of the Board, such land or property shall have to be vacated. 
Such provisions invariably amount to depriving the citizens of their rights to seek 
constitutional remedies and are gross violation of natural justice. As such, it has been felt 
that there is a dearth of adequate safeguard to other communities and especially poor people 
for protection of their properties from its inclusion in Waqf. 


Waqf Board has simultaneously been afforded with unbridled power in terms of 
registering any property, no other trust, mutths, akharas or a society is conferred with even 
remotely parallel autonomy in their affairs. Registration of property is an important corner 
stone of personal rights guaranteed in the Indian Constitution. The Waqf Act is discriminatory 
both in intent and application while retaining a charitable optics and is in stark violation of 
article 3(2) of the Indian Constitution that prohibits the State from making laws that abridge 
the rights conferred to the citizens by Part III of the Indian Constitution. 


The Act as amended from time to time is also against the autonomy of the State in 
matters falling within its domain. Sections 28 and 29 of the Act provides overriding powers to 
the Waqf Board and its CEO to compel the State machinery to act in a manner consistent with 
the interest of the Board. Section 4 of the Act provides that the Board shall consist of a 
Chairperson, a member amongst the Muslims who has professional experience in town 
planning, finance, agriculture, etc., a recognized scholar in Shia and Sunni Theology nominated 
by the State Government, one person amongst the Muslims nominated by the State 
Government who is an officer of the State Government (but not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary) and not more than two members will be elected by the electoral college constituting; 
Muslim Members of the Parliament from the particular state, Muslim Members of the State 
Legislature, Muslim Members of the Bar Council of the concerned state and mutawallis 
having an annual income of one lakh rupees and above. The provisions of the Act makes it 
mandatory that the appointment of members of the Board is restricted to Muslim community 
only even when the members of the Board are entitled to the status of public servants which 
arguably is in contravention of the spirit of equality in employment. Such provisions are 
intended to further the interest of the Muslim community and have successfully served in 
unconstrained amassment of property in the name of Muslim charity. 


Further, many provisions of the Act are repugnant or constitutionally infirm. In so far 
as the other entities such as mutths, akhara and other trusts are concerned which may also 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


bear a religious undertone, the Act fails to establish any reasonable classification that may 
corroborate the conferment of such special status to the waqf. It is an established fact that 
the Constitution is the supreme law of the land and therefore it cannot be undermined by the 
Waaf Act, 995. 


In the light of above and for the purpose of achieving a more equitable arrangement 
and treatment of bodies such as waqf and other recognised religious entities established 
under similar intent, and to curb arbitrary amassment of properties by the waqf in the name of 
muslim charity, the aforesaid Wakf Act, !995 as amended till date is proposed to be repealed. 


Hence this Bill. 
HARNATH SINGH YADAV 


Short title 
and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of Article 
348. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


Bitt No. XLII of 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment), Act 2023. 
(2) It shall come into force at once. 

2. In article 348 of the Constitution, in clause (/),— 

(4) for sub-clause (a), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


"(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court shall be conducted in the official 
language of the Union, namely, Hindi and in all the regional languages listed in the 
Eighth Schedule of the Constitution, and a transcript thereof shall be translated into 
and made available in the English language. 


(b) all proceedings in every High Court shall be conducted in the official language 
of the Union, namely, Hindi and in the official lauguage of the respective State, and a 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


transcript thereof shall be translated into and made available in the English 
language. 


(ii) clause (9) shall be re-numbered as "clause (c)" and the following shall 
be substituted, namely:— 


"(c) the authoritative texts i.e.,— 


(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in 
either House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of 
a State, 


(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of 
all Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State, and 


(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and byelaws issued under this 
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State, 


shall be bilingual, i.e., in Hindi and English languages, and shall also be 
translated into and made available in all other languages listed in the Eighth 
Schedule of the Constitution.". 


3. Clause (2) shall be omitted. 
4. Clause (3) shall be omitted. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Seventy-four years after independence, the linguistic shadow of the colonial heritage 
of the country still remains. Article 348 of the Constitution stipulates that all proceedings 
before the Supreme Court and each High Court shall be conducted in English. After 
independence, our constituents expressed the need to promote Hindi along with other 
regional lauguages in our country's official functions. The use of English for certain purposes 
was originally agreed for a period of I5 years. 


2. In addition of this, the Constitution empowers the President to set up an Official 
Languages Commission to resolve language-related issues and to promote Hindi language. 
After that, Commissions were formed, and numerous reports were prepared, several orders 
were issued, and attempts were made to implement the provisions of the Official Languages 
Commission. However, the final expected result was not obtained. The rapid adoption of 
English as the official language has led to the neglect of Hindi as well as other regional 
languages of the masses. Moreover, the issue is not only about promotion of Hindi as 
Official Language, but simultaneous promotion of other regional languages of the country 
on equal terms. 


3. Even today, we are unable to maintain and promote our rich treasure of regional 
languages. The languages of all rich nations continue to thrive, but the diverse languages of 
our country are declining. Working in Hindi and other regional languages can bring this 
diverse nation together. The most urgent need now is to initiate the promotion of our regional 
languages for connecting with the masses and dispensing equity and justice as enshrined 
in the basis structure of the Constitution. Concrete initiatives need to be taken in this 
direction in order to promote regional languages to connect the people of our country. To 
achieve this and to get the expected results from the Official Languages Commission, what is 
needed today is to enforce usage of Hindi as well as other regional languages in the official 
working of the country, especially in the Supreme Court and the High Courts of the country, 
who are assigned with the duty of dispensing justice to the citizens of our country. 


4. Furthermore, Law is taught in Hindi and in regional languages in all educational 
institutions across the country and students are pursuing law degrees in Hindi and regional 
languages as well. But English being the language of the Supreme Court and High Courts of 
India, several law graduates are compelled to file cases in English when practising before the 
Supreme and High Courts. Because, these lawyers who have studied law in Hindi or in 
regional languages are not competent enough to explain cases in English, they face 
discrimination in their practice in Supreme Court and High Courts of India. Such discrimination 
is violative of their fundamental right to practice their profession, as enshrined in article 
9(.)(g) of the Constitution. 


5. The Bill intends to amend the provisions of article 348 of the Constitution to do away 
with the compulsory use of English in the proceedings of Supreme Court and High Courts 
and for the authoritative texts of the Parliament, State Legislatures and all the rules, regulations, 
Hindi and English along with translations available in all the regional languages listed in the 
Eighth Schedule of the Constitution. 


Hence, this Bill. 


HARNATH SINGH YADAV 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


BiLt No. LX VIII 07 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, the existing entries 4 to 22 shall be 
re-numbered as entries 5 to 23, respectively and before entry 5 as so re-numbered, the 
following entry shall be inserted, namely:— 


"4. Chhattishgarhi." 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of Eighth 
Schedule. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Constitution of India, through the Eighth Schedule, provides for the enrichment 
and promotion of languages. Along the same lines, there is a growing need and urgency to 
include Chhattisgarhi language in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. Chhattisgarhi 
dialect has a history of its own. The grammar of the dialect, prepared by Hiralal Kavyopadhyay 
and edited and translated by George A.K. Grierson, was published in the Journal of the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal in 890. A wide range of quality litrature is also available in 
Chhattisgarhi and the same is continuously increasing. While Chhattisgarhi sub-dialects 
and some other languages are also prevalent in the State, the majority of the residents use 
Chhattisgarhi as their language and the same is also a language of communication with those 
speaking other regional dialects. Apart from Hindi, Chhattisgarhi has been adopted as a 
State Official Language and Chhattisgarhi Official Language Day is celebrated every year on 
28th November in the State. Further, the State Government of Chhattishgarh, has also 
constituted Chhattisgarh Official Language Commission to preserve the tradition and for the 
development of overall linguistic diversity of the State according to the public sentiments 
and necessity. Chhattisgarhi is spoken not only by the 2.75 crore residents of Chhattisgarh, 
but also by residents in neighbouring districts in the States of Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Telangana and Odisha. Addition of Chhattisgarhi language to the Eighth Schedule will help 
the language's development and will enable the 2.75 crore people of the State to take 
examinations for public service in Chhattisgarhi. 


Hence this Bill. 
RAJEEV SHUKLA 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


Bitt No. CI or 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govenment may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In article 6 of the Constitution, for clause 4A, the following new clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


"(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision 
for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class or 
classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes which, in the opinion of the State, are not 
adequately represented in the services under the State." 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
Article 6. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Constitution being a legal as well as a social document should be dynamic in 
nature. With the changing needs of society and the foray of new ideas, the Constitution 


must change from time to time for the welfare of the people of India. If existing impediments 
to the welfare of the people are not removed, the Constitution would suffer virtual atrophy. 


2. The Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, !995 inserted clause (4A) to 
article 6 to extend the benefit of reservations in promotions as clause (4) is confined only to 
reservation in initial appointments. Parliament felt that it was necessary to continue providing 
reservations in promotion posts as well in the case of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes. However, the said amendment did not consider the case of Other Backward Classes 
(OBCs). 


3. The discrimination faced by the OBCs is comparable and a similar level to the 
discrimination faced by the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. The abhorrent and 
inhuman system of classification of human beings merely based on their birth, over which 
they obviously had no control, led to systemic oppression and discrimination. The effect of 
this systemic discrimination was not just econmic, it was social and psychological which 
was the primary reason to insert article |6(4) in the Constitution. 


4. The founding fathers of our Constituiton have designedly couched articles 4, 5 
and |6 in comprehensive phraseology so that the frail and emaciated sections of the people 
living in poverty, rearing in obsurity, possessing no wealth or influence, having no education, 
much less high education and suffering from social repression and oppression should not be 
denied equality before law and equal protection of the laws or subjected to any prohibition 
of discrimination on grounds of religion, rate, caste, sex or place of birth. These people who 
have been historically ostracized from mainstream education and employment should be 
afforded equal opportunity in the matters of public employment. OBCs are constitutionally 
recognised to be socially backward but still there are no enabling provisions to provide 
reservations for them in promotional posts. Due to such non-inclusion, the OBCs are vastly 
unrepresented at the higher posts of the administration as they were never considered for 
promotions due to social status. Even the States which are interested in granting reservations 
in promotional posts for OBCs cannot do so for lack of enabling provision in the Constitution. 


5. Recently, Parliament has extended the benefit of reservations to forward castes also 
in the category of economically weaker sections. 


6. Due to absence of the aforesaid Constitutional mandate in promotions, the real 
oppressed and downtrodden are not brought into the mainstream till today. Mere entry into 
service is not sufficient. Only when the OBCs are duly represented in promotional posts, a 
truly representative administration could be achieved and real substantive equality is enabled. 
Historical injustice is still meted out to backward classes of citizens and their due share in 
jobs in the higher posts is denied and they are not adequately represented even till today. 


7. Therefore, article |6 of the Constitution of India must be further amended to grant 
reservations in promotional posts with consequential seniority for the backward classes of 
citizens and this would result in true social justice as it would ensure adequate representation 
of the backward class of citizens in higher offices of the administration. 


8. Itis, therefore, proposed to amend the Constitution to achieve the above objectives. 


P. WILSON 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ll 


BILt No. XXI 07 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment), Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution: — 
(a) In List I-Union List, entry 69 shall be omitted; 


(b) In List II-Concurrent List, after entry 47, the following entry shall be inserted, 
namely,:— 


"48. Census" 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of the Seventh 
Schedule. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
l. An objective and thorough census across the country will give a correct picture of 
the representation of castes and communities in mainstream education and employment. 


Only based on such a scientific and empirical data can we make targeted, effective, affirmative 
action policies to uplift the really backward communities. 


2. The states are not in a position to grant any reservation to any class or communities 
for want of empirical data and any reservation laws enacted by the states are being struck 
down by Constitutional Courts on the ground of lack of empirical data. Thus, the mandate 
of reservation by the Constitution is being defeated. 


3. The states are in need of an accurate caste census data to enact targeted welfare 
measures on the basis of caste and community. Ultimately, this leads to perpetuating the 
status quo and social injustice. The data collected 92 years back cannot determine the 
entitlement and share of communities in this country. 


4. The 73rd and 74th constitutional amendments advocated the need of strengthening 
the local bodies and parts IX and IXA of the Constitution provided for a robust framework 
for conducting local body elections. The prime objective was democratic decentralization 
of power and participation of the oppressed and backward classes in governance. The 
amendments provided for mandatory reservation for Scheduled Caste and Schedule Tribe 
communities and women belonging to these communities. On the other hand, for backward 
classes, the articles 243-D(6) and 243-T(6) were only enabling in nature. When States have 
attempted to apply these provisions, there were legal obstacles due to which reservations 
granted to Other Backward Classes (OBC) communities in local bodies have been struck 
down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The impediment to the states to grant OBC reservations 
was due to want of ‘empirical data’. With the advent of l05th constitutional amendment and 
insertion of article 342A(3), a State or a Union Territory can gather information for ascertaining 
political backwardness of the backward classes and can specify the proportion of the 
reservation required local body-wise and can prepare and maintain for its own purposes, a 
list of socially and educationally backward classes. 


5. However, the entry 69 in List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution empowers 
only the Union to conduct census. Since, a state or a Union Territory is not empowered to 
conduct their own census, the population of each class or community on the basis of local 
units cannot be ascertained by the states and consequentially, maintaining an accurate 
head count based upon the list of backward classes contemplated under article 342A(3) 
would not be possible. 


6. The objectives of democratic decentralization are not only to bring governance 
closer to the people, but also to make it more participatory, inclusive and accountable to the 
weaker sections of the society. Reservations in local self-government are intended to directly 
benefit the community as a whole rather than just the elected representatives. Despite the 
fact that Parts [X and [XA were introduced in the Constitution 30 years ago, reservation in 
politics and sharing of political power is still a distant dream, leaving the OBCs unrepresented 
in the local self-governments. 


7. Therefore, placing the entry "census" in the Concurrent List would enable both the 
Union and the states to conduct their own census. The power to conduct a headcount by 
the states themselves will not only be useful for maintaining an accurate list of all classes 
including backward classes under article 342A(3), and collect empirical data of communities 
on the basis of the local units and to grant reservations in local bodies, but also for other 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ॥3 


targeted welfare measures. This will enable the states to implement appropriate affirmative 
and welfare measures for all castes and communities based upon their due entitlement and 
share. The states can then grant reservations in accordance with this data, which would be 
constitutionally and legally tenable and therefore avoid judicial intervention in the grant of 
reservations. 


8. It is therefore proposed to amend the Constitution to achieve the above objectives. 


P. WILSON 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


BiLt No. XLI oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for qualifications, method of appointment and other conditions of 
service of the Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and Regional 
Election Commissioners establishment of a permanent Secretariat and staff for 
the Election Commission of India and expenses of the 
Commission and for matters connected 
therewith and incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title and l. (J) This Act may be called the Election Commission of India (Reforms) Act, 2023. 


commencement. है ee : 
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect. 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Selection Committee; 


(b) "Chief Election Commissioner" means the Chief Election Commissioner 
appointed under clause (2) of article 324 of the Constitution; 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(c) "Commission" or "Election Commission" means the Election Commission of 
India established under clause (/) of article 324 of the Constitution; 


(d) "Eastern Regional Zone" means the zone consisting of the States of 
West Bengal, Bihar, Odisha, Jharkhand, Assam, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and the Union Territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands; 


(e) "Election Commissioner" means the Election Commissioner appointed under 
clause (2) of article 324 of the Constitution; 


(f) "Notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the 
expression "notify" shall be construed accordingly; 


(g) "Northern Regional Zone" means the zone consisting of the States of 
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and the 
Union Territories of Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Delhi and Chandigarh; 


(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(7) "Regional Election Commissioner" means a Regional Election Commissioner 
appointed under clause (4) of article 324 of the Constitution; 


(/) "Selection Committee" means the Committee constituted under section 5 of 
this Act; 


(k) "Southern Regional Zone" means the zone consisting of the States of 
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and the Union Territories 
of Puducherry and Lakshadweep; and 


(J) "Western Regional Zone" means the zone consisting of the States of 
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa and the Union Territory of 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu. 


CHAPTER II 


APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF ELECTION COMMISSIONER, ELECTION COMMISSIONERS AND REGIONAL 
ELECTION COMMISSIONERS 


3. (/) The Election Commission of India established under clause (/) of article 324 of 
the Constitution shall comprise of a Chief Election Commissioner and two or more Election 
Commissioner(s) in even number. 


(2) There shall be appointed one or more Regional Election Commissioner(s) for each 
of the regional zones, namely, the Northern Regional Zone, Southern Regional Zone, Eastern 
Regional Zone and Western Regional Zone, under clause (4) of article 324 of the Constitution. 


4. (7) Aperson shall not be qualified for appointment as a Chief Election Commissioner, 
Election Commissioner or Regional Election Commissioner unless, he or she— 


(a) is acitizen of India; 
(9) has attained the age of thirty-five years; 


(c) is, in the opinion of the Selection Committee, established under section 5 of 
this Act, a person of impeccable integrity; and 


(d) has, in the opinion of the Selection Committee, outstanding ability in matters 
of election, law or public administration: 


Provided that at least one of the Election Commissioners shall be a person 
who has practised law for not less than ten years before any High Court or the 
Supreme Court of India, or is in the opinion of the Selection Committee, an 
eminent jurist. 


Appointment 
of Chief 
Election 
Commissioner, 
Election 
Commissioners 
and Regional 
Election 
Commissioners. 


Qualifications 
and 
disqualifications 
for 
appointment 
as Chief 
Election 
Commissioner, 
Election 
Commissioners 
and Regional 
Election 
Commissioners. 


Selection 
committee to 
recommend 
appointment 
of Chief 
Election 


Commissioner, 


Election 
Comissioners 
and Regional 
Election 


Commissioners. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(2) A person shall not be eligible for appointment as Chief Election Commissioner, 
Election Commissioner or Regional Election Commissioner, if he or she— 


(a) has attained the age of sixty-two years; or 


(b) is or has been a Member of Parliament, Legislative Assembly or Legislative 
Council of a State or any local authority; or 


(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or 


(d) is an undischarged insolvent or has applied to be adjudicated as an insolvent 
and such application is pending; or 


(e) charges have been framed against him or her by a Court, for any offence 
involving a punishment of one year or more; or 


(f) is facing any criminal investigation for election related offences; or 


(g) has been in the employment of the Central or State Government or any 
Central or State owned undertaking or body or corporation or agency, or any local 
authority for the preceding five years; or 


(A) has been a Judge of any court in the preceding five years; or 
(i) is or was an office bearer of any registered political party. 


5. (/) The Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and Regional Election 
Commissioners shall be appointed by the President in accordance with the recommendations 
of a Selection Committee consisting of— 


(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson; 
(b) the Union Minister for Law and Justice—Member; 
(c) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People—Member; 


Provided that in case, there is no such Leader of Opposition, the leader of the 
party having the largest numerical strength amongst the opposition parties in the 
House of the People; 


(d) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by 
him—Member; 


(e) one eminent person from the civil society, as recommended by the Chairperson 
and Members referred to in clauses (a) to (d) above, to be nominated by the President— 
Member. 


(2) The Selection Committee shall constitute a Search Committee consisting of 
at least seven persons of impeccable integrity and having special knowledge and expertise in 
matters relating to public administration, election, vigilance, finance, law, or in any other 
matter which, in the opinion of the Selection Committee, may be useful in selecting candidates 
for the posts of Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner and Regional Election 
Commissioner. 


(3) The Search Committee constituted under sub-section (2) shall call for applications 
and draw up a panel of persons eligible for appointment to the posts of Chief Election 
Commissioner, Election Commissioner and Regional Election Commissioner. 


(4) The Selection Committee shall, on the basis of a majority vote, select and recommend 
names out of the panel drawn up by the Search Committee to the President for appointment 
to the posts of Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner and Regional Election 
Commissioner. 


(5) The Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure. 


(6) The Selection Committee shall also recommend to the President the number of 
Election Commissioners or Regional Election Commissioners to be appointed, from time to 
time. 


43 of 950. 
43 of I95]. 


43 of I95]. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY पर 


(7) The term of the Search Committee referred to in sub-section (2), the fees and 
allowances payable to its members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Selection 
Committee, by rules made under this Act. 


6. The President shall take or cause to be taken all necessary steps for the appointment 
of a Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner(s) or Regional Election 
Commissioner(s) at least six months before the arising of a vacancy in accordance with the 
procedure laid down in this Act. 


7. The Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and Regional Election 
Commissioners shall, on the recommendations of the Selection Committee, be appointed by 
the President by warrant under his or her hand and seal and hold office as such for a term of 
three years from the date on which he or she enters upon the office or until he or she attains 
the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier: 


Provided that he or she may— 


(a) by writing under his or her hand addressed to the President resign his 
or her office; or 


(b) be removed from his or her office in the manner provided under 
clause (5) of article 324 of the Constitution. 


Explanation.—For the Purpose of this section, the term of three years in respect 
of the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner or a Regional Election 
Commissioner holding office before the commencement of this Act, shall be computed 
from the date on which he or she had assumed office. 


8. (/) The functions of the Election Commission of India shall be vested with the 
Chief Election Commissioner and the Election Commissioners. 


(2) The Election Commission may, by unanimous decision, regulate the procedure for 
transaction of its business as also allocation of its business amongst the Chief Election 
Commissioner and other Election Commissioners. 


(3) Save as provided in sub-section (2), all business of the Election Commission shall, 
as far as possible, be transacted unanimously: 


Provided that if the Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners 
differ in opinion on any matter, such matter shall be decided according to the opinion 
of the majority. 


(4) The Election Commission shall carry out its functions in accordance with the 
provisions of the Constitution, Representation of the People Act, !950, the Representation 
of the People Act, 95! and all applicable laws. 


(5) ARegional Election Commissioner shall assist and aid the Election Commission in 
the discharge of its functions within his or her regional zone by performing such tasks as 
may be assigned to him or her from time to time by the Commission, implementing the orders 
of the Commission and submitting such reports as he or she deems fit pertaining to the 
conduct of elections within his or her regional zone. 


(6) A Regional Election Commissioner shall be bound by the orders of the Election 
Commission. 

(7) The Election Commission shall exercise complete superintendence and control 
over the Chief Electoral officers, District Election Officers, Returning Officers, Polling Officers 
and all officials appointed for the conduct of elections under the Representation of the 
People Act, !95 for the purposes of and during the conduct of elections. 


Filling up of 
vacancies of 
Chief Election 
Commissioner, 
Election 
Commissioner 
and Regional 
Election 
Commissioner. 


Term of 
office of 
Chief 
Election 
Commissioner, 
Election 
Commissioners 
and Regional 
Election 
Commissioners. 


Functions of 
the Election 
Commission 
of India. 


Salaries and 
allowances. 


Leave. 


Pension 
payable to 
Election 
Commissioners. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(8) Subject to the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 950, the 
Representation of the People Act, !95 and other applicable laws, the Election Commission 
shall, before every election to the House of the People Legislative Assembly of a State or 
Legislative Council of a State having such Council, publish a Model Code of Conduct for the 
candidates, political parties, Government servants, press and media and other persons, 
whose conduct in the opinion of the Commission, must be regulated. 


(9) The Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner and Regional Election 
Commissioner shall act in good faith in order to hold free and fair elections and shall exercise 
independent judgement. 


9. (J) There shall be paid to the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election 
Commissioners a salary which is equal to the salary of a Judge of the Supreme Court: 


Provided that if a person who, before the date of assuming office as the Chief 
Election Commissioner or, as the case may be, an Election Commissioner, was in receipt 
of, or being eligible so to do, had election to draw, a pension (other than a disability or 
wound pension) in respect of any previous service under the Government of the 
Union or under the Government of a State, subject to the provisions of 
clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section of this Act, his or her salary in respect of 
service as the Chief Election Commissioner or as the case may be, an Election 
Commissioner shall be reduced— 


(a) by the amount of that pension; and 


(b) ifhe or she had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion of 
the pension due to him or her in respect of such previous service, the commuted 
value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension. 


(2) There shall be paid to the Regional Election Commissioner a salary which is equal 
to the salary of a Judge of the High Court: 


Provided that if a person who, before the date of assuming office as the Regional 
Election Commissioner was in receipt of, or being eligible so to do, had election to 
draw, a pension (other than a disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous 
service under the Government of the Union or under the Government of a State, 
subject to the provisions of clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section of this Act, his or 
her salary in respect of service as the Regional Election Commissioner shall be 
reduced— 


(a) by the amount of that pension; and 


(b) if he or she had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion of 
the pension due to him or her in respect of such previous service, the commuted 
value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension. 


0. (7) Any other person who is appointed as the Chief Election Commissioner or an 
Election Commissioner or a Regional Election Commissioner may be granted leave in 
accordance with such rules as are for the time being applicable to a member of the Indian 
Administrative Service. 


(2) The power to grant or refuse leave to the Chief Election Commissioner or an 
Election Commissioner or a Regional Election Commissioner and to revoke or curtail leave 
granted to him or her, shall vest in the President. 


Il. (J) Where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner demits 
office in any manner as specified under section 7 of this Act, he or she shall, on such 
demission be entitled to— 


(a) a pension which is equal to the pension payable to a Judge of the Supreme 
Court in accordance with the provisions of Part II of the Schedule to the Supreme 
Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, !958, as amended from time to time; and 


43 of 950. 
43 of I95l. 


4l of 958. 


28 of 954. 


4! of 958. 


28 of 954. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(b) such pension (including commutation of pension), family pension and gratuity 
as are admissible to a Judge of the Supreme Court under the said Act and the rules 
made thereunder, as amended from time to time. 


(2) Where the Regional Election Commissioner demits office, he or she shall, on such 
demission be entitled to— 


(a) a pension which is equal to the pension payable to a Judge of the High Court 
in accordance with the provisions of Part III of the Schedule to the High Court Judges 
(Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 954, as amended from time to time; and 


(b) such pension (including commutation of pension), family pension and gratuity 
as are admissible to a Judge of the High Court under the said Act and the rules made 
thereunder, as amended from time to time. 


(3) Except where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner or a 
Regional Election Commissioner demits office by resignation, he or she shall be deemed, for 
the purposes of this Act, to have demitted his or her office if, and only if,— 


(a) he or she has completed the term of office specified in section 7, or 
(b) he or she has attained the age of sixty-five years, or 


(c) his or her demission of office is medically certified to be necessitated by 
ill-health. 


2. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the conditions of service relating to travelling 
allowance, provision of rent-free residence and exemption from payment of income-tax on 
the value of such rent-free residence, conveyance facilities, sumptuary allowance, medical 
facilities and such other conditions of service for— 


(i) The Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners shall be as 
applicable to a Judge of the Supreme Court under Chapter IV of the Supreme Court 
Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 958 and the rules made thereunder, as amended 
from time to time; and 


(ii) for a Regional Election Commissioner shall be as applicable to a Judge of a 
High Court under Chapter IV of the High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of 
Service) Act, !954 and rules made thereunder, as amended from time to time. 


3. (/) The Election Commission shall have a permanent Secretariat comprising of 
such number and categories of officers and other employees as may be determined by the 
Commission in consultation with the Central Government to assist the Commission in the 
discharge of its functions by rules made under this Act. 


(2) The recruitment of the officers and other employees of the Commission shall be 
made by the Commission in accordance with rules that may be prescribed by the Commission 
under this Act in consultation with the Central Government. 


(3) The officers and other employees of the Commission shall discharge their functions 
under the general superintendence, control and direction of the Commission. 


(4) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and 
other employees of the Commission shall be prescribed by rules framed by the Commission 
in consultation with the Central Government. 


(5) Subject to sub-section (3), the Chief Election Commissioner shall exercise 
administrative control over the officers and other employees of the Commission. 


4. () The expenses of the Election Commission of India including the salaries, 
allowances and pensions payable to the Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners, 
Regional Election Commissioners and the officers and other employees of the Commission 
shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. 


Other 
conditions of 
service. 


Permanent 
Secretariat and 
staff of the 
Commission. 


Expenses of 
the Election 
Commission. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Members and 
staff of 
Election 
Commission 
to be public 
servants. 


Bar of 
jurisdiction. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


Power to 
make rules. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(2) The Election Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an Annual Statement of Accounts in such form as may be prescribed and shall 
submit it to the President, who shall cause it to be laid before each House of Parliament within 
such time frame as may be prescribed. 


5. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Chief Election 
Commissioner, Election Commissioner, Regional Election Commissioner or any officer or 
employee of the Election Commission in respect of anything which is in good faith or intended 
to be done under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 


6. The Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner, Regional Election 
Commissioner, officers and other employees of the Election Commission shall be deemed, 
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be 
public servants within the meaning of section 2 of the Indian Penal Code. 


7. With effect from the date of this Act coming into force, no civil court shall have 
jurisdiction to entertain any suit, petition or appeal in respect of any order or decision of the 
Election Commission. 


8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force other than this Act or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any such law other than this Act. 


9. (7) The Election Commission (Conditions of Service of Election Commissioners 
and Transaction of Business) Act, |99 is hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said 
Act shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this 
Act. 


20. (/) The Election Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
tule. 


45 of 860. 


ll of I99]. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The words ‘democratic republic’ are the cornerstones of the Constitution of India. 
A democracy requires that there should be periodic, free and fair elections, so that people 
are in a position to elect representatives of their choice, as an effective instrument of 
ascertaining popular will. The concept of a 'republic' envisages a State in which the people 
are supreme, there is no privileged class and all public offices are open to every citizen 
without discrimination. 


2. Free and fair elections are the most important facets of democracy. They are meant 
to ascertain true popular will and are not mere rituals to generate an illusion of choice. 
Article 324 of the Constitution entrusts the power to conduct elections, to an independent 
body, viz., the Election Commission of India (ECI). Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, in one of his debates, 
articulated that the election machinery be outside the control of the Executive Government. 
The Constituent Assembly, from the very beginning, was keen to entrust the job of conducting 
elections to an independent body and therefore, expected a Parliamentary Law under clause 
(2) of article 324 relating to appointments of the Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) and the 
other Election Commissioners (ECs). Thus, the Constitution-makers wanted to keep the 
posts of the Chief Election Commissioner and the Election Commissioners outside the sole 
control of the Executive Government. However, the Hon'ble President of India continues to 
appoint the CEC and the ECs solely on the basis of aid and advice of the Council of 
Ministers, thus defeating the objective envisaged by the Constitution makers. 


3. Institutions shall remain strong only so long as the public have faith in them. 
Considering the sensitive nature of the Election Commission's task, if the public perceive 
the institution as corrupt, partisan or biased, it loses its vitality. Therefore, it is imperative 
that the ECI is manned by officers who are impartial, independent, and possess impeccable 
integrity. In order to avoid appointing career bureaucrats, and to facilitate appointment of 
independent members of civil society as heads of the ECI so as to protect the institutional 
integrity of the ECI, the mode of appointment qualifications and disqualifications, term of 
office and other conditions of service of the CEC and ECs are set out in the Bill. 


4. There is also a dire need to appoint Regional Election Commissioners who are 
conversant with the affairs of the States. India is the 7th largest country in the world in 
terms of area and the largest democracy in the world. Our country is the most linguistically 
diverse country in the world, having a total of 456 languages. For such a large democracy, 
it is a herculean task for the three Election Commissioners sitting in Delhi to handle elections 
across the length and breadth of the country and decide on all the election related issues 
that crop up from time to time. In order to make the functioning of the ECI more inclusive and 
broad based, it is high time that Regional Election Commissioners are appointed so that 
they bring more perspective into the functioning of the ECI. Appointment of Regional 
Election Commissioners would ensure that the ECI takes into consideration the needs of 
the population at the grass root level. 


5. The appointments of the Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners 
have to be insulated from political whims and fancies and therefore, must be on the basis of 
the recommendations of a high powered Selection Committee similar to the Selection 
Committee constituted for the appointment of the CBI Director, Lokpal and Lokayuktas. 
Only by ensuring that the appointment of the CEC and the ECs is transparent, objective and 
non-partisan, can we expect the ECI to be a neutral body. 


6. Under clause (2) of article 324, the drafters of the Constitution bestowed upon 
Parliament, the power to enact a law pertaining to the appointment of the Chief Election 
Commissioner and other Election Commissioners. However, no such law has been enacted. 


7. Another aspect is that the ECI cannot be truly impartial unless it has a permanent 
Secretariat, staff and its expenditure is charged from the Consolidated Fund of India. Only 
this will truly liberate the ECI and ensure its independence. Since, there has to be some 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


mechanism to check its expenditure and excesses, the ECI can be made responsible to both 
Houses of Parliament in so far as its expenditure is concerned. 


8. Recently, in a judgment, the Supreme Court of India has held that till such time, 
Parliament makes a law in this regard, appointments to the posts of Chief Election 
Commissioner and the Election Commissioners shall be done by the President of India on 
the basis of the advice tendered by a Committee consisting of the Prime Minister of India, 
the Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha and, in case, there is no such Leader, the 
Leader of the party having the largest numerical strength amongst the parties in opposition 
in the Lok Sabha and the Chief Justice of India. The Court has also requested the Union 
Government to consider bringing in laws to ensure that the ECI gets a permanent Secretariat 
and staff and is not dependent on the Union Government for its funding. 


9. That apart, one of the fundamental flaws of the ECI is that it does not have a legal 
member, though it adjudicates disputes having civil consequences. It is well settled that 
any Tribunal or Commission that performs adjudicatory functions must have a legal member. 
In the absence of such a legal mind, often, binding judgments of the Constitutional Courts 
are ignored by the Commission in passing orders leading to further litigation. 


0. It is, therefore, proposed to introduced a Bill to provide for a comprehensive law 
for establishing the procedure for appointing the Chief Election Commissioner, Election 
Commissioners and the Regional Election Commissioners in four Regional Zones, namely, 
Northern, Southern, Eastern and Western. 


The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives. 


P. WILSON 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Sub-clause (2) of Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Search Committee 
for calling applications and drawing up a panel of persons eligible for appointment as 
Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and Regional Election Commissioners 
and sub-clause (7) of Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the fees and allowances of members 
of the Search Committee. Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the salaries and allowances of the 
Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and Regional Election Commissioners 
and Clause | ] for their pensions. Clause |3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a 
permanent Secretariat for the Election Commission with such number and category of officers 
and other employees to assist the Commission in the discharge of its functions and Clause 2 
of the Bill provides for other conditions of service of the Chief Election Commissioner, 
Election Commissioners, Regional Election Commissioners, officers and other employees 
of the Commission. Clause |4 of the Bill provides that the all expenses of the Election 
Commission of India shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. 


Therefore, the Bill if enacted, is likely to involve an expenditure, both of recurring and 
non-recurring nature, of about One thousand Crore rupees annually from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Election Commission of India, in consultation with 
the Central Government, to make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules 
will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative powers is of normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


Bit No. CX or 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. Short title and 
हि sais है commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 
of article l02. 


Amendment 
of article 9]. 


Amendment 
of the Tenth 
Schedule. 


Disqualification 
and vacation 
of seat in 
cases of 
merger etc. 


Decisions on 
question as to 
disqualification 
on ground of 
defection. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In article 02 of the Constitution, after clause (2), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


"Provided that a member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party 
who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule 
shall continue to be disqualified for a further period of six years from the date of his 
disqualification." 

3. In article 9] of the Constitution, after clause (2), the following priviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


"Provided that a member of Legislative Assembly of a State or either House of the 
Legislature of a State having Legislative Council belonging to any political party who is 
disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall 
continue to be disqualified for a further period of six years from the date of his disqualification." 


4. In the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution— 


(i) in paragraph |, for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely— 


(६) "Adjudicating Committee" means a committee appointed to pass any 
order or decision under this Act. 


(aa) "House" means either Houses of Parliament or the Legislative 
Assembly or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State;' 


(ii) for paragraph 4, the following paragraph, shall be substituted, namely:— 


"4. (7) The Members of a House, comprising not less than one-third of the 
total membership of a political party of that House, who— 


(a) give up the membership of their original political party and merge 
with another political party, or 


(b) form a new political party and function independently, shall be 
liable to disqualification under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule and 
their seats in the House shall automatically be vacated, as per the provisions 
of sub-clause (a) of clause (3) of article 0 of the Constitution and such 
members shall have to seek fresh elections to the House, if they so desire. 


(2) In the event of defection by members of the House of the People or of 
the Legislative Assembly of a State, comprising not less than one-third of the 
total membership of a political party in that House, a special session shall be 
convened for the purpose of discussion and voting on a motion expressing 
confidence or want of confidence in the Council of Ministers within a period of 
forty-eight hours, from the date of vacation of seat(s) by such Member(s) on 
defection. 


(iii) for paragraph 6, the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely:— 


(J) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House has become 
subject to disqualification under this Schedule, the question shall be referred for 
the decision of a three-member Adjudicating Committee, constituted in such 
manner as the President may determine, comprising the following: 


(a) a retired Judge of the Supreme Court as Chairperson; 
(b) a retired Judge of the High Court as Member; 
(c) aretired Chief Election Commissioner as Member. 


(2) No person who has held office as a judge of the Supreme Court or as 
the Chief Election Commissioner shall be appointed as a member of the 
adjudicating committee before the expiry of six years from the date he ceases to 
hold such office. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


(3) The Conditions of service and tenure of the members of the committee 
shall be such as the President may determine: 


Provided that the conditions of service and tenure of the members shall 
not be varied to their disadvantage either after their appointment or during the 
course of their tenure in such capacity. 


(4) The decision of the Adjudicating Committee shall be final. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India's political system has undergone tremendous changes since independence. While 
the formation of coalition governments since [9605 has on the one hand helped ensure wider 
representation and diversity of voices in the governance system, it has also parallelly increased 
the instances of political manoeuvring. Accordingly, India enacted anti-defection law in 
985. However, despite the legislation being in force, elected representatives have been 
using various loopholes in the laws to continually pursue defection. 


Such a defection mostly arising out of the power tussle and political considerations 
often erodes the public trust in the fundamentals of a democracy. Paragraph (4) of the Tenth 
Schedule to the Constitution which validates mergers, where two-thirds of the members of a 
legislative party have consented to such merger, remains in effect as a tool of misuse by 
majority of the legislators. 


The Tenth Schedule of the Constitution as it originally existed recognised the concept 
of 'split' if one-third members of any political party decided to form a new political party or 
join another political party. However, this provision was later modified by the Constitution 
amendment in 2003. While the anti-defection law aims at preventing horse-trading of the 
legislators, the extant provisions in Tenth Schedule fails to prevent such practices by way of 
misuse of loopholes therein. The defections are often instigated not by independent individual 
disagreement of the members, but rather by use of money and muscle power. 


Additionally, putting the final authority to decide the cases of disqualification in cases 
of defection on the Speaker of the House may also compromise the decision. Hence, to 
provide for greater independence, fairness, and impartiality, there is a need to refer such a 
decision to a separate Adjudicating Authority. 


Therefore, this Bill provides for immediate disqualification of a candidate who defects 
from a political party and vacation of his seat necessitating him to seek fresh mandate. Such 
a clause shall ensure that the legislators have a moral responsibility to the political party and 
to the people who trust him at large. 


Hence, this Bill. 
PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Sub-clause (iii) of clause 4 of the Bill inter-alia provides for constitution of a 
three-member Adjudicating Committee comprising a Retired Judge of the Supreme Court as 
Chairperson; a retired Judge of the High Court as Member; and a retired Chief Election 
Commissioner as Member. Therefore, if enacted, this Bill would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is difficult to estimate the actual financial expenditure 
likely to be incurred at this stage. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


BIL No. IX 07 2023 


A Bill to provide for a framework to regulate, control and define powers of the police 
agencies and central investigative agencies to use facial recognition technologies for 
the purposes of identification, investigation and inquiries of criminal offences 
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and l. (J) This Act may be called the Facial Recognition Technology (Regulation of Police 
commencement. Powers) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette appoint. 


2 of 974. 


ll of 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3] 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "facial recognition technology" means an algorithm based automated or 
semi-automated technology which is employed to identify, verify, map and match 
individual's facial features, including |:! identification and |: N verification system, to 
infer emotions, associations or activities of the individual; 


(b) "face surveillance" means the use of facial recognition technology to track, 
analyse, observe movements, behaviour, data, or actions of an individual or groups of 
individuals; 


(c) "Magistrate" means,— 
(7) in relation to a metropolitan area, the Metropolitan Magistrate; or 
(ii) in relation to any other area, the Judicial Magistrate of the first class. 


(d) "other remote biometric recognition" means any form of automated or semi- 
automated process used to assist in identifying an individual, trace an individual or 
otherwise surveil information about an individual, which may include voice recognition 
technology, logs to infer characteristics of the individual but does not include finger 
prints and palm prints; 


(e) "police officer" means an officer in-charge of a police-station or a 
police officer making an investigation under Chapter XII of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 973, or any other police officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector; and 


(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. (7) Unless otherwise stated under this Act, no police officer, police agency or central 
investigation agency shall be allowed to acquire, possess, access or use facial recognition 
technology or other remote biometric recognition to identify, trace or otherwise surveil the 
origin of any individual for any criminal investigation, identification or inquiry: 


Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to offences committed 
which affect or endanger the national security of India, or such offences which threaten the 
unity and integrity of India. 


(2) Subject to provision of sub-section (/), a police officer shall obtain the order of a 
Magistrate for utilising facial recognition technology or other remote biometric recognition 
in the identification, investigation or inquiry of the offence, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The use of facial recognition technology or other remote biometric recognition 
shall not be considered within the ambit of 'measurements' as provided under the Criminal 
Procedure (Identification) Act, 2022. 


(4) The use of facial recognition technology shall not be employed to identify persons 
only on the basis of race, caste, religion, gender, sexual orientation, political ideology, place 
of birth, face surveillance or any of them. 


4. (/) The National Crime Records Bureau shall, in the interest of prevention, detection, 
investigation and prosecution of any offence under any law for the time being in 
force,— 


(a) collect the record of face surveillance and/or other remote biometric 
recognition record from State Government or Union Territory Administration or any 
other law enforcement agencies; 


(b) store, preserve and destroy the record of face surveillance and/or other 
remote biometric recognition records at national level; 


(c) process such record with relevant crime and criminal records; and 


Definitions. 


Use of Facial 
Recognition 
Technology in 
certain 
offences. 


Collection, 
storing, 
preservation 
of face 
surveillance 
and/or other 
remote 
biometric 
recognition 
records. 


Power of 
Magistrate to 
allow the 
investigating 
agencies to 
take face 
surveillance 
and/or other 
remote 
biometric 
recognition 
records. 


Bar of 
Proceedings or 
suit. 


Power to make 
rules. 


Act to have 
over riding 
effect. 

Repeal and 
savings. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(d) share and disseminate such records with any law enforcement agency, in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The record of face surveillance and/or other remote biometric recognition records 
shall be retained in digital or electronic form for a period of seventy-five years from the date 
of collection of such measurement: 


Provided that where any person, who has not been previously convicted of an offence 
punishable under any law with imprisonment for any term, has had his face surveillance and/ 
or other remote biometric recognition records taken according to the provisions of this Act, 
is released without trial or discharged or acquitted by the court, after exhausting all legal 
remedies, all records so taken shall, unless the Court or Magistrate, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing otherwise directs, be destroyed from records. 


(3) The State Government and Union Territory Administration may notify an appropriate 
agency to collect, preserve and share the face surveillance and/or other remote biometric 
recognition records in their respective jurisdictions. 


5. (7) Where the Magistrate is satisfied that, for the purpose of any investigation or 
proceeding under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973 or any other law for the time being in 
force, it is expedient to direct any person to give face surveillance and/or other remote 
biometric recognition records under this Act, the Magistrate may make an order to that effect 
and in that case, the person to whom the order relates shall allow the face surveillance and/ 
or other remote biometric recognition records to be taken in conformity with such directions. 


(2) No person shall be denied a reasonable opportunity of being heard before allowing 
the deployment of facial recognition technology or other remote biometric recognition 
techniques as may be required, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


6. No suit or any other proceeding shall lie against any person for anything done, or 
intended to be done in good faith under this Act or any rule made thereunder. 


7. (7) The Central Government or the State Government may, by notification in the 
official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act; 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule; 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of State Legislature where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. 


9. (/) The Criminal Procedure (Identification) Act, 2022 is hereby repealed to the extent 
of powers accorded in this Act to use of facial recognition technology or other remote 
biometric recognition techniques; 


(2) Any regulation, or any proceedings taken, any rule made or any direction given or 
any proceedings taken or any penalty or fine imposed under the repealed Identification of 
Prisoners Act, |920 shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be 
deemed to be void; 


2 of 974. 


ll of 2022. 


33 of 920. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice or 
0 of 897. affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 897 with regard to the 
effect of repeal. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


The advancement in the field of technology has created ripples in other domains of 
social life, such as governance, communication, service delivery and also law enforcement. 
Technology can be a friendly servant but a dangerous master. The development of Facial 
Recognition Technology (FRT) has a significant potential of improving the efficiency of law 
enforcement agencies. 


2. However, unregulated utilisation of such technology by the law enforcement agencies 
in the background of absence of a strong data protection law in the country can have several 
unintended consequences emanating from the possible misuse. This may primarily include 
misidentification, inaccuracy of the technology, machine bias etc. 


3. In the case of Sadhan Haldar vs. NCT of Delhi, the Hon’ ble High Court of Delhi 
allowed the use of technology for identification of missing children. However, there have 
been several reported instances where Central as well as State level agencies have used 
technologies to track persons involved in protests against the government. In this light, the 
legality of use of the technology requires introspection. 


4. Given the immense potential of the technology in several aspects of law enforcement, 
such as identification of missing persons, prevention of crimes, boosting security systems, 
faster processing of data etc., there is a need to strike a balance in a way that the technologies 
such as FRT and other remote biometric recognition techniques would be used by law 
enforcement agencies within the permissible bounds of constitutional right to privacy and 
right against self-incrimination. 


5. Thus, there is a need to demarcate the offences for which such a technology may be 
deployed in the course of investigation, identification and inquiries. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above-mentioned objective. 


PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and the State Governments to 


make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of 
detail only, the delegation of the legislative power is of a normal character. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. XCVI oF 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and I. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 
commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Insertion of 2. In the Constitution of India, after article 44, the following new article shall be inserted, 
new article namely:— 

44A. 

Control of "44 A. The State shall take all necessary steps to control population growth by promoting 
population. small family norms by all reasonable incentives and education through print and electronic 


media and other means as may be deemd appropriate to achieve a stable population." 


Amendment 


: 3. In article 5A, after clause (k) the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
of article SIA. 


"(0) to encourage, incentivise and adopt small family norms and set targets 
towards achieving a stable population." 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India is the second most populous country after China with the highest birth rate in the 


world. According to a report, India is slated to become the world's most populous country 
with a population of |.6 billion by 2030. 


India has had a State-sponsored family planning programme since 95[. Of late, the 
programme has shown some results. The Total Fertility Rate (TFR) has fallen from around 6 
at the time of independence, to around 2.3. The results of the programme have, however, 
been skewed. It is very unfortunate that despite the availability of various birth control 
means and family planning programmes, the population is continuing to rise menacingly. 
This has caused over-crowding due to which law and order situation is also deteriorating. 
Unemployment is rising rapidly causing frustration amongst unemployed, particularly amongst 
the youth who are being lured by anti-national and anti-social elements. There is unparallel 
transformation of human values, social institutions and economic structures. Agricultural 
land holdings are becoming smaller and smaller and farming is becoming uneconomical. As 
aresult, many farmers are committing suicides. The housing needs are far beyond the available 
finances and the shortage is appalling. Educational and health care facilities are far from 
satisfactory. If the population is not stabilized, achieving a quality life would be a distant 
proposition. 


Further, the benefits of collective efforts of national building have been squandered 
by the rise in population or evident from economic data. India's per capita GDP in 998 was 
43 dollars and it has grown to about 206 dollars in the year 208. However, during this 
period, our population is estimated to have grown from | billion to .4 billion. Had there been 
a stable population during this period, the per capita GDP would have been higher by 
another 40 per cent. Certainly, a rising population limits the ability of the State to provide 
better quality of life to its citizens, since a large chunk of national income is spent on 
maintaining the existing facilities. 


It is, therefore, imperative that a focused approach must be taken to check the increasing 
population. The Bill seeks to insert a new article in Part IV of the Constitution enjoining upon 
the State to take all steps to control population growth by promoting small family norms and 
achieve a stable population. The Bill also makes it a fundamental duty for citizens to adopt 
small family norms and work towards achieving a stable population in the country. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


Hence, this Bill. 


DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. XCVIII of 2022 


A Bill to provide for regulation of marriage bureaus for prevention of malpractices and 
misuse of marriage registration facility and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and . (/) This Act may be called the Marriage Bureau (Regulation) Act, 2022. 
Commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in other cases, the Central Government; 


(9) “identity proofs” means any of the following,— 


6 of 886. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


(i) valid passport; 
(ii) voter Identity Document; 
(iii) Aadhaar Card; 


(iv) any photo identity card issued by the State Government or the Central 
Government or Public Sector Undertakings or banks; 


(c) “marriage” includes a re-marriage duly instituted as per the existing laws; 


(d) “marriage bureau” means a bureau or institution consisting of a person or 
group of persons, which carries on the activity of helping the unmarried persons 
including divorcees, widows and widowers, desirous of getting married, registered 
with the bureau, in finding a suitable match for them by arranging to bring them 
together; 


(e) ‘parties’ means the husband and wife whose marriage has been solemnized; 
(f) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(g) ‘Registrar’ means a Registrar of Marriage Bureaus and Marriages appointed 
under this Act; 


(A) ‘Registrar-General’ means the Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and 
Marriages appointed by the appropriate Government under the Births, Deaths and 
Marriages Registration Act, !886. 


3. (/) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint 
as Many persons, as it may consider necessary to be the Registrar of Marriage Bureaus and 
Marriages for such area or areas as may be specified in such notification; 


(2) The Registrar shall exercise such powers and duties as may be prescribed and shall 
work under the general superintendence and control of the Registrar-General. 


4. From the date of coming into force of this Act, every marriage bureau and every 
marriage in the country shall be registered with the Registrar of Marriage Bureaus and 
Marriages. 


5. () Any person or group of persons desirous of conducting or running a marriage 
bureau shall apply for registration of such marriage bureau to the Registrar, in such manner 
with such fees and documents as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Registrar shall, upon reviewing an application received under sub-section (/), 
after scrutiny thereof, register such marriage bureau and grant a certificate of registration to 
such bureau, in the prescribed form. 


(3) The registration certificate so granted shall be displayed prominently by such 
bureau in its registered office premises. 


(4) Every such marriage bureau shall renew its registration after every two years from 
the date of grant of such certificate on payment of the prescribed renewal fee. 


(5) No marriage bureau shall carry on or conduct its activities as the marriage bureau, 
except at its registered office as specified in the registration certificate granted under 
sub-section (2). 


(6) Every marriage bureau shall conduct its activities strictly as per the terms and 
conditions of the registration granted under sub-section (2). 


(7) Contravention of any of the provisions of the Act by a marriage bureau shall make 
the registration of such bureau liable for cancellation: 


Provided that registration of a marriage bureau shall not be cancelled without giving a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, to the concerned bureau. 


Appointment 
of Registrar of 
Marriage 
Bureaus and 
Marriages. 


Marriage 
bureaus and 
marriages to 
be registered. 


Registration 
of marriage 

bureaus and 

marriages. 


Duties of 
marriage 
bureau. 


Registration 
of particulars 
of marriage. 


Consultancy 
fee. 


Penalty. 


Overriding 
effect of the 
Act. 


Act not to be 
in derogation 
of any other 
law. 


Power to 
make rules. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(8) Any marriage bureau aggrieved by the order of the Registrar refusing to register or 
renew the registration of the bureau or regarding cancellation of the registration may, appeal 
against such order to the Registrar-General in such manner as may be prescribed. 


6. (/) It shall be mandatory for every marriage bureau to obtain a copy of a valid 
identity proof from every desirous to be registered with the bureau and to maintain a record 
of the parties in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Privacy of information shared by the parties with the marriage bureau shall be 
maintained by the marriage bureau and shall only be furnished to law enforcing, investigating 
or Government agencies upon a written request received therefrom. 


(3) No marriage bureau shall convert or attempt to convert, either directly or otherwise, 
any other person from one religion to another by use or practice of misrepresentation or any 
fraudulent means, or by promise of marriage, nor shall any person abet to or conspire for 
such conversion. 


7. For the purpose of facilitating the proof of marriages, the Registrar shall provide that 
the parties to any such marriages shall have the particulars of their marriages entered in such 
manner and subject to such condition as may be prescribed. 


8. Consultancy fee payable to the marriage bureau by the parties shall be a reasonable 
amount which shall be fixed by the Registrar-General in the manner as may be prescribed. 


9. Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the 
provisions of this Act, shall be punished with a fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees for the first violation and up to twenty five thousand rupees for second and subsequent 
violations. 


0. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to marriage bureaus. 


Il. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force. 


2. (/) The Central Government or the State Government may by notificaton in the 
Official Gazette make rules for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Marriage bureaus are popular match making services in India where parties interested 
in marriage register their names with them and the bureau suggests to them suitable matches 
from their database. Most marriage bureaus are community based where one can easily find 
a partner as per their liking, mother tongue, country, religion, occupation and more. The 
matches are suggested by the bureaus directly to the candidates or the parents of the 
candidates when they visit the bureau or through correspondence, emails and phone calls. 
Some marriage bureaus arrange meetings between suitable matches as well. Running a marriage 
bureau may also be a good source of income as the expenses are low while the income is 
high. Many marriage bureaus in cities like Mumbai, Delhi, Pune and Bangalore charge between 
one thousand to five thousand rupees for each registration. 


In some Indian States, registration of marriage bureaus is being done as per established 
laws. But in most States, services by bureaus are being misused for making false promises or 
false profile of marriage. Besides some of the marriage bureaus do not keep the personal 
information of the parties secured and confidential. Further, marriage bureaus do not have 
stringent ‘Know Your Customer’(KYC) procedures in place and hence, readily accept 
documents or facts provided by fake profiles which result in commission of fraud. Therefore, 
it is imperative to provide for regulation of marriage bureaus in India in order to prevent 
malpractices and misuse of marriage registration facility as well as to maintain a record of 
parties with sufficient proof alongwith other details. 


Thus, there is an urgent need to provide registration and regulation of marriage bureaus. 


Hence, this Bill. 


DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill inter-alia provides for appointment of Registrar of Marriage Bureaus 
and Marriages. Therefore, if enacted, this Bill would involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. However, it is difficult to estimate the actual financial expenditure likely to be 
incurred at this stage. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and the State Government to 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of 
details only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal character. 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


BILL No. XXXVI oF 2023 


A Bill to prohibit interfaith marriages by unlawful conversion and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and l. (J) This Act may be called the Interfaith Marriages by Unlawful Conversion 
commencement. (Prohibition) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette appoint. 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: — 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "Family Courts" means the family courts as established under the Family 
Courts Act, 984; 66 of 984. 


(c) "interfaith marriage" means marriage between persons professing different 
religions; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


(d) "offence" means the offence of performing an interfaith marriage for the sole 
purpose of unlawful conversion, as per section 5 of this Act; 


(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(f) "religion" means any organized system of worship pattern, faith, belief, worship 
or life-style as prevailing in India or any part of it and defined under any law or custom 
for the time being in force; 


(g) "spouse" means either the husband or wife in the interfaith marriage; and 


(h) "unlawful conversion" means convert or attempt to convert any person from 
one's own religion to another by use or practice of misrepresentation, force, undue 
influence, coercion, allurement or by any fraudulent means and is not in accordance 
with the law of the land. 


3. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force 
or in any custom or ritual of any community, religion, tribe or caste, interfaith marriage, which 
is done for the sole purpose of unlawful conversion of one spouse, either before or after the 
marriage, is hereby prohibited. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (/), 
the appropriate Government shall issue necessary directions for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


4. Any interfaith marriage, which is done for the sole purpose of unlawful conversion 
of one spouse, either before or after the marriage, shall be declared void by the Family Court 
having jurisdiction in the area where such interfaith marriage has taken place, or where 
Family Court is not established, the Court having jurisdiction to try such case on a petition 
presented by either party thereto against the other party of the marriage, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


5. Whoever performs or takes part in an interfaith marriage which is done for the sole 
purpose of causing unlawful conversion of one spouse, either before or after the marriage, 
shall be guilty of having committed an offence of performing an interfaith marriage for the 
sole purpose of unlawful conversion. 


6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
whoever commits an offence under this Act, shall on conviction by a Court of Law be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment, which shall not be less than five years but which 
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 


7. When an offence is committed under this Act, each of the following persons shall 
be deemed to have taken part in committing the offence and to be guilty of the offence,— 


(a) every person who actually does the act which constitutes the offence; 
(b) every person who aids or abets another person in committing the offence; 


(c) every person who does or omits to do any act for the purpose of enabling or 
aiding another person to commit the offence; and 


(d) any person who counsels, convinces or procures any other person to commit 
the offence. 


8. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, !973, every 
offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable and triable by the 
Court of Sessions. 


Prohibition 
of interfaith 
marriages 
done for the 
sole purpose 
of unlawful 
conversion. 


Interfaith 
marriage done 
for the sole 
purpose of 
unlawful 
conversion or 
vice-versa to 
be declared 
void. 


Offence of 
performing an 
interfaith 
marriage for 
the sole 
purpose of 
unlawful 
conversion. 


Penalty. 


Parties to the 
offence. 


Offences to be 
cognizable and 
non-bailable. 


Power to make 
rules. 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


9. (/) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Marriage is a part of individual life as well a social issue. Interfaith marriage signifies a 
marital union wherein the partners belong to different faiths and religions. These marriages 
usually face difficulties in respect of social involvement, social behaviour, adaptation and 
acceptance by the families of both spouses as well as the society. Sometimes even the 
children of interfaith marriages face challenges and exclusion in society. Some religions 
prohibit interfaith marriages, some are silent on the issue, while others allow it with 
requirements of ceremony and customs. 


Interfaith marriages have recently become a topic of controversy due to the disapproval 
of relationships/alliances between Hindus and Muslims, where in some cases non-Muslims 
are required to convert to solemnise the marriage. These incidents have attracted 
condemnation, harassment and legal action by the involved communities. Such interfaith 
marriages are seen as an inherent indication of a forced conversion of one of the spouses, 
mostly women. As per Muslim personal law, in order to get married to a non-Muslim, 
conversion of religion is the only way. Interfaith marriages in India are registered under the 
Special Marriage Act, 954. 


In recent years, there have been instances of conversion in the name of interfaith 
marriages and these instances have caused disturbance and public unrest. The institution of 
marriage should not be exploited for the sake of unlawful conversion. 


Thus, there is an urgent need to contemplate a law in order to prohibit interfaith 
marriages done for the sole purpose of unlawful conversion. There should also be deterrent 
punishment for the persons who are responsible for such acts. 


Hence, this Bill. 
ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


BIL_ No. XCIII 07 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Advocates Act, 96. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification Short title and 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. commencement. 
25 of 96]. 2. In section 2 of the Advocates Act, 96 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Amendment of 
Act), after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — section 2. 


"(ia) "misconduct" means any act of a legal practitioner that is found to be 
in breach of or wanting in observance of the standard of professional conduct 
or etiquette prescribed by the rules framed under clause (c) of sub-section (/) of 
section 49 of this Act, or any conduct that is a disqualification for enrolment under 
section 24A of this Act." 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Amendment 3. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause (d), the following 
of section 35. : न 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(e) impose such fine as it may deem fit, proportionate to the gravity of the 
misconduct proved against the advocate, subject to the maximum limit of three lakh 
rupees; and 


(f) award a fair and reasonable compensation of such amount as it may deem fit, 
subject to the maximum limit of five lakh rupees, payable to the person aggrieved by 
the misconduct of the concerned advocate." 


Amendment 4. In section 43 of the principal Act, after clause (b), the following proviso shall be 
of section 43. inserted, namely:— 


"Provided that the disciplinary committee may order special or exemplary costs, 
subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees, to be payable either by the complainant, if 
the complaint is found to be vexatious or frivolous, or by the respondent advocate, if 
he is found to have been uncooperative in the disciplinary proceedings under this 
Act." 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ३ ॥॥॥ 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The legal profession is considered a noble profession as it facilitates the establishment 
of a legal system that dispenses fair and impartial justice and protects the rule of law. The 
fundamental pre-requisite for preserving the nobility of this profession is to ensure adherence 
to a well-defined set of professional norms that seek to regulate the conduct of advocates 
and provide adequate punishment in cases of proven misconduct. 


Although both the Advocates Act, !96] and the Bar Council of India Rules lay down 
the standards of professional conduct, they are silent as to what the term ‘misconduct’ 
means in the context of the legal profession. This lack of specificity has resulted in the 
arbitrary usage of section 35 of the Act, which seeks to penalise the misconduct of advocates. 
Furthermore, the forms of punishment prescribed under section 35 are very limited. They do 
not allow for imposition of fine on the advocate on whose part the misconduct is proven, or 
provision of compensation to the party aggrieved by such misconduct. Lastly, the Act fails 
to provide punishment in case the complaint of misconduct is found to be vexatious or 
frivolous, or where the advocate has been uncooperative in the disciplinary proceedings. 


To remedy this lacunae in the law governing the legal profession, this Bill inserts a 
comprehensive definition for ‘misconduct’, expands the scope of penalties and costs provided 
under sections 35 and 43. By doing so, this Bill lends much-needed clarity and efficacy to the 
professional norms that are aimed at deterring misconduct of advocates. 


This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


DR. SASMIT PATRA. 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. XCI oF 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Indian Penal Code, |860. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and I. (7) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


commencement. हि C G ae 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Substitution of 2. For section !24A of the Indian Penal Code, 860 (hereinafter referred to as the Code), 


new section for the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
section |24A. 


Sedition. "]24A. Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible 
representation or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or 
excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards the Government established by law 


45 of 860. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


in India, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or 
with imprisonment which may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or 
with fine: 


Provided that the provisions of this section shall apply only when the 
words, signs, visible representation or any other action directly results in 
incitement of violence and commission of an offence punishable with 
imprisonment for life under this Code. 


Explanation.—Comments or signs or visible representation or any other act 
expressing disapprobation of the administrative measures or other action of the 
Government, do not constitute an offence under this section.". 


3. In the Code, for section 309, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 


"309. Whoever holds out a threat of suicide to a public authority, with intent to 
cause that authority to do any act which it is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do 
any act which it is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the execution of such 
threat, and does any act towards the execution of such threat, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or with 
fine, or with both.". 


4. In the Code, in section 375, for Exception 2, the following Exception shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


"(2) Marriage or other relationship shall not constitute a defence to a charge of 
rape under this section.". 


Substitution of 
new section 
for section 
309. 


Threat of 
suicide with 
intent to 
coerce a public 
authority. 


Substitution 
of new 
exception for 
exception 2 
of section 
375. 


54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Democracy is not another name of majoritarianism, on the contrary it is a system to 
include every voice, where thought of every person is counted, irrespective of the number of 
the people backing that idea. In a democracy, it is natural that there will be different and 
conflicting interpretations of a given account of an event. Not only viewpoints which 
constitute the majority are to be considered, but at the same time, dissenting and critical 
opinions should also be acknowledged. Free speech is protected because it is necessary to 
achieve some greater, often ultimate, social good. In a democratic set-up, there has to be an 
active and intelligent participation of the people in all spheres and affairs of their community 
as well as the State. It is their right to be kept informed about current political, social, 
economic and cultural life as well as the burning topics and important issues of the day in 
order to enable them to consider and form broad opinion about the same and the way in 
which they are being managed, tackled and administered by the Government and its 
functionaries. To achieve this objective the people need a clear and truthful account of 
events, so that they may form their own opinion and offer their own comments and viewpoints 
on such matters and issues and select their further course of action. 


2. The Supreme Court has also narrowed the scope and applicability of section l24A, 
in its landmark judgment in Kedar Nath Singh V/s State of Bihar (962) case, where it linked 
sedition to a test of tangible evidence of actual harm. There is an urgent need to amend 
section |24A of the Indian Penal Code in compliance with the judgment of the Supreme Court 
and to prevent the possibility of undue harassment of citizens who simply disagree with the 
Government. 


3. Section 309 of Indian Penal Code criminalised an attempt to suicide by any person. 
However section !5 of the Mental Health Care Act, 20l7 States that any person who 
attempts to commit suicide shall be presumed to have stress and therefore shall not be 
punished under IPC thus making provision of section 309 of IPC otiose. The Law Commission 
had twice, in !97 and 2008, also recommended the repeal of section 309 of the IPC. In Aruna 
Ramchandra Shanbaug v. Union of India, (20I) 4 SCC 454, the Supreme Court emphasised 
that a person suffering from mental health illnesses needs help rather than punishment. 
However, it is imperative to punish suicide where it serves another purpose, i.e., an attempt 
to suicide should be criminalised when it is used as an instrument to threaten with the object 
of coercing a public authority to pursue a course of action. To prevent suicide attempts 
being used as threats, to intimidate of coerce public authorities, the new provision be added 
to the code. 


4. In India, marital rape exists de facto but is not recongnised de jure, i.e. in law. While 
in other countries either the legislature has criminalized marital rape, or the judiciary has 
played an active role in recognizing it as an offence, in India, however, very little has been 
done to recognise this crime. Though marital rape is the most common and repugnant form of 
masochism in Indian society, it is hidden behind the iron curtain of marriage. In 993, the 
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights published the declaration on the 
elimination of violence against women. This also establishes Marital Rape as a human right 
violation. However, India is one of the thirty-six countries that still have not criminalized 
marital rape. In a landmark judgment, the Supreme Court in Independent Thought v. Union of 
India, (20i3) 382 SCC (207) criminalized unwilling sexual contact with a wife between fifteen 
and eighteen years of age. This judgment has in turn led to an increase in other writs 
challenging the constitutionality of Exception 2 of section 375 of IPC as a whole. Although 
the Constitution guarantees equality to all under Article 4, Indian criminal law discriminates 
against female victims who have been raped by their own husbands. Exception 2 also violates 
Article 2’s right to live a healthy and dignified life. It is well settled that the “right to life” 
envisaged in Article 2] is not merely a right to exist. The courts have repeatedly held that the 
“right to life” encompasses a right to live with human dignity. Yet, the very existence of 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 55 


Exception 2 of section 375 which fails to deter husbands from engaging in acts of forced 
sexual contact with their wives, adversely affects the physical and mental health of women 
and undermines their ability to live with dignity. It is time that we recognise the inhumane 
nature of this provision and consign it to the dustbin of history. 


This Bill seeks to amend sections 24A, 309 and Exception 2 of section 375 of the 
Indian Penal Code, |860 to achieve the aforesaid objectives. 


DR. SASMIT PATRA. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


Bit No. XCII oF 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India as 
follows:- 


Short title and l. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


commencement. हि C G ce 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Substitution of 2. For article ३३] of the Constitution of India, the following article shall be substituted, 
article 33]. namely:- 

Representation "॥३३], Notwithstanding anything contained in article 8, the President shall, if he 
of transgender is of the opinion that the transgender community is not adequately represented in the 
eo House of the People, nominate not more than two members of that community to the 


the House of 


the People. House of the People." 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 57 


3. For article 333 of the Constitution of India, the following article shall be substituted, 
namely:- 


"333. Notwithstanding anything contained in article 70, the Governor of a 
State shall, ifhe is of the opinion that the transgender community needs representation 
in the Legislative Assembly of the State and is not adequately represented therein, 
nominate one member of that community to the Assembly." 


Substitution of 
article 333. 


Representation 
of transgender 
community in 
the Legislative 
Assemblies of 
States. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The transgenders face various forms of discrimination and trauma in our society. Since 
the colonial rule, the eunuchs have been labelled as cross-dressers, beggars and unnatural 
prostitutes. They are treated as outcasts right from birth. They have to beg on the streets for 
their living. People try to avoid them whenever they see them. We ourselves have rarely seen 
them employed in the public sectors. They also have to live at a separate place away from the 
society. Due to the social stigma and no protection to them, the Transgender Persons 
(Protection of Rights) Act, 20l9 was recently passed by the Parliament. The Act gives 
recognition to the community as 'third gender' and provides protection again various forms 
of discrimination. 


While the Act is a welcome move, and protects the community from discrimination, the 
transgender community has not got representation in Parliament. In the Census 20]], the 
transgender population was calculated to be six lakhs. Therefore, it becomes more significant 
for them to have a representative in the Parliament. In National Legal Services Authority vs. 
Union of India and others | (204) 5 SCC 438, the Supreme Court had recognized the community 
to be from the economically and socially backward class. For the transgender persons, 
discrimination is not based on religion, it is more about what they are born with and considering 
their sexual practices as ‘contamination’ and ‘filth’. The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes communities have reservation of seats, therefore there should be a similar provision 
for the transgender community also. 


In such a scenario, if they get two seats reserved, this would help them in voicing their 
opinions easily because when the Transgender Person (Protection of Rights) Act, 20l9 was 
passed, there was no one from their community who could voice their opinion or share their 
plight in the Parliament. Furthermore, since independence, there has not been a single 
transgender Member of Parliament or Member of Legislative Assembly of any State. Since 
the Parliament in the winter session of 209 discontinued the reservation of two seats for the 
Anglo-Indians, those two seats can now be reserved for the transgenders. In the State of 
Odisha, Aishwarya Rutuparna Pradhan has become the first openly transgender civil servant. 
In order to facilitate more people to embrace their identity and to feel safe about accepting 
who they are, we can begin with reserving seats for them in the Parliament. 


Thus, while there is a demand from the transgender community for reservation in the 
public sphere, the call for reservation of two seats for them in the Parliament should also be 
pursued. The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 20l9 ensures protection for 
the transgenders in the society, and this Bill shall ensure their involvement in policies framed 
for their own welfare and the decisions made for the country. 


Hence, this Bill. 
DR. SASMIT PATRA. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend article 33] of the Constitution, with a view to 
provide representation to transgender community in the House of the People. Article 06 of 
the Constitution provides that the members of either House of Parliament shall be entitled to 
receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined by Parliament 
by law. 


Similarly, Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend article 333 of the Constitution, with a view 
to provide representation to transgender community in the Legislative Assemblies. Article 
95 of the Constitution provides that the members of either Legislative Assembly or Legislative 
Council of a State shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may from time 
to time be determined by Legislature of the State. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. However, it is not possible to quantify the exact amount required from the Consolidated 
Fund of India at this stage. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved. 


Short title and 


commencement. 


Insertion of 
new sections 
0A and l0B. 


Lending rate 
and limit for 
lending of 
collateral free 
loans. 


60 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. XCIX 07 2022 


A Bill to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development 
(Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, after 
section |0, the following sections shall be inserted, namely: — 


"0A. (/) Every scheduled commercial bank shall lend to the micro, small and 
medium enterprises at the rate of one per cent. plus the rate of fixed deposit of such 
banks. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 6l 


(2) Every micro, small or medium enterprise shall be entitled to collateral free loan 
of up to rupees two crore from scheduled commercial banks. 


I0B. The Central Government shall, from time to time, notify suitable incentives 
to increase the inflow of equity capital in micro, small and medium enterprises.". 


Incentives to 
increase the 
inflow of 
equity capital. 


62 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 aims to provide for 
facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of micro, 
small and medium enterprises in the country particularly after the covid pandemic. The 
recommendations of various committees and task groups have brought about considerable 
positive changes in various areas of development of competitiveness of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). 


However, the MSMEs, that contribute to nearly ten per cent. of the country's Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP), forty-five per cent. of the manufactured output, forty per cent. of 
our exports and that employ an estimated twelve million people, continue to face serious 
bottlenecks in its development especially after the ill effects of covid pandemic and lock 
downs. Lack of access to adequate and timely credit at a reasonable cost is the most critical 
problems faced by this sector. Hence, there is an urgent need to make it mandatory by law for 
scheduled commercial banks to provide affordable lending rates to MSMEs. 


The Bill hence, aims to ensure lowest lending rates to MSMEs, fixed at one per cent. 
plus the rate of interest for fixed deposits of the scheduled commercial banks in the country. 
This would ensure more credit flow to the MSME sector, without hurting commercial banks, 
as they will continue to have freedom to fix lending rates to other sectors or units. The Bill 
also aims to make it mandatory for scheduled commercial banks to offer MSMEs, collateral 
free loans, up to rupees two crore. These two key changes in the Principal Act would revive 
MSMEs through increased credit flow. 


Hence, this Bill. 


DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 63 


BiLt No. CII or 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


l. (7) This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act, 
2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 3 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to 
as the principal Act),— 


(i) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ba) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;"; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
section 3. 


64 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ca) "child" means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of 


eighteen years"; 
(iii) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ga) "Council" means the Nutrition Council constituted under 
section 7A;"; and 


(iv) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(ha) “educational institution" includes— 


(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate 
Government or a local authority; or 


(ii) a school receiving aid or grants from the appropriate 
Government or the local authority to meet whole or part of its expenses; or 


(iii) a school belonging to specified category; or 


(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to 
meet its expenditure; or 


(०) an educational institution managed by a private entity, society 
or a trust, which imparts elementary education;". 


Insertion of 3. After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections 
new Chapter thereunder shall be inserted, namely:— 
IIA. 

"CHAPTER ITA 


REGULATION OF SALE AND ADVERTISING OF 7007 PRODUCTS CAUSING 
OBESITY AMONGST CHILDREN 


Establishment 7A. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish 
of Nutrition a council to be known as the Nutrition Council to regulate sale and advertising of food 
Council. पु . : 

products which cause obesity amongst children. 


Composition 7B. The council shall consist of— 

of the 

Nutrition (a) the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare, chairperson, ex-officio; 
Council. 


(b) not more than six members having expertise in medicine with at least 
fifteen years of experience in handling issues related to nutrition and child 
health; 


(c) one expert each in the field of labeling and claims, advertisement, food 
additives, processing aids; 


(d) one member from the Union Ministry of Women and Child Development 
not below the rank of Joint Secretary; 


(e) three eminent personalities from medical fraternity; and 


(f) two Members of Parliament to be nominated, one each from Rajya Sabha 
and Lok Sabha. 


Functions of 7C. The Council shall— 


the Council. 
(a) lay down policies and principles to regulate sale and advertising of food 


products causing obesity amongst children; 


(b) determine its procedure in the performance of its functions; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 65 


(c) admit any complaints regarding non-implementation of its policies; and 
(d) initiate action for violating provisions of this Chapter. 


7D. The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and other 
employees to the Council as may be necessary for efficient discharge of its functions. 


I7E. All food products containing high sugar, calories, sodium, saturated fat or 
any other ingredient present in food products beyond limits stipulated and detrimental 
to health of children shall bear label warning in black bold letters about the presence of 
excess ingredients. 


7F. All food products labelled under section |7E shall not be sold within a radius 
of one kilometer of an educational institution and shall not to be sold to minor children. 


7G. All food products labelled under section 7E shall not be advertised in print, 
television or any other form targeting children below the age of eighteen years. 


I7H. (7) Whoever sells a labelled food product in contravention of the provisions 
of this chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto 
three years and fine which may extend up to ten lakh rupees. 


(2) whoever advertises a labelled food product in contravention of provisions of 
this chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto two 
years and fine which may extend upto ten lakh rupees.”. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
officers and 
employees. 


Labeling of 
food products 
by the Council 


Prohibition of 
sale of labelled 
food products 
near 
educational 
institutions. 


Prohibition on 
advertising of 
labelled food 
products. 


Punishment 
for sale and 
advertisement 
of labelled 
food products. 


Punishment 
for 
advertisement 
of labelled 
food products. 


66 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Increasing exposure to variety of fast foods has led to rise in consumption of 
food products which are largely detrimental to the health of persons. While adults can 
recognize the harmful effects, the targeted advertising of such unhealthy food products 
towards younger population has led to poor lifestyle standards amongst youth. There 
is a need to regulate the sale and advertising of such food products so as to save 
children from their harmful effects. 


Childhood obesity is a major challenge in the battle against rising rate of non- 
communicable diseases in India. The prevalence of overweight and obesity amongst 
children and adolescents aged 5 to 9 has risen dramatically from just 4% in 975 to 
over 20% in 2020. The rise has occurred similarly amongst both boys and girls. In 2020, 
20% of girls and 2[% of boys were overweight. The fundamental cause of obesity and 
overweight is an energy imbalance between calories consumed and calories expended. 
Globally, there has been an increased intake of energy-dense foods that are high in fat 
and sugars; and an increase in physical inactivity due to the increasingly sedentary 
nature of many forms of work, changing modes of transportation, and increasing 
urbanization. 


Changes in dietary and physical activity patterns are often the result of 
environmental and societal changes associated with development and lack of supportive 
policies in sectors such as health, agriculture, transport, urban planning, environment, 
food processing, distribution, marketing and education. 


While India is already facing strong challenge in providing affordable healthcare 
access to its citizens, the effects of poor lifestyle habits amongst its urban citizens 
adds further burden on the country's resources. The establishment of the Nutrition 
Council under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare with adequate representation 
of professionals will be vital in regulating the use of ingredients resulting in obesity. A 
warning label on food products having more than the permissible limit of certain 
ingredients too caution the consumers about their ill-effects should be made mandatory. 


It is also necessary to place restriction on advertisement of food products which 
cause obesity and sale of such food products near educational institutions. The Bill, 
accordingly, seeks to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 with a view to 
reduce consumption of unhealthy food products by children. 


Hence, this Bill. 


DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 67 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute the Nutrition Council to regulate the sale 
and advertising of food products which cause obesity amongst children and provides 
for appointments of experts, officers and employees thereto. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, 
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a 
recurring expenditure of about one hundred crore rupees per annum would be involved 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about two hundred crore rupees is also likely to 
be involved. 


68 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


BiLt No. CII or 2022 


A Bill to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu for the purpose 
of sustainable and balanced development of growth-oriented infrastructure such as 
affordable housing, drinking water, roads, sanitation, creation of grain and 
fodder banks, skill development, textile parks, food processing zones, 
cloud seeding and welfare schemes for women, children, senior 
citizens and people living below the poverty line in the State 
and encouraging traditional water conservation through 
lakes, ponds, wells rainwater harvesting and 
afforestation and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and . (/) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Tamil 
commencement. Nadu Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


42 of 2005. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 69 


2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India, 
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance 
to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be 
undertaken by the State Government of Tamil Nadu with the approval of the Union Government 
for the purposes of— 

(a) improvement of drinking water facilities; 
(b) implementation of schemes aimed at improving the health and educational 
standards of the girl child; 


(c) providing for welfare measures aimed at improving the condition of agricultural 
and migrant labourers; 


(d) providing for measures aimed at lowering of infant mortality rate, improving 
the maternal health and promoting institutional delivery; 


(e) provindg employment to members of families living below poverty line and 
unemployed youth through skill development; 


(f) providing water and sanitation facilities in rural and urban areas; 


(g) creating good quality infrastructure of roads, rail, highways, street lights, 
schools, colleges and transport; 


(h) creating awareness amongst people about disaster preparedness plan and 
training them to deal with disasters; 


(i) creation and maintenance of water conservation bodies such as check dams; 


(/) digging of open wells, ponds and desiltation of such bodies from time to time 
under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005; 


(k) encouraging and providing irrigation facilities to the farming sector and 
promotion of sustainable practices like organic farming coupled with modern facilities 
like drip irrgation and sprinklers to farmers; 


(J) capping of water guzzling sugarcane area and promotion of drought resilient 
crops; 


(m) promotion of rain water harvesting and watershed development to ensure 
replenishment of groundwater; 


(n) afforestation particularly on vacant or barren and waste land with the help of 
villagers and village Panchayats including community afforestation; 


(0) promotion for growing fodder and setting up fodder and food grain banks at 
conspicuous places; 


(p) initiating welfare measures for improving the conditions of agricultural 
workers, senior citizens, women, children and poor people; 


(4) establishing cold storages and warehouses for farmers; 
(7) settling the debt of farmers; 


(s) providing compensation and relief to farmers and agricultural labourers for 
any damage to crops caused due to rainfall deficit, pest attack, flood, hailstorm or any 
other natural calamity; 


(7) promotion of research and development through Krishi Vigyan Kendra in 
agriculture and drought management to ensure better and inexpensive inputs like 
seeds, fertilizers and pesticides; 


(u) promotion of sectors like livestock and poultry; 


Power to 
remove 
difficulty. 


Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 


70 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(v) promoting food processing industries based on local agricultural products; 
textile parks; 


(w) implementation of social awareness campaigns through Non-Governmental 
organisations and Self-Help Groups relating to farmer credit, water literacy and drought 
management through change in cropping pattern; 


(x) promotion and implementation of cloud seeding through silver iodide; and 


(y) such other provisions as the State Government of Tamil Nadu may deem 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


3. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the President of 
India may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act 
which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act. 


4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 8॥ 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The State of Tamil Nadu needs assistance from the Central Government for the 
successful completion of various schemes being undertaken at present with an aim to improve 
the standard of life of the people, improve the level of education and health condition of the 
girls, to encourage the girl students of families living below poverty line to pursue higher 
education and also to provide incentives for people living below poverty line to pursue 
higher education. The condition of farmers and agricultural labourers in the State, their 
welfare and protection are of paramount importance. Central assistance to the State is also 
needed for the holistic development and further reduction in the maternal and infant mortality 
rates. 


Recurring droughts have made the farmers of the State to seek support from the 
Government. The situation wherein droughts have been a frequent occurrence during the 
past fifty years has to be stopped through massive water conservation with check dams and 
other structures to arrest rain water run off. 


The traditional methods of water conservation through digging of open wells, ponds, 
lakes and such other bodies and time to time desiltation of such water bodies need to be 
undertaken. Rain water harvesting has to be promoted as a mass movement in the State. 
Afforestation on a large scale particularly on barren lands and wastelands has to be promoted 
involving villagers and village Panchayats by providing incentives which can certainly arrest 
the desertification. Unfortunately certain backward regions of the State are not much 
developed in comparison to other urban regions of the State in terms of infrastructure facilities, 
such as, potable water, roads, electricity, sanitation and other development indicators such 
as employment, per capita income and education particularly of the girl child. Welfare measures 
for the senior citizens, widows, physically handicapped or infirm do not exist in these regions 
of the State. Tamil Nadu has to be allocated its fair share of resources by the Central 
Government. As a welfare State, the Government has to provide all these facilities and work 
towards giving a requisite push for overall and all round development of the State. 


Hence, this Bill. 
DR. KANIMOZHINVN SOMU. 


72 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu 
to be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due 
appropriation provide, to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be 
undertaken by the State of Tamil Nadu with the approval of the Central Government. The Bill, 
therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India. As 
the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Tamil Nadu as special financial 
assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare 
schemes to be implemented by the State Government with the approval of the Central 
Government are identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, 
which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this state. 


2. No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 73 


BiL_ No. CIX or 2022 


A Bill to effectively prevent and combat hate speech and hate crimes, their 
negative effects on individuals, groups and societies, and to 
protect the constitutional values of autonomy, dignity, and 
equality and for matters connected therewith 
and incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Hate Speech and Hate Crimes (Prevention) Short title and 
Act, 2022. Short title and commencement. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


74 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires;— 


(a) "accused person" means a person who has been arrested for or formally 
charged with an offence under this Act; 


(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government 
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(c) "audience" means a person who is a listener or a viewer of hate speech; 


(d) "Court of Session" means a court defined under section 9 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, |973; 


(e) "group of persons" means a group of two or more persons; 
(f) "hate crime" means an offence defined under section |5 of this Act; 
(g) "hate speech" means an offence defined under section 3 of this Act; 


(A) "hatred" and "hostility" means intense and irrational emotions of 
opprobrium, enmity and detestation towards the victim; 


(i) "victim" means any person, who has suffered physical, mental, 
psychological or monetary harm as a result of the commission of any offence 
under this Act; 


(j) "witness" means any person who is in possession of any information or 
has knowledge necessary for the purpose of investigation, inquiry, or trial of any 
crime involving an offence under this Act. 


CHAPTER IT 
OFFENCE OF HATE SPEECH 


Hate speech. 3. A person who intentionally and within the hearing or sight of another person or 
group of persons uses, publishes, presents, produces, plays, provides, distributes or 
directs the performance of any speech that:— 


(i) incites, justifies, promotes or spreads discrimination, hatred, hostility, or 
violence against a person or group of persons; or 


(ii) denigrates a person or group of persons by reasons of their real or 
attributed characteristics or status, which includes religion, race, caste or 
community, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, place of birth, national or 
ethnic origin, language, age, or disability shall be guilty of an offence of hate 
speech. 


Protection of 4. No legal proceedings shall be instituted against a person under section 3 for an 


action done action done in good faith in the course of engagement in: 
in good faith. 


(i) any artistic or creative, performance or other form of expression, to the 
extent that such performance or expression does not advocate hatred or hate 
speech; or 


(ii) any academic or scientific inquiry; or 


(iii) fair and accurate reporting or commentary in the public interest. 


Punishment 5. (J) Whoever commits the offence of hate speech shall be punished with 
for ie imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or with 
speech. 


fine, or with both. 


(2) The award of punishment under this section shall be based on the severity of 
the offence, which shall be assessed by the following six factors: — 


2 of 974. 


2 of 974. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 75 


(i) social and political context prevalent at the time the offence was 
committed; 


(ii) the position or status of the offender in the society; 


(iii) the relationship between the intent of the offender, subject and object 
of the offence, and the audience; 


(iv) content of the offence which may include the degree to which the offence 
was provocative and direct, as well as the form, style, nature of arguments deployed 
in the offence; 


(v) reach of the offence, its public nature, its magnitude and size of the 
audience; and 


(vi) probability that the offence would succeed in inciting actual action 
against the victim. Punishment for hate speech. 


(3) An offence of hate crime shall be cognizable, non-bailable and non- 
compoundable and shall be triable by the Court of Session exercising jurisdiction in 
that area in which the offence is committed. 


CHAPTER HI 
INVESTIGATION, PROSECUTION AND TRIAL FOR THE OFFENCE OF HATE SPEECH 


6. (/) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, |973 (hereinafter referred 
to as the Code of Criminal Procedure) shall apply to this Chapter, save as supplemented 
to the extent provided under this Chapter. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), section 95 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure shall apply to any newspaper, book, painting, drawing or 
photograph, the publication of which is punishable under section 5 of this Act. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), section 96 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure shall apply to any newspaper, book, painting, drawing or 
photograph, punishable under section 5 of this Act against which a declaration of 
forfeiture has been made under section 95 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 


7. No police officer below the rank of Inspector shall investigate an offence 
committed under section 3, of this Act. 


8. (/) The Court of Session shall follow the procedure for the trial prescribed by 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, while trying the accused person. 


(2) The Court of Session may also try any offence, other than the offence under 
section 3, with which the accused person may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
be charged at the same trial if the offence is connected with the offence under this Act. 


(3) If, in the course of any trial under this Chapter, it is found that the accused 
person has committed any other offence, the Court of Session may, try such person of 
such offence and pass any sentence authorised by law for the punishment thereof. 


9. (J) The Court of Session may, on an application made by a witness in any 
proceeding before it or by the Public Prosecutor in relation to such witness or on its 
own motion, take such measures as it deems fit for keeping the identity and address of 
the witness secret. 


(2) A victim shall have the right to reasonable, accurate, and timely notice of any 
court proceeding and shall be entitled to be heard at any proceeding under this Chapter 


Application 
of the Code 
of Criminal 
Procedure. 


Powers to 
investigate. 


Powers of 
Court of 
Session. 


Rights of 
victims and 
witnesses. 


Appeals. 


Hate crime. 


Punishment 
for hate 
crime. 


76 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


in respect of bail, discharge, release, parole, conviction or sentence of an accused or 
any connected proceedings or arguments and file written submissions on conviction, 
acquittal or sentencing. 


(3) Notwithstanding the offender or any suspect as the case may be, having been 
arrested, granted bail, charged, convicted or sentenced, the Superintendent of Police or 
an officer designated by him shall inform the victim in writing about the details of the 
offender or suspect, and the progress of investigations into the offence. 


(4) The victim shall have the right to receive a copy of any statement of witness 
recorded during investigation or inquiry, and a copy of all statements and documents 
filed under section |73 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, including the charge-sheet or 
closure report submitted by police. 


(5) A victim shall be entitled to receive free legal aid, if they so choose and to 
engage any advocate who they choose from among those enrolled in the legal aid panel 
under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 987, and the Legal Services Authority 
established under the said Act shall pay all costs, expenses and fees of the advocate 
appointed by the victim or informant in accordance with relevant rules. 


(6) It shall be the duty and responsibility of the police for making arrangements 
for the protection of victims and witnesses against any kind of intimidation, coercion or 
inducement of violence or threats of violence. 


(7) The police shall inform the Court of Session about the protection provided to 
any victim, informant or witness and the Court of Session shall periodically review the 
protection being provided under this section and pass appropriate orders. 


0. (/) An appeal shall lie as a matter of right from any judgment, sentence or 
order of a Court of Session to the High Court both on facts and on law. 


(2) An appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of sixty days 
from the date of the judgment, sentence or order appealed from. 


Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said 
period of sixty days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within the period of sixty days. Appeals. 


CHAPTER IV 
OFFENCE OF HATE CRIME 
Il. "Hate crime" means any offence recognised under the Indian Penal Code, 
860 (hereafter in referred to as the Penal Code), the commission of which is motivated 
by the offender's prejudice or intolerance towards the victim by reasons of their real or 
attributed characteristics or status, which includes religion, race, caste or community, 


sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, place of birth, national or ethnic origin, language, 
age or disability. 


2. Whoever commits any offence which is hate crime in accordance with the 
provisions of section |] shall be punished with the punishment as provided for in the 
Penal Code for such offence: 


Provided that the severity of such punishment shall be determined by the fact 
that such offence has been classified as a hate crime under section |] of this Act. 


Provided further that such punishment shall be just and reasonable. 


39 of 987. 


45 of 860. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY TT 


CHAPTER V 
REPORTING 


3. (/) The Central Government shall publish annually in such manner as may be 
prescribed, both national and State-wise data regarding:— 


(a) hate speech cases and hate crime cases registered and at their disposal; 
and 


(b) persons convicted for the offence of hate speech and hate crime. 


(2) The data under sub-section (/) shall be classified in a manner as may be 
prescribed. 


CHAPTER VI 
MEASURES FOR EDUCATION AND RAISING AWARENESS 


4. The appropriate Government, in consultation with the National Human Rights 
Commission and the State Human Rights Commissions, as the case may be, shall promote 
awareness about the dangers of hate crimes and hate speech by:— 


(i) conducting education and information campaigns to raise awareness of 
the extent of hate speech and the harm it causes to individuals and communities; 


(ii) conducting education and information campaigns to inform the public 
about the prohibition against hate crimes and hate speech; 


(iii) conducting educational and information campaigns specifically for 
children and youth, parents and guardians, youth workers and volunteers working 
with children to enable them to understand and deal with hate crimes and hate 
speech; 


(iv) taking specific measures to support Government and private educational 
institutions in the conduct of activities and cultural programmes for the general 
public that enhance commitment to human rights as part of a pluralistic democratic 
society, encourage critical thinking, promote equality and inter-cultural and inter- 
faith dialogue, and strengthen the competences needed to identify and counter 
hate crimes and hate speech; 


(v) providing assistance and advice to any person who wants to file a 
complaint of a hate crime or hate speech; 


(vi) ensuring that all public officials who may be involved in the investigation 
and prosecution of hate crimes and hate speech are educated and informed of the 
prohibition against these offences; and 


(vii) training public officials on the prohibition, prevention and combating 
of hate crimes and hate speech and educating them on the prevailing social context 
in the country. 


CHAPTER VII 
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE 


5. Section 53A of the Penal Code shall be omitted. 


6. Section |53B of the Penal Code shall be omitted. 


Publication of 
registered hate 
speech and 
hate crime 
cases and 
convictions. 


Duties of the 
appropriate 
Government. 


Omission of 
section I53A. 


Omission of 
section |53B. 


Omission of 
section 295A. 


Omission of 
section 298. 


Insertion of 
new _ section 
295AA. 


Advocacy of 
hatred and/or 
hostility 
towards a 
religion or 
religious 
beliefs. 


Insertion of 
new sections 
304C and 
304D. 


Mob 
lynching. 


Punishment 
for Mob 
lynching 


Amendment 
of section 
505. 


78 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


7. Section 295A of the Penal Code shall be omitted. 


8 Section 298 of the Penal Code shall be omitted. 


9. After section 295 of the Penal Code, the following new section shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


"295AA. A person who intentionally uses, publishes, presents, produces, 
plays, provides, distributes or directs the performance of any speech that 
advocates hatred or hostility against a religion or a religious belief of any class of 
citizens of India, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both: 


Provided that such punishment shall not apply to an interpretation in good 
faith of any religious tenet, belief, teaching, doctrine or writings, to the extent that 
such interpretation does not advocate hatred that constitutes incitement to cause 
harm: 


Provided further that such punishment shall be based on the severity of the 
offence, which shall be assessed by the factors as specified in sub-section (2) of 
section 5 of this Act.". 


20. After section 304B of the Penal Code, the following new sections shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


"304C. Where a group of two or more persons, commit any act or series of 
acts of violence or aid, abet or attempt an act of violence, whether spontaneous 
or planned, by a mob on the grounds of religion, race, caste or community, sex, 
gender identity, sexual orientation, place of birth, national or ethnic origin, 
language, age, or disability, such a group shall be guilty of an offence of mob 
lynching. 


304D. Whoever commits the offence of mob lynching: — 


(i) where the offence leads to the victim suffering hurt, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees; 


(ii) where the act leads to the victim suffering grievous hurt, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five 
thousand rupees and may extend to three lakh rupees; 


(iii) where the act leads to the death of the victim, shall be punished 
with rigorous imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less 
than one lakh rupees and may extend to five lakh rupees.". Insertion of new 
sections 304C and 304D. 


2. In section 505 of the Penal Code, after clause (3), the following proviso shall 


be inserted, namely:— 


"Provided that such punishment shall be based on the severity of the offence, 
which shall be assessed by the factors specified in sub-section (2) of section 5 of 
the Hate Speech and Hate Crimes (Prevention) Act, 2022." 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 79 


CHAPTER शा 
AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 


22. In section 95 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, for the words, figures and Amendment 
letters "section !24A or section 53A or section 53B or section 292 or section 293 or Ms section 
section 295A", the words, figures and letters "section !24A or section 292 or section : 

293 or section 295AA" shall be substituted. 


23. In section 06 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in clause (a) of sub- Amendment 
section (2), the words, figures and letters "section I53A or section |53B or" shall Ae as 
be omitted. , 


24. In section l08 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-clause (a) of clause (i) Amendment 
of sub-section (/), for the words, figures and letters "section [240 or section 53A or Pas 
section |53B or section 295A", the words, figures and letters "section |24A or section 
295AA" shall be substituted. 


25. In section 96 of the Code of Criminal Procedure: Amendment 
of section 


(i) in clause (a) of sub-section (/), the words, figures and letters "section !96. 
I53A section 295A", the words, figures and letters "section 295AA" shall be 
substituted; and 


(ii) in clause (a) of sub-section (JA), the words, figures and letters "section 
53B" shall be omitted. 


26. In section 320 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-section (l), the entry Amendment 


pertaining to section 298 in the TABLE, shall be omitted. ee aa 


27. In the First Schedule of the Code of Criminal Procedure, under the heading "I. Amendment 
OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE":— ae ae 


Schedule. 
(Z) entry relating to section 53A shall be omitted; 
(2) entry relating to section 53B shall be omitted; 
(3) entry relating to section 295A shall be omitted; 


(4) entry relating to section 298 shall be omitted; 


(5) after the entry relating to 295, the following entry shall be inserted, 


namely:— 
Section Offence Punishment Cognizable Bailable By what 
or Non- or Non- Court 
Cognizable Bailable triable 
295AA Advocacy of Imprisonment for 3 Cognizable Non-  Courtof 
hatred or hostility years, or fine, or both bailable Session 


towards a religion 
or religious beliefs 


80 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[Part II— 


(6) after the entry relating to section 304B, the following entry shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


Section Offence Punishment Cognizable 
or Non- 
Cognizable 

304C Mob Lynching Imprisonment for life or Cognizable 


imprisonment for l0 
years, or imprisonment 
for 7 years and fine. 


CHAPTER IX 


Bailable By what 
or Non- Court 
Bailable triable 


Non- Court of 
bailable Session 


AMENDMENT TO THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AcT, 2000 


Insertion of 28. After section 66 of the Information Technology Act, 2000, the following section 


section 66AA. shall be inserted, namely:— 


Punishment for "66AA. Any person who intentionally publishes, distributes or otherwise 
हे _ makes available an electronic communication that constitutes hate speech as 
५८ contemplated in section 3 of the Hate Speech and Hate Crimes (Prevention) Act, 


communication. 2022 which is accessible to another person, shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three years and with fine. 


Explanation: For the purpose of this section, an electronic communication 
means a message or information created or transmitted or received on a computer, 
computer system, computer resource or communication device including 
attachments in text, image, audio, video and any other electronic record, which 


may be transmitted with the message." 


2l of 2000. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 8l 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

In recent years, India has witnessed an increase in the discrimination and 
dehumanisation of marginalised groups through hate speech. The Law Commission, in 
its 267th report, and the Supreme Court, on several occasions, have expressed the need 
for a specific law to combat hate speech. However, at present, no such law exists in our 
country. Further, India has an international obligation under article 20(2) of the 
International Convention Civil and Political Rights, l966, to prohibit hate speech. This 
Bill seeks to remedy the issue. 


Hate speech is problematic, mainly for three reasons. First, the hostile and 
unwelcoming environment resulting from hate speech alienates the victims and leads 
them to recede from the active fabric of the social structure. Thus, it deprives them of 
choices and opportunities and undermines their autonomy. Second, hate speech affects 
the dignity of the victims since it undermines the victim's self-worth and fails to recognise 
them as full-fledged agents whose views count. Third, hate speech affects the victim's 
status in the society, and is responsible for the entrenchment of stereotypes which 
result in inequality and subordination. Hence, to effectively prevent and combat hate 
speech, and to preserve and uphold the constitutional values of autonomy, dignity and 
equality, the Bill: 


(a) defines the offence of hate speech and provides a list of exceptions; 
(b) provides the punishment for hate speech; 


(c) provides the manner in which investigations, prosecutions and trial 
should be conducted; 


(d) provides for the rights of victims and witnesses during the trial; 


(९) mandates the annual reporting of the data related to hate speech in a 
prescribed manner; 


(f) mandates the appropriate Government, the National Human Rights 
Commission, and the State Human Rights Commission to take up educational and 
awareness-raising measures for the prevention of hate speech; 


(8) makes requisite amendments in the Indian Penal Code, |860 and the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, !973; and 


(h) inserts new provisions in the Information Technology Act, 2000 and the 
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines) Rules, 202! to prevent hate 
speech on online platforms. 


Hate Crimes have also witnessed a steady rise over the last few years in India. 
Pertinently, the cases of mob lynching have plagued the country, and the Supreme 
Court, in Tehseen S. Poonawalla v. Union of India and others, has urged the Parliament 
to "create a separate offence for lynching and provide adequate punishment for the 
same". Therefore, to prevent crimes that are motivated by the offender's prejudice 
towards the victim, including the crime of mob violence, the Bill: 


(a) defines the offence of hate crime and makes a provision for its 
punishment; 


(b) inserts a provision in the Indian Penal Code, |860, which define the 
offence of mob violence; 


(c) inserts a provision in the Indian Penal Code, 860, which provides for the 
punishment of mob violence. Such punishment is proportionate to the harm caused 
to the victim; 


(d) makes requisite amendments in the Code of Criminal Procedure; 


82 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(e) mandates the annual reporting of the data related to hate crimes in a 
prescribed manner; and 


(f) mandates the appropriate Government, the National Human Rights 
Commission, and the State Human Rights Commission to take up educational and 
awareness-raising measures for the prevention of hate crimes. 


Hence, this Bill. 


K.R. SURESH REDDY. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 83 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause |4 of the Bill provides for the duties of the Central Government, towards 
raising awareness of the dangers of hate crimes and hate speech. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted, would involve both non-recurring and recurring expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the 
expenditures. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |3 of the Bill provides that the data regarding hate crime and hate speech 
shall be published by the National Crime Bureau of India in the 'Crime in India’ Report 
and the data so published shall also be classified in the manner as may be prescribed. 
The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made are generally 
matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for 
them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 


Short title and 


commencement. 


Insertion of 
new section 
90A. 


Kaleshwaram 
Lift Irrigation 
Project to be 
a national 
project. 


84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. XVII of 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 20(4. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment) 
Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In the Andhra Pradesh (Reorganisation) Act, 204, (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), after section 90, the following section shall be inserted, namely,:— 


"OOA. (/) The Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Project is hereby declared to be a 
national project. 


(2) In the interest of the public, the Central Government shall ensure the execution 
of the project in an expedient manner.". 


6 of 20]4. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 85 


3. In the Thirteenth Schedule of the principal Act, under the heading "Infrastructure", 
after entry |2, the following entries shall be inserted, namely, :— 


"260. The Government of India shall develop an Information Technology 
Investment Zone at Hyderabad in the successor State of Telangana, which is to be 
completed in phases with Phase I by end-2026. 


2B. The Government of India shall establish a Turmeric Board at Nizamabad in 
the successor State of Telangana.”. 


Amendment 
of the 
Thirteenth 
Schedule. 


86 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The objectives of this Bill are four-fold: 


First, the Bill proposes to accord the Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Project (KLIP) a 
national project status. The KLIP, a multi-purpose irrigation project on the Godavari River in 
Kaleshwaram, Telangana, is currently the world's largest multi-stage lift irrigation project. 
The project envisages: 


(a) the diversion of 95 thousand million cubic feet (TMC) of Godavari water to 
the Sripada Rao Yellampally project and subsequently to Mid Manair Reservoir by 
lifting it to higher contours to bring large extents of lands in the basin under irrigation; 


(b) the irrigation of about |8.25 lakh acres of land in 3 districts in the successor 
State of Telangana; 


(c) the stabilisation of about |8.82 lakh acres of land in the successor State of 
Telangana; 


(व) The provision of 40 TMC of drinking water and 6 TMC of water for industrial 
use; 


(e) the stabilisation of shortfalls in the planned utilization of water under the 
Sriram Sagar Project, the Singur Project, and the Nizam Sagar Project; 


(f) the restoration of groundwater level to its original state by making surface 
water available for irrigation. 


Granting national project status to KLIP would alleviate the financial burden of the 
successor State of Telangana, help in the project's timely completion, and provide water to 
several lakh households in the successor State. In addition, the provision of water in the 
drought-prone areas and backward districts would also help reduce labour migration from 
the successor State of Telangana, prevent farmer suicides and develop and strengthen the 
State's food security. 


Second, the Bill proposes to create an obligation on the Central Government to establish 
an Information Technology Investment Zone (ITIZ) in Hyderabad, Telangana. The creation 
of an ITIZ in Hyderabad would result in: 


(a) the generation of direct revenues of over three lakh crore rupees; 
(b) the growth of IT exports to the tune of over two lakh crore rupeees; 


(c) direct employment for nearly fifteen lakh people and indirect employment of 
nearly fifty-three lakh people; and 


(d) an increase in tax revenue to the successor State to the extent of about 
thirty thousand crore rupees over twenty-five years. 


Third, the Bill proposes to establish a Turmeric Board at Nizamabad, Telangana. 
Telangana is the country’ largest turmeric-producing State, with Nizamabad producing about 
thirty percent of the country's total turmeric production. Turmeric is the only spice in India 
that can be exploited commercially on multiple scale apart from its primary use as a flavouring 
agent in food. The spice is mainly used as a flavouring agent, medicine for stomach disorders 
and food poisoning, an Ayurvedic component in toothpaste, facial powers, and natural dye. 
To exploit the inherent natural advantages that our country possesses in the production of 
turmeric and to safeguard the interests of turmeric farmers, a nodal agency must be created. 


The establishment of the Turmeric Board would help:— 
(a) the export promotion of turmeric; 


(b) the development and implementation of good agricultural practices, through 
scientific, technological research and regulation of domestic marketing of 
turmeric; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 87 


(c) provide a common platform for Indian exporters and international buyers 
through international exhibitions and meetings; 


(d) the promotion of organic production and certification of turmeric; 
(e) the promotion of exports of organic turmeric and organic turmeric products; 
(f) the formulation and implementation of various developmental schemes; 


(g) rendering assistance for studies and research on better processing practices, 
quality management systems, improvement of grading methods and effective packaging 
techniques; 


(h) the provision of inputs to the Government on policy matters relating to 
import and export of turmeric; 


(i) the registration and licensing of turmeric exporters; 


(7) manage a comprehensive and updated information for exporters and importers; 
and 


(k) the collection and documentation of trade information. 


Hence, this Bill. 


K.R. SURESH REDDY. 


88 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 provides for the declaration of Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Project as a national 
project. Clause 3 provides for the establishment of an Information Technology Investment 
Zone at Hyderabad, and a Turmeric Board at Nizamabad, in the successor State of Telangana. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve a non-recurring expenditure of one lakh 
two hundred eighteen thousand crore rupees, and a recurring expenditure of one hundred 
crore rupees from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 89 


BiLt No. C or 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (7) This Act may be called the Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) _ Short title, and 
Act, 2022. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


5 of 2003. 2. In section 3 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred Amendment 
to as the principal Act), of section 3. 


(i) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely,— 


“Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that, the 
process or activity connected with proceeds of crime is a continuing activity 


Amendment 
of section 5. 


Amendment 
of section 7. 


Amendment 
of section 9. 


90 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


and continues till such time a person is directly or indirectly enjoying the pro- 
ceeds of crime by its concealment or possession or acquisition or use or project- 
ing it as untainted property or claiming it as untainted property in any manner 
whatsoever.” 


(ii) after the Explanation, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely,— 


“Provided that no complaint for an offence of money laundering shall be 
entertained by the Court unless the concerned officer as may be appointed for 
the purpose or someone authorized by him establishes that the proceeds of 
crime have been generated from a scheduled offence and that a First Information 
Report has already been filed for a scheduled offence in the concerned police 
station.”. 


3. In section 5 of the principal Act— 


(i) in sub-section (/), for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, 


namely— 


“(a) any person is in possession of any proceeds of a crime for which a 
First Information Report has been filed; and”; 


(ii) in sub-section (/), the second proviso shall be omitted; 
(iii) after sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely— 


“Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall furnish a copy of such 
order to the accused.”; and 


(iv) after sub-section (5), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely— 


“Provided that the Director or the officer concerned shall furnish a copy of 
such complaint to the accused.”. 


4. In section |7 of the principal Act— 


(i) in sub-section (/), in clause (7), the word “on oath” shall be omitted; 

(ii) in sub-section (2),— 
(a) the words “or upon issuance of a freezing order’ shall be omitted; 
(b) the words “in a sealed envelope” shall be omitted; 

(iii) after sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely— 


“Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall furnish a copy of such 
reasons to the accused.”; 


(iv) in sub-section (3), the proviso shall be omitted; and 
(v) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely— 


“The authority seizing any record or property under sub-section (/) shall, 
within a period of thirty days from such seizure, file an application, requesting 
for retention of such record or property seized under sub-section (/), before the 
Adjudicating Authority.”. 


5. In section 9, of the principal Act— 


(i) after sub-section (7), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely— 


“Provided that the Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Director or any 
other officer authorized in this behalf by the Central Government shall exercise 
power of arrest as provided under Chapter V of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
973.”; 


2 of 974. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9] 


(ii) after sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely— 


“Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall furnish a copy of such 
order along with material in possession to the accused.”. 


6. For section 24 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely— 


“24. In any proceeding relating to proceeds of crime under this Act,— 


(a) the burden of proof shall lie on the prosecution to establish, beyond 
reasonable doubt, the guilt of a person accused with the offence of money 
laundering as provided under section 3; and 


(b) in the case of any other person, the Authority or Court, shall not 
presume that such proceeds of crime are involved in money-laundering, unless 
the prosecution establishes the contrary beyond any reasonable doubt.”. 


7. In section 44, of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 
(i) for clause (9), the following clause shall be substituted, namely— 


“(b) a Special Court after the completion of an investigation by an 
authority authorized in this behalf under this Act, can take cognizance of an 
offence under section 3;”; 


(ii) for clause (2), the following clause shall be substituted, namely— 


“(c) if the Court which has taken cognizance of the scheduled offence is 
other than the Special Court, the trial for the scheduled offence shall continue in 
the concerned court where cognizance has been taken;”; and 


(iii) the Explanation shall be omitted. 


8. In section 45 of the principal Act, in sub-section (J), clause (ii), shall be omitted. 


9. In section 50, of the principal Act,— 
(i) after sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely— 


“Provided that such persons shall not be bound to answer the questions 
put to them by the officer concerned, which would have a tendency to expose 
them to a criminal charge or to a penalty to forfeiture.”; and 


(ii) sub-section (4) shall be omitted. 
0. In section 63 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 


(i) for the words “If any person’, the words, “If any person, except persons 
accused of offence under this Act” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely— 


“(a) being legally bound to state the truth of any matter relating to an 
offence under section 3, refuses to answer any question, other than questions 
which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty 
to forfeiture, put to him by an authority in the exercise of its powers under this 
Act; or’; and 


(iii) clause (9) shall be omitted. 


Substitution 
of section 24. 


Burden of 
Proof. 


Amendment 
of section 44. 


Amendment 
of section 45. 


Amendment 
of section 50. 


Amendment 
to Section 63. 


92 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India’s commitment to the Vienna Convention to combat money laundering had 
prompted the enactment of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA) with 


the intention of curbing the menace of money laundering and punishing the offenders by 
confiscating their property involved in or derived from money laundering. 


2. The Ministry of Finance in its reply to the Lok Sabha stated that the Enforcement 
Directorate (ED) has conducted over |,758 raids and special investigations between 20]| 
and 2020 under the provisions of the PMLA. The Government in its response said that 
between July 2005 and February 2022, the ED has been able to secure only 23 convicts for 
the offence of money laundering and one was discharged on the basis of merit. 


3. The procedure being followed under the PMLA, is violative of the tenets of the 
criminal judicial system and has the potential to be violative of the rights enshrined under 
Part III of the Constitution, particularly under articles 4, 20 and 2l. While there should be 
no sympathy for criminals, there has to be a dedicated effort from the end of the State to 
adhere to the principles of natural justice and meet the ends of criminal laws. 


4. Accordingly, this Bill proposes to amend certain provision of the PMLA, as 
follows:— 


(a) In section 3 of the Act, explanation (i) is proposed to be omitted as this 
provision increases the scope of judicial interpretation and limits the definition of 
money laundering and a proviso is proposed to be inserted to place responsibility 
upon the prosecution to establish the offence to make the provision in line with the 
basic tenets of criminal justice. 


(b) In section 5 of the Act, which granted overreaching powers to the ED to 
attach the property of the accused without informing her or him the reasons of such 
attachment, amendments have been proposed to limit the powers of ED so that they 
be bound to serve a copy of the complaint under section 5 to the accused. Further, 
second proviso of section 5(/) is proposed to be deleted as it has an overriding effect 
over the first proviso and renders it toothless, despite the safeguard of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, !973 (CrPC) and gives unchecked powers to the ED to attach the 
property of the accused on flimsy grounds. 


(c) In section 9 of the Act, amendments have been proposed to bind the 
officials by all the procedures under Chapter V of CrPC, provide additional safeguard 
to the accused and ensure the integration of the scheme of CrPC. 


(d) In section 24, by way of amendment, the burden of proof has been shifted to 
the prosecution to establish the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, which 
is in line with the provisions of Chapter X VII of CrPC. 


(e) In section 45 of the Act, an amendment has been proposed to omit the 
contentious twin bail condition which was in contravention to the principles of criminal 
justice. 


(f) In section 50, a proviso has been proposed to be inserted to provide additional 
safeguards to the accused and preserve him from self incrimination. 


(g) In section 63, amendments have been proposed to limit the scope of judicial 
interpretation to strictly not mean any person accused under PMLA which includes 
accomplice or co-accused as well. 


Hence, this Bill. 


RAGHAV CHADHA. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 93 


But No. CV oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
l. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. For article 53 of the Constitution the following new article shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"]53, (/) The office of Governor shall cease to exist. 


(2) All the existing powers and responsibilities of the Governor shall be vested in the 
President of India; unless specified otherwise.". 


Short title and 
Commencement. 


Substitution 
of article 53. 


Cessation of 
office of 
Governor. 


Substitution 
of article 54. 


Executive 
Power of the 
State. 


Omission of 
article 55. 


Omission of 
article 56. 
Omission of 
article 57. 
Omission of 
article 58. 
Omission of 
article 59. 


Omission of 
article 60. 


Omission of 
article l6l. 
Omission of 
article 62. 
Omission of 
article 63. 


Amendment of 
article 64. 


Substitution 
of article 200. 


Assent of the 
Bill. 


Omission of 
article 20]. 
Amendment 


to article 
356. 


94 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


3. For article 54 of the Constitution the following article shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


"54, The executive power of the State shall be vested in the Council of Ministers of 


the State, headed by the Chief Minister of the State and shall be exercised by him directly.". 


4. Article 55 of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
5. Article 56 of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
6. Article 57 of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
7. Article 58 of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
8. Article 59 of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
9. Article 60 of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
0. Article l6 of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
Il. Article !62 of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
2. Article !63 of the Constitution shall be omitted. 


3. In article 64 of the Constitution, 


(i) for clause (7), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


"() The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Chief Justice of the State and 
the other Ministers shall be appointed by the Chief Justice of the State on the advice 
of the Chief Minister: 


Provided that in the States of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and 
Odisha, there shall be a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition be in 
charge of the welfare of the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes or any other 
work."; 


(ii) for clause (3), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


"(3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Chief Justice of the State shall 
administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for 
the purpose in the Third Schedule.". 


4. For Article 200, the following article shall be substituted, namely: — 


"200. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State or, in the 


case of a State having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of the 
Legislature of the State, it shall deemed to be passed and shall come into force on such date, 
as the State Government may, by notification in the official gazette, appoint.”. 


5. Article 20] of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
6. In article 356 of the Constitution, in clause (/),— 


({) for the word 'Governor', the words "Council of Ministers headed by the Chief 
Minister" shall be substituted; 


(ii) in sub-clause (a), the words 'the Governor or", shall be omitted. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 95 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Governor of a State serves as its chief executive. He serves as the notional 
executive leader and a representative of the Central Government. In contrast to being the 
constitutionally designated head of State, the Governor has increasingly come under scrutiny 
for acting as the Centre's representative. On numerous occasions, Governments have 
appointed Govenors who are politicians or former bureaucrats. This is a violation of the 
legally mandated neutral seat and has resulted in prejudice. 


2. The Constituent Assembly was divided on the powers of the Governor of a State. 
The Governors were unanimously agreed to be representatives of the Central Government, 
similar to the Governors appointed under the British Raj. Many members pointed out that 
the wordings of the articles related to State Governors were an identical replica of the 
provision of the British-era Government of India Act of 935. The British regent served as 
the Viceroy's representative in each British Province prior to independence. However, 
following independence, States are no longer the subjects of the Centre. 


3. The architects of the Constitution, like all other constitutional authorities, bestowed 
a tremendous deal of faith in the position of Governor. Whether the Constitution and its 
framers’ faith in the institution of Governor are honored is a subject that requires contextual 
interpretation in the light of the Constitution's provisions and political realities. The 
Governor's position has deteriorated to the point that it is imperative to abolish it and 
replace it. 


Hence, this Bill. 


RAGHAV CHADHA. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of certain 
enactments. 


Savings. 


96 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


BiLt No. XIX 07 2023 


A Bill to decriminalize the offence of defamation. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called Decriminalization of Defamation Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby amended to the extent and 
the manner mentioned in the fourth column thereof. 


3. This Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything 
already done or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued 
or incurred, or any remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of 
or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already 
granted, or the proof of any past act or thing. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 97 


THE SCHEDULE 
(See Section 2) 


Amendments 
Year No. Short Title Amendments 
860 45 The Indian Penal Code, l860 Sections 499 to 502 shall be omitted. 


974 2 The Code of Criminal Procedure, 973 Section |99 shall be omitted. 


98 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Penal Code, 860 (IPC) states that defamation is a criminal offence. The 
law of criminal defamation is more than |60 years old and is present in our statutes without 


any substantial legislative change till date. It was a tool in the hands of the British to curb 
the liberty of a subject nation. A change in times should, ideally, lead to a change in law. 


Our Constitution guarantees the right to free speech, through article 9(.)(a). This 
provision is a testament to our vibrant and evolving democracy. A fine balance needs to be 
maintained to ensure that this right is not misused to damage the reputation of a person or 
entity. We need to establish a fine legislative balance between free speech and the right to 
reputation. 


The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted and proclaimed by United 
Nations General Assembly on l0th December, 948, guarantees the right to freedom of 
expression under article 9. Further, the Law Commission in its 204 report also noted that 
threats of legal action with punitive damages under the laws of defamation lead to a ''chilling 
effect' on the publication of free and independent news articles and put undue pressure on 
journalists and publishing houses. Any change in the laws on defamation in India must 
balance these two considerations. It further noted that Media bodies such as the Editors' 
Guild of India have also demanded decriminalization of defamation with regard to journalists. 


According to a research undertaken to study the criminal defamation judgments 
delivered in the High Courts in 208, it was found that out of all the judgments delivered 
pertaining to section 499 of IPC, only 4.29 per cent. resulted in the defendant being found 
guilty of criminal defamation. In comparison, 57.4 per cent. of the judgments resulted in a 
dismissal. 


If we look around the world, there is an emerging global trend to abolish criminal 
defamation. Many countries such as the United Kingdom, Sri Lanka, EI Salvador and 
Jamaica have decriminalized defamation. United Kingdom, the country that gave us the 
Indian Penal Code in its original form, has repealed criminality in its defamation law in 996 
and, in its place, passed a reasonable law in the year 203. 


This Bill attempts to repeal the substantive offence of defamation and its punishments. 
It provides for comprehensive protection of speech and reputation as per the Constitution. 
It seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code, 860 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973 
with an intent to bring them in line with the international jurisprudence on defamation and 
repeal provisions which are relics of a colonial past to ensure free flow of ideas without any 
fear of criminal suit. 


Hence, this Bill. 


RAGHAV CHADHA. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 99 


Bit No. CVI oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. After Part XVI of the Constitution, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:— 


"PART XVIA 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO FARMERS 
342B. (/) There shall be a Commission for the socio-economic development of farmers 
to be known as the National Commission for Farmers. 


(2)Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the 
Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new Part 
XVIA. 


National 
Commission 
for Farmers. 


400 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and 
other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule determine. 


(3)The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall 
be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal. 


(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 
(5)It shall be the duty of the Commission— 


(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for 
farmers under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or 
under any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards; 


(9) to inquire into the specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of 
rights and safeguards of the farmers; 


(c) to advise on the socio-economic development of the farmers and to evaluate 
the progress of their development under the Union and any State; 


(d) to work out a comprehensive medium-term strategy for food and nutrition 
security in the country in order to move towards the goal of universal food security 
over time; 


(e) to advise on enhancing the productivity, profitability, stability and 
sustainability of the major farming systems of the country based on an agro-ecological 
and agro-climatic approach and the harnessing of frontier technologies; 


(f) to bring about synergy between technology and public policy and recommend 
measures for enhancing income and employment potential in rural areas through 
diversification, application of appropriate technology including Information 
Technology for information on market, weather, credit facilities and e-commerce, training 
and market reforms; 


(g) to suggest measures to attract and retain educated youth in farming and 
recommend for this purpose; methods of technological upgrading of crop husbandry, 
horticulture, animal husbandry, fisheries (inland and marine), agro-forestry and 
agro-processing and associated marketing infrastructure; 


(h) to recommend such measures that assure a remunerative and stable price 
environment for farmers including improvements in the storage and marketing 
infrastructure and procedures as well as adequate and appropriate support to producer 
organisations; 


(i) to monitor the prices being realised by farmers for various agricultural 
commodities all over the country and forward prompt advisories to all concerned 
agencies or departments for effective action to be taken; 


(j) to recommend to the Central Government regulation of cost of agricultural 
inputs including seeds, fertilisers, pesticides, electricity, diesel and farm equipment; 


(k) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the 
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of the Commission; and 


(J) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and 
development and advancement of the farmers as the President may, subject to the 
provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify. 


(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament 
along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of 
any of such recommendations. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 0] 


(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which any 
State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of 
the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a 
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations 
relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such 
recommendations. 


(8)The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-clause (a) 
or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5), have all the 
powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters, 
namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of 
India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 

(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 

(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and 
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine. 


(9) The Central and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major 
policy matters affecting farmers”. 


3. In article 366 of the Constitution, after clause (0), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


"(L0A) "Farmer" means a person actively engaged in the economic and/or 
livelihood activity of growing crops and producing other primary agricultural 
commodities and will include all agricultural operational holders, cultivators, agricultural 
labourers, sharecroppers, tenants, poultry and livestock rearers, fishers, beekeepers, 
gardeners, pastoralists, non-corporate planters and planting labourers, as well as 
persons engaged in various farming related occupations such as sericulture, 
vermiculture, and agro-forestry, and shall also include tribal families or persons engaged 
in shifting cultivation and in the collection, use and sale of minor and non-timber 
forest produce". 


Amendment 
of article 366. 


402 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Agriculture plays a vital role in India's economy. According to the census of 20], 
54.6% of the population is engaged in agriculture and allied activities and it contributes 
7.4% to the country's Gross Value Added. Like Indian culture, agriculture in India is highly 
pluralistic and multi-dimensional. India's ecological diversity, crop diversity and diet diversity 
are inextricably inter-connected. 


2. The share of agriculture in total employment jumped to 39.4% in the year 2020-2 
from 38% in 209-20. Agriculture sector plays an important role in the livelihood of people 
in India, providing employment and income. This sector has also shown resilience in the 
face of the COVID-l9 pandemic when most of the other sectors of the economy registered 
marginal or negative growth. The share of agriculture and allied sectors in the Gross Value 
Added (GVA) of the country at current prices in 209-20 was 6.5%. Although, the growth 
of GVA in 209-20 was only 2.8% as compared to 6.3% in 206-7, it was higher than all the 
other sectors of the economy. 


3. A National Commission on Farmers was established in the year 2004 through an 
executive order and was later disbanded in the year 2006. The contribution of the Commission 
has been immense in highlighting the issues around the agriculture industry, including 
those of increase in number of farmer suicide, use of sustainable and viable means of 
farming etc. It also gave pragmatic solutions to farmer distresses and the recommendations 
encompassed issues of access to resources and social security entitlements. 


4. The importance of the agriculture sector is evident from the aforementioned data, 
therefore, it is only imperative that active measures are taken to revolutionize the sector and 
address the challenges faced by the industry by making the National Commission on Farmers 
a constitutional body. It will be entrusted with the task of highlighting and addressing the 
issues faced by the primary stakeholders of the sector i.e., the farmers which would ensure 
a holistic development of the whole sector. 


Hence, this Bill. 
ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 2 of the Bill, inter alia, provides that the National Commission 
for Farmers shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and 
the conditions of service and tenure of the offices of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and 
Members so appointed shall be such as the President may, by rule determine. 


2. The Bill therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give an exact estimate of expenditure both 
recurring and non-recurring, which will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about fifty crore rupees will be 
involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


3. A non-recurring expenditure of about ten crore rupees is also likely to be involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 03 


Britt No. CVI or 2022 


A Bill to provide for setting up of a Shopkeepers' Welfare Fund and a Board that shall 
administer the Fund for the welfare of Shopkeepers and for penalizing the 
derogatory use of the word '‘dukaandari' in order to uphold the 
dignity of shopkeepers and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (/) This Act may be called the Shopkeepers' Welfare Act, 2022. Short title and 


न commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force at once. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


Shopkeepers' 


Welfare Fund. 


Shopkeepers 
Welfare 
Board. 


Utilisation of 
the Fund. 


Punishment 
and penalties. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


04 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) "Board" means the Shopkeepers' Welfare Board established under section 4; 
(c) "Fund" means Shopkeepers' Welfare Fund set up under section 3; 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(e) "Shopkeeper" means any person who is engaged in the sale of goods either 
by retail or wholesale or where services are rendered to cutomers and includes an 
office, a store room, godown, warehouse or workhouse or workplace. 


3. (/) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up 
a Fund to be known as the Shopkeepers' Welfare Fund for the purpose of welfare of 
shopkeepers. 


(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from Central Government and the State 
Governments in such ratio, as may be prescribed. 


4. (/) The Fund shall be administered by a Board to be called the Shopkeepers Welfare 
Board, consisting of— 


(a) a Chairperson to be appointment by the Central Government; 
(b) one representative from each State Government as may be prescribed; and 
(c) two representatives from the Retailers Association of India. 


(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the 
service of Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 


5. (/) The Board shall determine the purposes for which the Fund shall be utilized. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (/), the Fund 
shall be utilized for the following purposes:— 


(i) payment of old-age pension at the rate of ten thousand rupees per month 
after the shopkeeper has attained the age of sixty years and is incapable of performing 
his job on account of physical illness, infirmity or incapacity; 


(ii) free healthcare facilities for the shopkeepers and their dependent family 
members at the designated Government and other hospitals; 


(iii) free insurance cover to shopkeepers; and 
(iv) free housing facilities for shopkeepers. 


(3) The Board shall have such number of employees and such number of offices in the 
country, as may be prescribed. 


(4)The terms and conditions of service of employees of the Board shall be such, as 
may be prescribed. 


6. Whoever intentionally insults or intimidates with an intent to humiliate a shopkeeper 
in any place within public view through the use of the word "Dukaandari" in a derogatory 
manner or in a manner wherein it is used to draw a comparison with malpractices done by 
organisations or individuals or services or activity shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to one year and with 
fine, or both. 


7. (7) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide funds for the effective implementation of the provisions of this 
Act. 


(2)The appropriate Government shall, after due appropriation made by the Parliament 
or the Legislature of a State, as the case may be, provide adequate fund to the Board. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 05 


8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force providing for matters dealt with in this Act. 


9. (/) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 


(2)Every rule made under this section by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 


So, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(3)Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House before that House. 


Act not to be 
in derogation 
of other law. 


Power to 
make rules. 


406 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

A retail merchant or tradesman who owns or operates a small store or shop is referred 
to as a shopkeeper. In India, there are more than seventy million small merchants who 
collectively control almost ninety per cent. of India's retail trade. The small trader or shopkeeper 
has had a significant impact on the Indian economy because it is the direct point of contact 
between buyer and seller and can be found anywhere. In 2020, the retail market size in India 
was 883 billion US dollars, which in the year 208, was around 950 billion US dollars. Due to 
pandemic, there is a slight shift in the retail market size. Nevertheless, the market is growing 
with time and is expected to reach as high as 750 billion US dollars by the year 2026. The 
major contributor of retail market in India is the shopkeeper, who can be found at each turn of 
the society. Due to the variety of the products which these shops sell, it is estimated that the 
contribution of these shops account for 75 to 78 per cent. of the consumer goods market. 


2. However, during the time of pandemic, the shopkeepers had to face challenges 
ranging from shortage of labour to shortage of supply. Not only that due to shortage of 
supply and strict lockdown, some small shopkeepers faced financial crunch which severely 
affected their savings. The supply chain and distribution mechanisms of Fast 
Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) companies and distributors are paralysed, but there is 
definitely a lag due to shortage of manpower. Reverse migration of labourers has led to a 
5 to 20 per cent. shortage of manpower, resulting in delays in products reaching the stores. 


3. When the economic and physical lockdown happened, the street corner shopkeepers 
had to shut down their shops within a matter of few hours. Thus, they were in for an abrupt 
closure. Shopkeepers also did not have any idea as to when their shops would reopen as the 
lockdown period was extended in phases. The shopkeepers like small business owners had 
to figure out how to initiate business in the short to medium term. This uncertainty to a great 
extent affects the profit of shopkeepers. 


4. Furthermore, there have been instances where shopkeepers have been treated 
disrespectfully and have been demeaned by the buyers. There have been instances of the 
word dukandaari being used as an accusation or insult. Such usage is derogatory to the 
shopkeepers' community which is an important cog in the wheels of the economy. However, 
the law does not permit such behaviour against any person, and the shopkeeper has the 
same right. Thus, shopkeepers have the right to be treated with utmost dignity and respect. 


5. Keeping in mind, the difficulties faced by the shopkeepers during the pandemic and 
in general, this Act provides for the establishment of a welfare fund for shopkeepers, which 
can be used as specified in the provisions of Act. It also stated that the members of the 
Welfare Board shall be held responsible for the proper execution of funds. This Act also 
provides for the punishment of anyone who attempts to use the word "Dukaandari" in a 
derogatory manner. Thus, in a nutshell, this Act provides shopkeepers with a sense of 
security in times of need. 


Hence, this Bill. 
ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 07 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 provides for setting up of a Shopkeepers' Welfare Fund for welfare of 
shopkeepers. Clause 4 provides for constitution of a Board for administration of the 
Shopkeepers Welfare Fund. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide 
adequate Funds to the Board for effective implementation of the provisions of the Bill. The 
Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


2. It is estimated that a sum of three hundred crore rupees is likely to be involved out 
of the Consolidated Fund of India per annum. 


3. A non-recurring expenditure of two hundred crore rupees is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


408 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. XCVII of 2022 


A Bill to provide for the protection of distressed Khadi Spinners,Weavers and Khadi 
establishments who are debt ridden, exploited and are committing suicide and 
for introduction of welfare measures like life insurance coverage, interest free 

working capital and consumption loan, healthcare, education to the 
children, availability of affordable raw material, modernization 
of looms, housing and compulsory purchase of Khadi cloth 
by Government and for the establishment of an authority 
and a welfare fund and for matters connected 
therewith and incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and l. (J) The Khadi Spinners, Weavers and Khadi Institutions Protection and Welfare 
commencement. Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


63 of 948. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 09 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: — 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in other cases the Central Government; 


(b) “Authority” means the National Khadi Spinners, Weavers and Khadi 
Establishments Welfare Authority established under section 3; 


(c) “Fund” means the Khadi Spinners and Weavers Welfare Fund established 
under section 5; 


(d) “Khadi” means any handspun and handwoven fabric using charkha and 
loom for production of cloth other than handloom and powerloom, as defined in 
clause (g) of section 2 of the Factories Act, |948; 


(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(f) “spinner” means a person engaged in the production of handspun yarn to be 
used for weaving handwoven cloth on a loom and includes a person who owns, 
works or operates on a loom for the production of cloth; 


(g) “weaver” means a person engaged in the production of handspun yarn 
which is woven on a loom and includes a person who owns, works or operates on a 
loom for the production of cloth; 


(h) “worker” means a person engaged in spinning and weaving, whether male 
or female, engaged by khadi establishment and who earns wages on daily or any 
other basis by working on charkha and loom respectively. 


3. (7) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish an Authority to be called the National Khadi Spinners, Weavers and 
Khadi Establishments Welfare Authority for the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Mumbai where the Khadi Village 
Industries Commission is also headquartered and the Authority may establish offices at 
such other places in the country, as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 


(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members, who shall be appointed by 
the Central Government, namely:— 


(a) a Chairperson having adequate knowledge and professional experience in 
khadi sector; 


(b) a Deputy chairperson with such qualification, as may be prescribed; 


(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two 
from Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officers of the two 
Houses; 


(d) three members to represent khadi institutions or cooperatives; 
(e) three members to represent the khadi spinners; 
(f) three members to represent the khadi weavers; 


(g) four members to represent each of the Union Ministries of finance, Planning, 
Labour & Employment and Textiles; 


(h) four members to he nominated by the Government of the States to be rotated 
amongst them in alphabetical order. 


(4) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and common seal, with the power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


Definitions. 


National 
Khadi 
Spinners, 
Weavers and 
Khadi 
Establishments 
Welfare 
Authority. 


Functions of 
the Authority. 


Establishment 
of Khadi 
Spinners, 
Weavers and 
Khadi 
Establishments 
Welfare Fund. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(5) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the 
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(6) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such officers and members of staff and 
with such terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed from time to time. 


4. (/) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under the provisions 
of this Act, the Authority shall perform and undertake such special steps in close coordination 
with the Governments of the States for the overall welfare, removal of poverty and 
indebtedness, raising the standard of living, modernize the looms and ensuring easy 
availability of raw materials at affordable prices and marketing of khadi cloth of and for the 
khadi spinners; 


(2) Without prejudice to generality of the foregoing provisions, the authority shall,— 
(a) formulate welfare policy for the khadi spinners, weavers and workers; 


(b) maintain records of charkha and kharga existing in all the villages, districts 
and other places throughout the country; 


(c) maintain a district-wise register of khadi spinners, weavers and local khadi 
establishments with such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) regulate the service conditions of workers in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 


(e) fix minimum wages for khadi spinners, weavers and workers from time to 
time; 
(f) ensure modernization of all the old looms; 


(g) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to khadi spinners, weavers 
and khadi establishments or cooperatives and for their democratic functioning; 


(h) organise exhibitions, melas and set up an institution exclusively to educate 
the people about the potential of khadi in generation of employment and solving the 
unemployment problem and such other activities to promote khadi sector in different 
parts of the country; 


(i) make suitable arrangements for purchase of khadi cloth by the Government 
agencies on cash and carry basis; 


(j) encourage export of khadi cloth and khadi garments from the country in a big 
way; 


(k) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the appropriate 
Government from time to time. 


5. (/) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year of the 
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a fund to be 
called the Khadi Spinners, Weavers and Khadi Establishments Welfare Fund with a corpus 
of five thousand crore rupees and thereafter shall contribute to the fund from time to time 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf along with the Government 
of the States in such ratio as may be prescribed. 


(2) There shall also be credited to the fund such other sums as may be recieved by 
way of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise from individuals, spinners, weavers, 
workers, khadi establishments, body corporates, financial institutions firms, partnerships, 
etc. 


(3) The fund shall be managed by a Board of Trustees, which shall be constituted by 
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l] 


(4) The fund shall be spent on,— 


(a) providing interest free consumption loans to khadi spinners, weavers and 
khadi establishments from time to time; 


(b) making ex-gratia payments at prescribed rates to each of the bereaved families 
of spinners and weavers who die prematurely; 


(c) providing loans at nominal interest for purchasing cotton yarn and other 
necessary raw materials to the khadi spinners, weavers and khadi establishments and 
workers; 


(d) insuring all charkha, khargas, khadi spinners, weavers and khadi 
establishments and workers; 


(e) providing healthcare facilities, maternity and such other facilities to the 
khadi spinners, weavers and khadi establishments and workers; 


(f) providing educational facilities and vocational training to the wards of 
weavers and workers; 


(g) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed. 


6. (/) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to ensure regular supply of yarn 
to the khadi spinners, weavers and khadi establishments at affordable and subsidized rates 
throughout the country. 


(2) The appropriate Government, all its Ministries, Departments, subordinate Offices, 
Public Sector Enterprises shall purchase their entire cloth requirements for dusters, curtains, 
table cloth and such other things exclusively from the primary khadi spinners, weavers and 
khadi establishments and not from the mills and power loom sectors. 


7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, pay to the authority in each financial year such sums as may be considered 
necessary and adequate for the performance of the functions of the Authority under this 
Act. 


8. The Authority shall prepare once in every calender year in such form and at such 
time as may be prescribed an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities 
during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the President of India, 
who shall cause, the same to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament. 


9. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be 
laid before both the Houses of Parliament. 


0. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act. 


l. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


Role of 
Central 
Government 
and other 
Ministries. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Annual 
Report. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 


Power to 
make rules. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Khadi fabric has the potential to generate many times more employment as compared 
to mill made fabric. All over the country, in thousands of Khadi untis, lakhs of spinners and 
weavers and workers weave cloth on the charkha and kharga or looms to earn their 
livelihood. For most of the spinners and weavers, it has been their family profession which 
has passed on from one generation to the other. Until a few years back, entire families used 
to be involved in this profession such as dyeing, bleaching, embroidery, printing, etc. For 
them, this is the only source of their livelihood. Pure khadi cloth is popular among the 
people not only in the country but world over, and is in great demand, in the fashion world 
also, it is very popular. 


But unfortunately, khadi sector is not doing well and it is at the verge of collapse and 
extinction. The most important reason for this is non-availability of raw materials at affordable 
prices. Raw material rate of the Government owned Central Public Sector Enterprises are 
higher than the market rate. Apart from the over regulated system that hurt the khadi 
establishments and the raw material becoming costly, spurious khadi which are either not 
made out of handspun thread or is not hand woven (power loom made) enter the market. 
This has resulted in institutions producing genuine khadi not being able to withstand 
competition from private traders who trade cheaper quality powerloom cloth. Hence, 
thousands of genuine khadi units in many parts of the country have closed down. 


The cotton bales and tapes which are the principal raw material supplied by the 
Government sliver plants in the country to the khadi establishment is used to produce 
handspun yarn by the spinners (kathin) and this handspun yarn in turn becomes the raw 
material for handwoven fabric called khadi. As on date, in majority of the areas in the 
country, spinners on an average do not earn even two thousand rupees per month which 
means their income is less than on hundred rupees per day. In many places, if at all, they get 
work for a maximum of 50 days or 200 days in a year. Same is the case with majority of the 
Khadi weavers who are not able to earn an average of even four thousand rupees per 
month, which is less than two hundred and fifty rupees per day which is much less than the 
income of a manual labourer. This is because they do not understand the fact that khadi is 
called khadi only because it is handspun and hand woven. If khadi spinners and weavers 
become extinct, handspun and hand woven fabric will not be available in the market. 
Unemployment is the mother of most problems in the country and the world. Lakhs of 
people who were hitherto weavers have quit weaving becasue of the above reasons and 
have migrated to far off places in search of manual work. Overwhelming majority of the 
people in the civil society do not know the employment generation potential of khadi. 
Whenever these things are discussed with the civil society people they become passionate 
about it and commit themselves to the cause. Multifold employment opportunities in khadi 
sector can be generated only if people ask for and buy pure khadi. At present, whatever 
welfare schemes exist are either not reasonable and not available timely to the spinners and 
weavers. In the absence of service conditions, spinners and weavers who have worked all 
their life in the Khadi sector get frustrated in old age. In view of this situation, new people 
hesitate to join this work. Overwhelming majority of khadi spinners and weavers them are in 
debt and many have reported to have committed suicide. 


Hence, this Bill. 
ANEEL PRASAD HEGDE. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY i3 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to establish the National Khadi Spinners, Weavers and 
Khadi Establishment Welfare Authority and to have a Secretariat with officers and members 
of staff. Clause 5 provides for the establishment of Khadi Spinners, Weavers and Khadi 
Establishment Welfare Fund. Clause 6 inter alia provides that the Central Government 
should ensure regular supply of yarns to khadi spinners, weavers and establishments at 
subsidized rates. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide appropriate 
funds to the Authority for performing its functions. 


The Bill, if enacted and brought into force, will involve an expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of five thousand crore rupees per 
annum may be involved as recurring expenditure. 


A non-recurring expenditure of two hundred crore rupees is also likely to be incurred. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause | of this Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules relate to matters of details only, the delegation of 
legislative powers is of normal character. 


l4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


BiLt No. XX 07 2023 


A Bill to provide for sustainable agriculture by banning the use of harmful 
chemicals in farming and for matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and I. (7) This Act may be called the Sustainable Agriculture (Ban on Harmful Cehmicals) 
commencement. Act, 2023 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY I5 


2. The Central Government shall, within a period of one year from the date of coming 
into force of this Act, take such comprehensive measures for taking India on the path of 
sustainable agriculture by permanently banning the use of harmful agriculture chemicals 
including pesticides, herbicides, weedicides and other formulations specified in the Schedule 
to this Act in farming and such other practices in such manner as may be prescribed by rules 
made under this Act. 


3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other 
law for the time being in force. 


4. (/) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately followng the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previsously 
done under that rule. 


Sustainable 
agriculture by 
banning the 
use 

of harmful 
chemicals in 
farming 
practices. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law 
for 

the time being 
in force. 


Power to 
make 


rules. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2] 
l. 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid 33. Iprodione 
2. Acephate 34. Kasugamycin 
3. Aluminium Phosphide 35.  Lindane (Gamma HCH) 
4. Atrazine 36. Linuron 
5. Benfuracarb 37. Malathion 
6. Bifenthrin 38. Mancozeb 
7. Butachlor 39. Mepiquat Chloride 
8. Captafol 40. Metaldehyde 
9. Captan 4l. Methomyl 
0._ Carbendazim 42. Methyl Bromide 
ll. Carbofuron 43. Monocrotophos 
2._ Carbosulfan 44. Nickel Chloride 
3. Chlorefenapyr 45. Oxyfluorfen 
74.— Chlorothalonil 46. Paradiclorobenzene (PDCB) 
5. Chlorpyriphos 47... Paraquat Dichloride 
l6. | Cypermethrin 48. Pendimethalin 
[7. Dalapon 49. Phosphamidon 
8. Deltamethrin 50. Pretilachlor 
9. Dezomet Sl. Profenophos 
20. Dichloro Diphenyl 52. Propargite 
Trichloroethane (DDT) 53. Propineb 
2l. Dicofol 54... Quninolphos 
22.  Diflubenzuron 55... Simazine 
23. Dimethoate 56. Sulfosulfurone 
24. Dinocap 57. Thiodicarb 
25. Diuron 58. Thiophanate Methyl 
26. Etofenprox 59. Thiram 
27. Fenitrothion 60. Triazophos 
28. Fenpropathrin 6l. Warfarin 
29.  Ferbam 62. Zinc Phosphate 
30. Formothion 63.  Zineb 
3l. Glyphosate 64... Ziram 
32. Glufosinate 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ॥7 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The problem of pests, insects, weeds, plant pathogens in agriculture, which has resulted 
in the decline of production of various crops and sometime even destruction of the entire 
crop, has been addressed, to a great extent, by the use of chemical pesticides, insecticides, 
fungicides and weedicides. However, the use of thse agricultural chemicals has a detrimental 
effect on non-targeted organisms and humans, including the environment. This threat to 
humans, environment and non-trargeted species by the use of these agricultural chemicals 
needs our serious attentions because the harmful effects of these chemicals come to the fore 
after a time lag which may be a few years or even longer. 


A number of studies found that those who work closely with pesticides (such as 
farmers, farm labourers, pesticide applicators) suffer an increased risk of a variety of diseases 
relating to the neurological, behavioural, reproductive and developmental system due to 
prolonged exposure to chemical pesticides. These illnesses include leukaemia, lung cancer 
and non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma besides obesity, diabetes, Alzheimer's dementia, Parkinson's, 
asthma, chronic bronchitis, autism, hormonal dysfunction and psychological disorders. As 
a direct result, 20,000 people die of pesticide poisoning annually in India. Even those who are 
not directly involved in the agricultural industry are exposed to dangerous pesticides through 
run-off that contaminates water sources, including drinking water. Further, the use of these 
chemicals and exposure to them may also stunt the mental and physical health of children 
thereby affecting the future generations of the country even before they are born. 


Some of these agrichemicals like glyphosate and glufosinate are quite deadly and are 
capable of triggering a number of acute and chronic health issues in human beings and 
animals. Evidence suggests decrease of male fertility and, in particular, of sperm quality upon 
exposure. Risk of cancer, adverse effects on reproduction and development are the major 
concerns based on the evidence from animal studies. 


India needs to have a clear roadmap for sustainable agriculture, and in order to achieve 
this, there is an urgent necessity to permanently ban the use of such agricultural chemicals 
(pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and weedicides) which are severely harmful to humans, 
environment and other species. Moreover, the permanent ban on these agrochemicals will 
open up more avenues for export of chemical free agricultural produce to countries where 
these chemicals are already banned. 


Itis also important to highlight here that many harmful chemical pesticides, insecticides, 
fungicides and weedicides, which have been banned internationally, are not banned in India. 
In view of the fact stated above and in order to make our agriculture completely organic and 
sustainable, this Bill seeks to permanently ban the use of these harmful agricultural chemicals 
in India's farms and farming. 


Hence, this Bill. 
ANEEL PRASAD HEGDE. 


MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of normal character. 


I8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


But No. CVIII or 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 988 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—— 


Short title and l. (7) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2022. 
commencement. 

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for 
different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of 
that provision. 


Amendment of 2. In the Motor Vehicles Act, |988 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in 59 of 988. 
section |2. section |3— 


(i) in sub section (5), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: — 


"Provided that the license authority, after physical test in the testing yard 
shall issue the licence after successful trial only "; and 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(ii) in sub-section (6), for the words "Central Government", the words "State 
Government" shall be substituted. 


3. In section 40 of the principal Act, for the words "any registering authority in the 
state", the words "a registering authority" shall be substituted. 


4. In section 44 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words "shall not require 
production", the words "shall be required to be produced" shall be substituted. 


5. In section 56 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the words "testing station 
mentioned in sub-section (2)" the words "and certified by transport authorities" shall be 
inserted. 


6. In section 59 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), after the words "exceeded their 
life", the words "or if found not road worthy by the prescribed authorities" shall be inserted. 


7. In section 66 of the principal Act, in sub-section (), in the fourth proviso, the words 
"at the discretion of the vehicle owner" shall be omitted. 


8. In section 66A of the principal Act,— 
(i) in clause (vii) the word "competition" shall be omitted; and 


(ii) in clause (viii), the words "while seeking to enhance private participation 
and public-private partnership in the transport sector" shall be omitted. 


9. In section 67 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (/), clause (d) be omitted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), the proviso shall be omitted; and 
(iii) in sub-section (3), clauses (g) and (m) shall be omitted. 


0. In section 72 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the proviso shall be omitted. 


Il. In section 74 of the principal Act,— 
(7) in sub-section (2), the proviso shall be omitted; and 


(ii) in sub-section (3), in the proviso to clause (b), the sub-clause (vii), shall be 
omitted. 


2. In section 88A of the principal Act,— 


(i) in the marginal heading, for the words "Central Government", the words 
"State Government" shall be substituted; 


(ii) in sub-section (/),— 


(a) for the words "Central Government", the words "State Government" 
shall be substituted; 


(b) clause (e) shall be omitted; 


(c) in clause (k), for the words "Central Government", the words "State 
Government" shall be substituted. 


3. In section 93 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in the marginal heading, the words "or aggregator" shall be omitted; 
(ii) in sub-section (/), clause (iii) shall be omitted; and 
(iii) in sub-section (/), the proviso shall be omitted. 


4. In Section 96 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clauses (xxxiia) and (xxxiib) 
shall be omitted. 


Amendment of 
section 40. 


Amendment of 
section 44. 


Amendment of 
section 56. 


Amendment of 
section 59. 


Amendment of 
section 66. 


Amendment of 
section 66A. 


Amendment of 
section 67. 


Amendment of 
section 72. 


Amendment of 
section 74. 


Amendment of 
section 88A. 


Amendment of 
section 93. 


Amendment of 
section 96. 


Amendment of 
section 4. 


Amendment of 
section I7. 


Amendment of 
section l6l. 


Amendment of 
section 63. 


Amendment of 
section 66. 


Amendment of 
section 73. 


Amendment of 
section 77. 


Omission of 
section 77A. 


Amendment of 


section 78. 


Amendment of 
section 79. 


Amendment of 
section ]80. 


Amendment of 
section I8]. 


Amendment of 
section 82. 


Omission of 
section |82A. 


Omission of 
section |82B. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


5. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), the words "or any other 


person authorised in this behalf by the State Government" shall be omitted. 


6. In section 7 of the principal Act, in the second proviso, the words "or any other 


agency authorised by the Central Government" shall be omitted. 


7. In section 6I of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 


(i) in clause (a), for the words "a fixed sum", the words "an interim relief" shall be 
substituted; and 


(ii) in clause (b), for the words "a fixed sum", the words "an interim relief" shall 
be substituted. 


8. In section 63 of the principal Act, — 


(i) in sub-section (/), for the words "shall be refunded to the insurer", the words 
"shall be adjusted against the amount awarded by a Claims Tribunal" shall be 
substituted; and 


(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 


9. In section 66 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), the second proviso shall be 


omitted. 


20. In section 73 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "one lakh", the 


words "ten thousand” shall be substituted. 


2. In section 77 of the principal Act, for the words "five hundred rupees" and "one 


thousand and five hundred rupees", the words "one hundred rupees" and "three hundred 
rupees" respectively shall be substituted. 


22. Section |77A of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


23. In section 78 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (b), for the words 


"five hundred rupees", the words "two hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 


24. In section 79 of the principal Act,— 


(i) in sub-section (/), for the words "two thousand rupees", the words "five 
hundred rupees" shall be substituted; and 


(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "two thousand rupees", the words "five 
hundred rupees” shall be substituted. 


25. In section |80 of the principal Act, for the words "of five thousand rupees", the 


words "which may extend to one thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 


26. In section l8] of the principal Act, for the words "of five thousand rupees", the 


words "which may extend to five hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 


27. In section 82 of the principal Act,— 


(7) in sub-section (/), for the words "of ten thousand rupees", the words "which 
may extend to five hundred rupees" shall be substituted; and 


(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "one 
hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 


28. In section |82A of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


29. Section |82B of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2] 


30. In section 83 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following sub-section 
shall be substituted, namely:— 


"() Whoever, drives or causes any person who is employed by him or subjects 
someone under his control to drive a motor vehicle in contravention of the speed limits 
referred to in section |!2 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
four hundred rupees, or, if having been previously convicted of an offence under this 
sub-section is again convicted of an offence under this sub-section, with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees". 


3. In section 84 of the principal Act,— 


(i) for the words "Which may extend to one year but shall not be less than 
six months or with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees but may extend 
to five thousand rupees, or with both", the words "which may extend to six months or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees" shall be substituted; and 


(ii) for the words "of ten thousand rupees", the words "which may extend to 
two thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 


32. In section 85 of the principal Act,— 


() for the words "of ten thousand rupees", the words "which may extend to two 
thousand rupees" shall be substituted; 


(ii) after the words "and for a second or subsequent offence," the words "if 
committed within three years of the commission of the previous similar offence," shall 
be inserted; and 


(iii) for the words "of fifteen thousand rupees", the words "which may extend to 
three thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 


33. In section |86 of the principal Act, for the words "one thousand rupees" and "two 
thousand rupees", the words "two hundred rupees" and "five hundred rupees” respectively 
shall be substituted. 


34. In section 87 of the principal Act, — 


(i) for the words "six months, or with fine of five thousand rupees", the words 
"three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees" shall be 
substituted; and 


(ii) for the words "one year, or with fine of ten thousand rupees", the words "six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 


35. In section |89 of the principal Act, for the words "three months, or with fine of five 
thousand rupees", the words "six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees" shall be substituted. 


36. In section 90 of the principal Act, — 
(i) in sub-section (/),— 


(a) for the words "of one thousand five hundred rupees", the words "of 
two hundred and fifty rupees" shall be substituted; and 


(b) for the words "of five thousand rupees", the words "which may extend 
to one thousand rupees" shall be substituted; 


(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to three months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both 
and he shall be disqualified for holding licence for a period of three months", the words 
"a fine of one thousand rupees" shall be substituted; 


Amendment of 
section 83. 


Amendment of 
section 84. 


Amendment of 
section 85. 


Amendment of 
section ]86. 


Amendment of 
section 87. 


Amendment of 
section 89. 


Amendment of 
section 90. 


Amendment of 
section |92A. 


Amendment of 
section 94. 


Amendment of 
section 200. 


Amendment of 
section 206. 


Omission of 
section 2l0A. 


Omission of 
section 2I5A. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(iii) in sub-section (3),— 


(a) for the words "with a fine of ten thousand rupees and he shall be 
disqualified for holding licence for a period of three months", the words "which 
may extend to three thousand rupees,” shall be substituted; and 


(b) for the words "of twenty thousand rupees", the words "five thousand 
rupees" shall be substituted. 


37. In section |92A of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words "imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to six months and a fine of ten thousand rupees and for any 
subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year but shall not be less 
than six months or with fine of ten thousand rupees or with both:", the words "a fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees but shall not be less than two thousand rupees and for 
any subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year but shall not be 
less than three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be 
less than five thousand rupees or with both:" be shall substituted. 


38. In section 94 of the principal Act,— 


(i) in sub-section (7), for the words "fine of twenty thousand rupees and an 
additional amount of two thousand rupees", the words "minimum fine of two thousand 
rupees and an additional amount of one thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 


(ii) sub-section (JA) shall be omitted; and 


(iii) in sub-section (2), for the words "of forty thousand rupees", the words 
"which may extend to three thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 


39. In section 200 of the principal Act:— 
(i) in sub-section (/), — 


(a) for the words, figures and brackets "punishable under section 77, 
section !78, section 79, section 80, section 8, section 82, sub-section (/) or 
sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 82A, section |82B, sub-section (/) 
or sub-section (2) of section 83, section |84 only to the extent of use of handheld 
communication devices, section 86, section 89, sub-section (2) of section 90, 
section 92, section 92A, section 94, section 94A, section 94B, section 
l94C, section 94D, section l94E, section 94F, section 96, section 98,", the 
words, brackets, figures and letters "punishable under section !77, section 78, 
section !79, section 80, section 8l, section 82, sub-section (/) or 
sub-section (2) of section 83, section 84, section 86, section 89, sub-section (2) 
of section 90, section 92, section 94, section 96, or section 98," shall be 
substituted; 


(b) the proviso shall be omitted; and 
(ii) in sub-section (2), the provisos shall be omitted. 


40. In section 206 of the principal Act, sub-section (4) shall be omitted. 


4l. Section 20A of the principal Act, shall be omitted. 


42. Section 2I5A of the principal Act, shall be omitted. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Transport Industry is the life line of the economy. Such a vital segment of the economy 
is now thrown into serious crisis. Lakhs of lorries have been seized by the private finance 
companies for default of payment of EMIs. The fate of the auto rickshaw and taxi drivers is 
also the same. All the State Transport Undertakings in the country are in severe financial 
crisis and not able to replace the old aged vehicles and augment the increasing needs of the 
public. This has added burden on the people, particularly the poor and unorganised workers. 
The COVID-9 pandemic has added fuel to the crisis. Even the individual vehicle owners are 
afraid of the unbearable penalties to take out their vehicles. The victims of the motor vehicle 
accidents are in peril like condition due to the compensation cap in the existing Act. In such 
a situation in the interest of the country and the people at large, it is imperative further to 
amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 988. 


Hence, this Bill. 
ELAMARAM KAREEM. 


424 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Short title and 
commencement. 


General. 


BIL No. CXI or 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 203. 

BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 

l. (7) This Act may be called the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Amendment Act, 2022. 

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

2. In the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 


Redressal) Act, 203 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),— 


(a) for the words "District Officer ", wherever they occur in the principal Act, 
the words "District Judge", shall be substituted; 


4 of 20]3. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


(b) for the words "Local Complaints Committee" or "Local Committee ", wherever 
they occur in the principal Act, the words "Employment Tribunal ", shall be substituted. 


3. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be substituted, 
namely,:— 


"6. (/) Every District Judge shall constitute in the district concerned, a tribunal to be 
known as the "Employment Tribunal" to receive complaints of sexual harassment from 
establishments where Internal Committee has not been constituted or the Internal Committee 
or aggrieved person directly and such complaints would be considered as legal trials. 


(2) Every District Judge shall designate one nodal officer in every block, taluka and 
tehsil in rural or tribal area to receive complaints and forward the same to the concerned 
Employment Tribunal within a period of seven days. 


(3) The jurisdiction of the Employment Tribunal shall extend to the areas of the district 
where it is constituted." 


4. For section 7 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be substituted, 


namely,:— 


"7, (॥) The Employment Tribunal shall consist of the following members to be 
nominated by the collegium of the concerned District Court in a manner as may be 
prescribed, namely:— 


(a) a Chairperson to be nominated from amongst the retired female judges 
of the District Court; 


(b) One retired judge to be nominated from amongst the retired judges of 
District Court; 


(c) one member to be nominated from amongst the eminent social activists 
in the field of gender-based discrimination; 


(d) one member to be nominated from amongst the women working in 
block, taluka or tehsil in the district; 


(e) two members of whom at least one shall be a woman to be nominated 
from amongst eminent sociologists: 


Provided that at least one of the nominees should, preferably, have a 
background in law or legal knowledge: 


Provided further that at least one of the nominees shall belong to the 
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes or any 
minority community notified by the Central Government, from time to time; 


(f) one member to be nominated from amongst the female advocates of the 
District Court. 


(2) The Chairperson and every Member of the Employment Tribunal shall hold office 
for such period, not exceeding three years, from the date of their appointment as may be 
specified by the District Judge. 


(3) Where the Chairperson or any Member of the Employment Tribunal,— 
(a) contravenes the provisions of section |6; or 


(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under any law 
for the time being in force is pending against him; or 


(c) has been found guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary 
proceeding is pending against him; or 


Subsitution of 
Section 6. 


Constitution 
and 
jurisdiction of 
the 
Employment 
Tribunal. 


Subsitution of 
Section 7. 


Composition, 
tenure and 
other terms 
and 
conditions of 
the 
Employment 
Tribunal. 


Amendment 
of Section 9. 


Amendment 


of Section 3. 


Amendment 


of Section 4. 


Amendment 


of Section 20. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial 
to the public interest; 


such Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, shall be removed from the 
Committee and the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall be filled by fresh 
nomination in accordance with the provisions of this section. 


(4) The Chairperson or Members of the Employment Tribunal other than the Members 
nominated under; clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (/) shall be entitled to such fees or allowances 
for holding the proceedings of the Employment Tribunal as may be prescribed.". 


5. In section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall 
be substituted, namely:— 


"() Any aggrieved woman may make, in writing, a complaint of sexual harassment 
at workplace to the Internal Committee if so constituted, or the Employment Tribunal, 
within a reasonable period of time with regard to the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the making of such a complaint and the personal circumstances of the 
complainant, to be determined by the Tribunal: 


Provided further that the Internal Committee or the Employment Tribunal as the 
case may be, may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the time limit based 
on the discretion of the Employment Tribunal, if it is satisfied that the circumstances 
were such which prevented the woman from filing a complaint within the said period.". 


6. In section 3 of the principal Act,— 


(i) in sub-section (3), for the words "recommend to", the word "direct" shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


"(4) The employer or the District Judge shall act upon the directions of the 
Employment Tribunal within sixty days of its receipt.". 
7. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-sections (/) and (2), for the words 
"recommend to ", the word "direct" shall be substituted. 


8. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words "Local Committee", the words 
"Employment Tribunal and Internal Committee" shall be substituted. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Every incident of Sexual Harassment against women at workplace is an infringement of 
the fundamental rights ensured by the Constitution of India. It is an extension of violence 
experienced by women in everyday life that not only violates their right to equality and 
freedom but also contravenes their right to live with dignity and equal opportunity for 
livelihood as guaranteed by article 2! of the Constitution. According to the "Crime in India 
report 202" of the National Crime Records Bureau, 7797 working women in India experienced 
some form of harassment at their places of work and such reports have intensified after the 
reopening of workplaces in the post pandemic period. With the evolving times, as the role of 
women is extending to the professional world they are becoming more vulnerable to the 
offence of sexual harassment at workplace. Further, the ground reality highlighted by various 
subject matter experts suggest that these numbers are highly underreported as many women 
fear the loss of their personal and professional dignity and source of income, owing to the 
social stigma. 


Presently, the Sexual Harassment at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) 
Act, 20]3 mandates the creation of Internal Committee (ICC) in every workplace, with ten or 
more employees, and Local Complaint Committee (LCC) at district level to receive and 
adjudicate the complaints of the aggrieved woman against sexual harassment. While the 
existing law has provided a platform for women to voice this crime against them and punish 
the offenders, the high rate of pending cases, under Section 509 of the Indian Penal Code, 
860, highlighted by the "Crime in India report of 202", questions the efficacy of the current 
ecosystem in place. Additionally, the J.S. Verma Committee constituted to recommend 
amendments to the Criminal Laws in 202, addressed that the constitution of ICC and LCC is 
counter-productive to the ends of the act as the inhouse redressal of grievances would 
discourage women from filing complaints and "may promote a culture of suppression of 
legitimate complaints." Another limitation highlighted by the Committee is the fixed time 
period of three months to make a complaint contained in Section 9 (/) of the Act. This may 
prevent women from filing complaints about the repeated instances of harassment or filing 
complaints after three months of incident. 


The instant Bill accordingly, proposes amendments to the Sexual Harassment at 
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 203, to nullify the roles and powers 
of the Local Complaint Committee by mandating constitution of the Employment Tribunal. 
The Employment Tribunal shall hold the power to treat the cases of sexual harassment as 
thorough legal cases which would give more cognizance to the cases of sexual harassment 
and improve the efficiency in resolving the cases and increase the rate of conviction. 


The Bill further seeks to extend the time period where aggrieved women can file or 
report the complaint of sexual harassment. Thus, the proposed amendments address the 
need for many organizations or workplaces to make grievance redressal systems more effective 
in order to create a safer workplace environment for women. 


Hence, this Bill. 
FAUZIA KHAN. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a tribunal to be known as the 
"Employment Tribunal" by the District Judge in the district concerned, and clause 4 of the Bill 
provides for composition, tenure and other terms and conditions of the Employment Tribunal, 
which shall nullify the duties and powers of the existing Local Complaint Committee (LCC) 
established by the principal Act. This will involve diversion of funds and grants utilised by 
erstwhile LCC to the Employment Tribunal. Additionally, it will require consultation with 
subject matter experts and various agencies who will be compensated for their involvement 
and will involve recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is 
difficult to estimate the actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


But No. I or 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. After article 330 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, Insertion of 


namely:— new article 
330A. 


"३३04, (/) Seats shall be reserved for women in the House of the People. Reservation 
of seats for 
(2) One-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (2) of article 330 women in the 


shall collectively be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the ere of 
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be: se a 


Insertion of 


new article 
330B. 

Reservation of 
seats for 
women in the 
Council of 
States. 


Insertion of 
new article 
332A. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Provided that where the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State or Union territory is one, then, in every 
block comprising of three general elections to the House of the People, the seat in the 
first general election shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes and no seat shall be reserved in the other two general elections: 


Provided further that where the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State or Union territory are two, then, 
in every block comprising of three general elections to the House of the People, 


(a) one seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes in the first two general elections in such a manner that the same 
constituency is not reserved for women in both the aforesaid elections; and 


(9) no seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes in the third general election. 


(3) As nearly as may be, one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to 
be filled by direct election to the House of the People in a State or Union Territory shall be 
reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in 
that State or Union Territory in such manner, as Parliament may by law determine: 


Provided that where the seat, not being a seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State or Union Territory is one, then, in 
every block comprising of three general elections to the House of the People, the seat in the 
first general elections shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes and no seat shall be reserved for women in the other two general elections: 


Provided further that where the seats, not being seats reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State or Union territory 
are two, then, in every block comprising of three general elections to the House of the 
People,— 


(a) one seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes in the first two general elections in such a manner that the same 
constituency is not reserved for women in both the aforesaid elections; and 


(b) no seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes in the third general election. 


3. After article 330A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:— 


"३३08, (/) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Council of States. 


(2) One-third of the total number of seats to be filled under clause (2) of article 80 
to the Council of States from a State or Union Territory shall be reserved for women. 


(3) One-third of the total number of seats in the Council of States under 
clause (2) shall collectively be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes 
or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be: 


Provided that where the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State or Union territory is one, then, in every block 
comprising of three elections to the Council of States from a particular State or Union territory, 
the seat in the first election shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes 
or the Scheduled Tribes and no seat shall be reserved in the other two elections. 


4. After article 332 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3] 


"332A. (/) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of every 
State. 


(2) One-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (3) of article 332 
shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes, as the case may be: 


Provided that where the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State is one, then, in every block comprising of 
three general elections to the Legislative Assembly of that State, the seat in the first general 
election shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes and no seat shall be reserved in the other two general elections: 


Provided further that where the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State are two, then, in every block 
comprising of three general elections to the Legislative Assembly of that State,— 


(a) one seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes in the first two general elections in such a manner that the same 
constituency is not reserved for women in both the aforesaid elections; and 


(b) no seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes in the third general election. 


(3) One-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be 
filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of every State shall be reserved for 
women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in that 
State in such manner, as Parliament by law determine." 


5. After article 334 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"334A. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of the 
Constitution, the provisions relating to the reservation of seats for women in the 
House of the People, the Council of States and the Legislative Assembly of a State 
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of twenty-five years from the 
commencement of this Act”. 


6. The amendments made to the Constitution by this Act shall not affect any 
representation in the House of the People or the Council of States or the Legislative Assembly 
of a State until the dissolution of the House or the Legislative Assembly of a State or 
expiration of the term of present members, as the case may be, in existence at the commencement 
of the said Act. 


Reservation 
of seats for 
women in the 
Legislative 
Assemblies of 
the States. 


Insertion of 
new article 
334A. 
Reservation 
of seats for 
women to 
cease after 
twenty-five 
years. 


Amendments 
not to affect 
representations 
in the House 
of the People 
or the 
Council of 
States or the 
Legislative 
Assembly of 
a State. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


The Bill to provide for one-third mandatory representation to women in the country 
was introduced in the Rajya Sabha in May 2008 and was referred to a Standing Committee. 
In 200, it was passed in the House and transmitted finally to the Lok Sabha. However, the 
Bill lapsed upon the dissolution of the I5th Lok Sabha. The original idea for the above- 
mentioned Government Bill originated from seventy-third and seventy-fourth Constitutional 
Amendment Acts, which provided for reservation of seats for women in rural and urban local 
bodies respectively. 


According to the Global Gender Gap Report 202, India has declined on the political 
empowerment index by 3.5 percentage points, and a decline in the number of women ministers, 
from 23.[% in 20l9 to 9.% in 202l. The various surveys do indicate that women 
representatives from Panchayati Raj have worked commendably in the development and 
overall well-being of society in villages and many of them would definitely want to work on 
the larger scale, however, they face various challenges in the political structure prevalent in 
India. Challenges in this regard thus include lack of proper political education, low financial 
power of women in society, sexual violence, manifestations of insecure patriarchy and an 
uneven distribution of household work between men and women among others. 


According to an Inter-Parliamentary Union study, India ranks !49th out of !93 countries 
in terms of female representation in the lower or single House of Parliament. It is inexcusable 
that in a country where women account for half of the population, they have an abysmally 
low 4% representation in the Lok Sabha and Il% in the Rajya Sabha. The scenario for 
women Members of Legislative Assemblies (MLAs) across all State Assemblies in India was 
even worse, with the national average being a pitiable 9%. Therefore, the political 
empowerment of women is rightly perceived as a powerful and indispensable tool for 
eliminating gender inequality and discrimination. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


FAUZIA KHAN. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


BIL No. XXV oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950 to modify 
the list of Scheduled Tribes in the State of Maharashtra. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) _ Shorttitle. 
Act, 2023. 


2. In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950, in the Schedule, in Part IX.— Amendment of 
Maharashtra, for entry 36, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— Schedule. 


"36. Oraon, Dhangad, Dhangar". 


434 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Scheduled Tribes have been defined in clause (25) of article 366 of the Constitution as 


"such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within such tribes or tribal communi- 
ties as are deemed under article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes for this Constitution.". 


2. Article 342 of the Constitution provides as under:— 
"342. Scheduled Tribes 


() The President may concerning any State or Union territory, and where it is a 
State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the 
tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities 
which shall for this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes about that State or 
Union territory, as the case may be. 


(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Tribes 
specified in a notification issued under claused (/) any tribe or tribal community or 
part of or group within any tribe or tribal community, but save as aforesaid a notifica- 
tion issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.”. 


3. In accordance with the provisions of article 342 of the Constitution, the first list of 
the Scheduled Tribes was notified during the year 950 in respect of various States and 
Union territories, vide, the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950. This list was modified 
from time to time. The list of Scheduled Tribes of the State of Maharashtra was last modified, 
vide the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) Act, 2002 (Act l0 of 2003). 


4. The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2023 proposes to 
amend Part [X.—Maharashtra of the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 
950 by substituting entry 36 to include "Dhangar" along with "Oraon and Dhangad", as a 
synonym of these communities. 


5. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objective. 


FAUZIA KHAN. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to include Dhangar as a synonym of Oraon and Dhangad in 
the list of Scheduled Tribes in the State of Maharashtra. The Bill, if enacted, may entail 
additional recurring and non-recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India on 
account of benefits to be provided to the persons belonging to the communities proposed in 
the Bill under the ongoing Central schemes meant for the welfare and development of the 
Scheduled Tribes. 


It is not possible to estimate the additional expenditure to be incurred on this account 
at this stage. However, the expenditure, if any shall be accommodated within the approved 
budgetary outlay of the Government of India. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


BILL No. X oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for free internet access to all the citizens in the country and for 
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Right to Free Internet Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of the 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Right of 
citizens to 
free internet. 


Special 
provisions for 
citizens 
belonging to 
backward and 
remote 
regions. 


Right to 
access any 
service 
provider. 


Duties of the 
Central 
Government. 


Duties of 
State 
Governments 
to monitor 
access and 
services. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Constitution 
of National 
Accessibility 
Council. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) "citizen" means any Indian citizen; 


(c) "internet" means the latest and fastest version of internet available as 
approved by authorities; 


(d) "service provider" means any public or private sector entity, which is provid- 
ing internet facilities; 

(e) "local authority" means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council or 
Zila Parishad or Nagar Panchayat or Panchayat, by whatever name called, and includes 
such other authority or body having administrative control or empowered by, or under 
any law for the time being in force to function as a local authority in any city, town or 
village; 


(f) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette; and 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
3. (J) Every citizen shall have the right to free internet access. 


(2) No citizen shall be liable to pay any kind of fee or charges or expenses which may 
prevent him or her from accessing internet facilities. 


4. The appropriate Government shall, while ensuring universal access to internet to all 
citizens, take special measures to ensure that the citizens who belong to the backward and 
remote regions of the country are provided equal access to the internet. 


5. (J) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the citizens have the right to 
choose any available service provider and may opt for any other service provider, as and 
when they desire. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall also ensure that no service provider shall deny 
services to any citizen on account of his/her not having a permanent address. 


6. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to,— 


(a) either directly provide internet access to all citizens or completely subsidize 
the services provided by any service provider so that internet access is ensured for all 
citizens; 

(b) develop a framework to carry out the provisions of this Act by strengthening 
the public sector entities along with legally requiring the services of the private players; 


(c) determine a tariff for such services and revise it regularly; and 


(d) examine the reports provided by the State Governments under section 7 of 
this Act and propose necessary actions to ensure internet access for every citizen. 


7. It shall be the duty of the State Governments to monitor internet access at the micro 
level and provide precise reports to the Central Government about internet access and 
services provided by the service providers for the citizens within its jurisdiction, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


8. The Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments, as 
grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


9. (/) The Central Government shall constitute by notification, a body to be known as 
the National Accessibility Council for performing the functions assigned under this Act. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


(2) The National Accessibility Council shall consist of a Chairperson appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed and such other members, as given 
below:— 


(i) representatives from both Houses of Parliament; 

(ii) representatives from the State Legislative Assemblies; 
(iii) representatives from the Central Government; 

(iv) representatives from the State Government; and 

(v) representatives of the service providers. 


(3) The representatives mentioned in sub-clauses (7) to (v) above shall be appointed in 
such number and in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairpersons and 
Members of the National Accessibility Council shall be such as may be prescribed. 


0. (/) Each State Government shall constitute, by notification, a body to be known as 
the State Accessibility Council for performing functions assigned under this Act. 


(2) The State Accessibility Council shall consist of a Chairperson appointed by the 
State Government in such manner as may be prescribed and such other members, as given 
below:— 


(i) representatives from the State Legislative Assembly and State Legislative 
Council, where there are two Houses of the State Legislature; 


(ii) representatives from the State Government; 
(iii) representatives from the Local Self-Governments; and 
(iv) representatives of the service providers. 


(3) The representatives mentioned in sub-clauses (7) to (iv) above shall be appointed 
in such number and in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairpersons and 
Members of the State Accessibility Councils shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Il. The National Accessibility Council Shall,— 


(a) decide the norms and standards of the services to be provided by the service 
providers; 


(b) devise a mechanism to redress grievances of aggrieved parties arising out of 
the implementation of the provisions of this Act; and 


(c) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central 
Government. 


2. The State Accessibility Councils shall perform such functions as may be assigned 
to them by the State Governments in consultation with the National Accessiblity Council. 


3. (/) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, for carrying out 
the provisions of the this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 


Constitution 
of State 
Accessibility 
Councils. 


Functions of 
the National 
Accessibility 
Council. 


Functions of 
the State 
Accessibility 
Councils. 


Power to 
make rules. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulty. 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of 
two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


4. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the appropriate 
Government may by notification, make such provisions, not inconsistent with this Act, as 
appears to them to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Internet is a technology that serves as the primary source of information to millions of 
Indian citizens. 


2. The Indian Constitution make the Right to Freedom of Speech and Expression a 
Fundamental Right for all citizens, as enshrined in article !9()(a). All citizens of the country 
should, therefore, be able to access internet in order to exercise and enjoy their right to 
freedom of expression and opinion, and other fundamental human rights. 


3. The Central Government and the State Governments have the responsibility to 
ensure that internet access is broadly available and that there are no unreasonable restrictions 
on an individual's access to the internet. 


4. This Bill seeks to expand the scope of the constitutional Right to Freedom of Speech 
and Expression granted to all citizens of the country by making internet accessible to all free 
of cost. The Bill also envisages to bridge the digital divide in society. 


The Bill seeks to achieve its objectives. 


V. SIVADASAN. 


440 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides that no citizen shall be liable to pay any kind of charges or 
expenses for accessing internet facilities. Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government 
shall take special measures to ensure internet access to citizens belonging to backward and 
remote regions of the country. Clause 6 (a) provides that the Central Government shall either 
directly provide universal internet access or completely subsidize the services provided by 
any other service provider. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall provide 
funds to the State Government, as grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. Clause 9 provides for the constitution of a National Accessibility 
Council, appointments of its members and their allowances. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is, however, not possible at this stage to estimate the expenditure involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and the State Government to 


make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4] 


BiLt No. XI oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for free access to public space to all citizens and for matters 
connected therewith and incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Right to Public Space Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force at once on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


Short title 
and 
commence- 
ment. 


Definitions. 


Right of 
citizens to 
free public 
space. 


Special 
provisions for 
senior citizens 
and differ- 
ently- 

abled citizens. 


Universal 
access to 
public space. 


Duty of 
Appropriate 
Government 
and local 
authority to 
establish 
public space. 


Central 
Government 
to Provide 
funds. 


Duties of 
appropriate 
Government 
or local 
authority. 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) "local authority" means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council or 
Zila Parishad or Nagar Panchayat or Panchayat, by whatever name called and includes 
such other authority or body having administrative control or empowered by, or under 
any law for the time being in force to function as a local authority in any city, town or 
village; 

(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 

(d) "public space" means any real property or structures thereon or any open 
spaces including libraries or buildings of other voluntary organizations, where entry is 


completely free and unrestricted to the general public, under the ownership or juris 
diction of the appropriate Government or local authority; 


(e) "citizen" means any citizen of India; and 
(f) "walking distance" means a distance of three hundred meters. 


3. (/) Every citizen shall have the right of access to a public space at a walking distance 
from his place of residence. 


(2) No citizen shall be liable to pay any kind of fee or charges or expenses which may 
prevent him or her from accessing public space. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure that public space is empowered with 
adequate provisions for education, entertainment and physical exercise of citizens. 


4. The appropriate Government shall, while ensuring universal access to public space 
to all citizens, take special measures to ensure that the senior citizens and the differently- 
abled citizens are provided equal access to such public space. 


5. The appropriate Government shall ensure that,— 


(i) the public space designed and designated under this Act are secular in 
nature; and 


(ii) no citizen, on the grounds of religion, faith, caste, community or ethnicity, is 
discriminated against, in respect of free access to public space. 


6. For implementing the provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government and local 
authority shall notify or establish, where it is not so established, within such area or limits of 
neighbourhood, as may be prescribed, a public space, within a period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act. 


7. The Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments, as 
grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out the purposes of this Act. 


8. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government or local authority, as the case may 
be, to— 


(a) ensure availability of a free and empowered public space within walking 
distance and its free access to all citizens; 


(b) ensure that no citizen is discriminated against and prevented from accessing 
public spaces; 


(c) provide infrastructure including building, equipments and staff for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


9. (7) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, for carrying out 
the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


Power to 
make rules. 


444 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Free access to a deliberative public space is a fundamental human right. Access to 
empowering, educative and transformative public spaces is the right and necessity for every 


human being. There is a need for establishment of public spaces where people can meet, 
discuss, debate, deliberate and learn. 


There is an urgent requirement to establish, attain and ensure the right of free access 
to public space to every citizen of the country. 


Therefore, the Central and State Governments and local authorities should take 
necessary measures to ensure that public spaces are established in every single ward of our 
Local Self Governing bodies. Further, public spending and resources for the establishment, 
support and promotion of public spaces should also be increased. 


Hence, this Bill. 


V. SIVADASAN. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides that no citizen shall be liable to pay any kind of charges 
or expenses which may prevent him or her from accessing the public space. 


Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government shall take special measures to 
ensure that senior citizens and differently-abled citizens are provided equal access to public 
space. 


Clause 6 provides that the appropriate Government and local authority shall establish 
public space. 


Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide funds to the State 
Governments, as grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out the purposes of 
this Bill. 


Clause 8 provides that the appropriate Government or the local authority, as the case 
may be, shall provide infrastructure including building, equipments and staff for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is, however, not possible at this stage to estimate the expenditure involved. 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and the State Government to 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


BiLt No. XXVI oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the right to early childhood care to all children in the country and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Right to Early Childhood Care Act, 2023. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "child" means any child living within the territory of India under the age of six 
years; 


(c) "early childhood care" means proper nutritious food, healthcare, play and 
early education within a protective and enabling environment to ensure proper growth, 
scientific upbringing and proper mental and physical wellbeing and development of 
the child. 


Right to early 
childhood 


care. 


Special 
provisions for 
differently- 
abled children. 


Universal 
access to early 


childhood care. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Duties of 
appropriate 
Government 
or local 
authority. 


Power to 
make rules. 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(d) "local authority" means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council of 
Zila Parishad or Nagar Panchayat, by whatever name called, and includes such other 
authority or body having administrative control or empowered by, or under any law 
for the time being in force to function as a local authority in any city, town or village; 

(e) "parent" means either the natural or step or adoptive father or mother or a 
guardian who has legal custody of the child and who is responsible for bringing up 
and caring for a child or a group of children; and 


(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules under this Act. 
3. (/) Every child shall have the right to early childhood care. 


(2) No parent shall be liable to pay any kind of fee or charges or expenses which may 
prevent him or her from accessing the benefits of universal early childhood care for his/her 
child. 


4. The appropriate Government shall while ensuring universal access to early childhood 
care to all children, take special measures to address the special needs of and provide special 
facilities to the differently-abled children. 


5. The access to early childhood care should be designed in such a way that no child 
is left out of the ambit of its benefit due to income inequality, social inequity or information 
asymmetry. 


6. (/) The Central Government shall have the primary responsibility for providing 
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments, to meet 
such percentage of expenditure as may be prescribed, in consultation with the State 
Governments, as grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out the purposes of this 
Act. 


7. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government or local authority, as the case may 
be, to— 


(a) ensure free early childhood care to every child; 


(b) ensure that no child is discriminated against and/or prevented from accessing 
early childhood care; 


(c) notify or establish, where it is not so established, a well-equipped early 
childhood care centre, within such area or limits of neighbourhood, as may be 
prescribed; and 


(d) provide necessary infrastructure for the care centres including building, 
equipments and well-trained staff. 


8. (/) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, for carrying out 
the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Early childhood refers to the formative stage of the first six years of life, which is the 
period of most rapid growth and development and critical for survival of a child. Deficiencies 
during this stage will have substantive and cumulative adverse impact on human development. 
As children are the future of our country, it is imperative to accord priority attention to early 
childhood care including proper nutrition, health care, play and early learning within a 
protective and enabling environment. 


2. Child malnutrition is one of the most serious problems being faced by our country 
today. Stunted growth and malnutrition are affecting our children and we are lagging behind 
many nations in this regard. This is an issue which needs to be addressed soon. 


3. The Central Government shall take it up as statutory responsibility backed by sound 
legislation to ensure right to early childhood care to all children of India. 


The Bill seeks to achieve this objective. 


V.SIVADASAN. 


450 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Sub-clause (2) of Clause 3 of the Bill provides that no parent shall be liable to pay any 
kind of fee or charges or expenses which may prevent him or her from accessing the benefits 
of universal early childhood care for his/her child. 


Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government shall take special measures to 
address the special needs of and provide special facilities to the differently-abled children. 


Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall have the primary responsibility 
for providing funds and shall provide funds to the State Governments, to meet such 
percentage of expenditure, as may be prescribed, as grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable 
them to carry out the purposes of this Bill. 


Clause 7 provides that it shall be the duty of the appropriate Government or the local 
authority, as the case may be, to notify or establish, a well-equipped early childhood care 
centre, within such area or limits of neighbourhood, as may be prescribed and also provide 
infrastructure including building, equipments and well-trained staff. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is, however, not possible at this stage to estimate the expenditure involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and the State Governments to 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. HI oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and I. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 2. In article 326 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
of article 326. 
"Provided that the word 'crime' referred to in this article, in case of undertrial 


prisoners, shall be confined to such non-bailable offences, as may be provided for, by 
or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature, punishable with imprisonment 
for more than seven years." 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

India is one among the few countries to have instituted a blanket ban on the voting 
rights of prisoners. When the nation went to the polls in the 209 Lok Sabha elections, nearly 
five lakh people out of the ninety crore-strong electorate were denied the right to franchise 
on account of being in prison. This number included incarcerated convicted prisoners as 
well as undertrial prisoners. Section 62(5) of the Representation of the People Act, 95I 
stipulates that "No person shall vote at any election if he or she is confined in a prison, 
whether under a sentence of imprisonment or transportation or otherwise, or is in the lawful 
custody of the police". The said Act derives its authority to formulate such a provision from 
article 326 of the Constitution of India. 


2. As per the data in the "Prison Statistics of India, 2020" published by the National 
Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), around 76 per cent. of the total number of inmates populating 
prisons across the country are undertrial - neither convicted nor acquitted, but simply 
languishing in jails, living between one hearing to the next, waiting for the final verdict to 
seal their fate. This means that more than three quarters of the people, who were denied 
suffrage for being in prison, are actually non-criminals if the edict of "innocent until proven 
guilty” holds any water. 


3. The socio-economic composition of undertrial prisoners must not be neglected. 
Muslims account for around 20 per cent, Dalits around 2! per cent., Adivasis l0 per cent., 
and Other Backward Classes around 42 per cent of the tally. For communities that are 
historically marginalised and under-represented in all institutions of the State, the right to 
choose their representatives holds great significance. Further, about 27 per cent. of all 
undertrial prisoners were found to be illiterate while 4] per cent. had dropped out before 
Class X. They are largely poor and unable to afford the bail bond or surety required to 
secure bail, or even the hefty costs of litigation itself. Those who can afford the amount 
are out on bail and entitled to vote. 


4. In Hussainara Khatoon & Ors. v/s. Home Secretary, State Of Bihar, !980, the 
Supreme Court gave a landmark ruling in the interest of undertrial prisoners, enhancing 
the scope of interpreting article 2! of the Constitution (Protection of Life and Personal 
Liberty). Later, section 436A has been inserted in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, 
stipulating that when a person has "undergone detention for a period extending up to one- 
half of the maximum period of imprisonment specified for an offence, for which the 
punishment of death has not been specified as one of the punishments under any law, he or 
she shall be released by the Court on his personal bond with or without sureties". However, 
implementation continues to be a challenge. 


5. The 268th Report of the Law Commission also recognised the need to bring in a 
Bail Law based on the principles of liberalising the bail system. As stated several times by 
the apex court, "Bail should be the norm, jail is an exception". Reforms in granting bail to 
undertrial prisoners are the need of the hour. Likewise, the voting rights of undertrial 
prisoners are also to be weighed in a similar fashion. 


6. In the light of the above, there is a pressing need to amend article 326 of the 
Constitution so as to ensure the right of adult franchise to undertrial prisoners facing charges 
of bailable offences or of non-bailable offences punishable with imprisonment of seven 
years or less. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the said objective. 


JOHN BRITTAS. 


454 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


BiLt No. VII oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 95. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and l. (7) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) 
commencement. Act, 2023 के 


(2) It shall come into force at once. 


Amendment of 2. In sub-section (5) of section 62 of the Representation of the People Act, 95], 
Section 62. for the words “or transportation or otherwise,”, the words “or facing trial for a non-bailable 
offence punishable with imprisonment for more than seven years” shall be substituted. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 55 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
During the Constituent Assembly Debates of 946 to 949, one of the few proposals 
that were agreed upon through near-unanimous consensus was Universal Adult Franchise. 
India, which was well on its path to becoming a buoyant democracy, recognised the 
significance of choosing one's own representatives as far back as pre-independence. Yet, 
75 years later, we continue to be one of the few countries with a blanket ban on the voting 
rights of prisoners. 


Data from the 202! report of the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) show 
that the number of undertrial prisoners in jails across the country registered a !5% increase, 
from 3.7 lakh in 2020 to 4.2 lakh in 202]. Under Section 62(5) of the Representation of 
the People Act, !95, this entire class of people is excluded from the ambit of casting 
their vote in elections to any legislative body - apart from convicted prisoners. The 
undertrial prisoners form around 77 per cent. of the total number of inmates, many of 
whom are facing charges for petty crimes with mild punishment in case of conviction. 
Even the detainees in Civil Prisons are deprived of their right to vote. 


In Satender Kumar Antil Vs. CBI & Anr (2022), the Supreme Court noted that "the 
majority of undertrial prisoners may not even be required to be arrested despite registration 
of a cognizable offence... they are not only poor and illiterate but also include women". 
Indeed, NCRB data records 25 per cent. of the undertrial population as being illiterate. In the 
absence of data on the economic standing of prisoners, education level and social 
background can stand in as useful proxies for gauging the degree of backwardness and 
vulnerability. The poor find it difficult to furnish bail even without sureties because very 
often the amount of the bail fixed by the courts is so excessive that in a majority of cases 
the poor are unable to satisfy the police or the Magistrate about their solvency for the 
amount of the bail and where the bail is with sureties, as is usually the case, it becomes an 
almost impossible task for the poor to find persons sufficiently solvent to stand as sureties. 
So the end result would be that the accused persons, having poor economic background, 
of even bailable offences languish in jails. 


Section 436A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973 stipulates that a person 
having undergone detention for half as much time as the maximum period of imprisonment 
for the alleged offence, for which the punishment of death has not been specified as one 
of the punishments, is entitled to be released on bail with or without sureties. In Hussain 
and Anr. v/s Union of India & Ors. (2077), the Apex Court had ordered expeditious 
disposal of bail applications on the principle of bail being the norm and jail the exception. 
However, the implementation continues to be a challenge. 


The ban on undertrial prisoners to exercise their right of franchise, including those 
being tried for bailable offences, lacks any reasonable classification based on the nature of 
crime or duration of sentence unlike some countries such as South Africa, Germany, France, 
Canada, etc. Another stark contradiction in this regard is that the undertrials who are out 
on bail, even in non-bailable offences, can enjoy the right to vote. This is anathema to 
articles 4 and 2] of the Constitution. 


At several junctures, the Election Commission of India has found its hands tied by 
such laws. Even though many petitions have sought to challenge this restriction on 
universal adult suffrage, it continues to pose a threat to the democratic ethos of our 
nation. In light of the above, there is a pressing need to amend section 62(5) of the 
Representation of the People Act, 95, so as to ensure the right to vote to undertrial 
prisoners facing charges of all bailable offences or of non-bailable offences punishable 
with imprisonment of 7 years or less. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the said objective. 
JOHN BRITTAS. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 45E. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. II or 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 934. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2023. 
(2) It shall come into force at once. 


2. In section 45E of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 934, in sub-section (2), after 
clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted namely:— 


"(ca) the mandatory disclosure and publication within seven months upon expiry 
of each financial year by the Bank and by each banking company, notwithstanding anything 
to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force or in any instrument regulating 
the constitution thereof or in any agreement executed by it, relating to the secrecy of its 
dealings with its clients including borrowers, of the names and full details of credit information 
of those defaulting borrowers whose loans or advances or other credit facilities with an asset 
value of five crore rupees or above, provided by any banking company has been written off 
or classified as a Doubtful or Loss Asset in that financial year: 


Provided that the publication of credit information of defaulting borrowers shall be 
caused by publishing the notice in a newspaper published in English language at national 
level and in a newspaper published in a vernacular language which is in circulation in those 
States where the borrower ordinarily resides or the principal office of the borrower is situated, 
apart from publishing on the websites of the Bank and the banking company concerned.". 


2 of 934. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 57 


The modern democratic system rests on the twin pillars of public funding and public 
trust. In an answer tabled by the Ministry of Finance in the Rajya Sabha on |3th December 
2022, it was conveyed that a staggering amount to the tune of 0,09,50 crore rupees had 
been written off by the Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) during the last five financial 
years, whereas the recovery in the written-off loans during the same period was a paltry sum 
of ,32,036 crore rupees. In financial year 202[-22 alone, a humongous sum of ,74,966 crore 
rupees was written off by SCBs, while the recovery thereon during the said period was a 
meagre sum of 33,534 crore rupees. 


Section 45E of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 934 stipulates that any credit 
information contained in statements submitted to or furnished by the Reserve Bank to the 
banking companies shall be treated as confidential. As a consequence, the details of top 
defaulters are not available to the public at large. Major corporate giants, private individuals 
and industrialists benefit from this absence of such provisions in the law, while the ordinary 
working-class and middle-class people mostly adhere to the stipulated loan conditions. As 
the adage goes ‘sunlight is the best disinfectant’, publishing the details of the wilful bigwig 
defaulters in the public domain will, to a large extent, act as a deterrent of such untoward 
classification. 


As per RBI guidelines, Non-Performing Assets (NPAs), including inter-alia, those 
in respect of which full provisioning has been made on completion of four years, are 
removed from the balance-sheet of the Bank concerned by way of write-off. Even though 
it is claimed that Banks pursue recovery actions initiated in written-off accounts by filing 
suits in civil courts or Debts Recovery Tribunals, or in the National Company Law Tribunal 
under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 20l6, SCBs have only managed to recover a 
paltry sum of ,32,036 crore rupees in the last five financial years as compared to the 
colossal 0,09,5l0 crore rupees being written off by SCBs during the same period. It is 
equally pertinent to note that there is a substantial increase in the quantum of amounts 
written off over the years as evident from the fact that the amount written off from 
0I.04.204 till 3|.03.209 had been 6,!9,244 crore rupees for public and private sector 
Banks combined. 


In the light of the above, there is a pressing need to amend section 45E of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 934 so as to publish the details of borrower-wise credit information in the 
public domain, of those defaulting borrowers whose loans or advances or other credit 
facilities provided by any banking companies has been written off or classified as a Doubtful 
or Loss Asset with an asset value of five crore rupees or above, thus infusing greater 
transparency and public confidence in the fiscal management of the nation. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the said objectives. 


JOHN BRITTAS. 


58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bitt No. IV oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, |972. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and l. (J) This Act may be called the Antiquities and Art Treasures (Amendment) 
commencement. Act. 2023 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 2. In section 25 of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 972,— 52 of 972. 
of section 25. 
(i) in sub-section (/), for the words, "imprisonment for a term which shall not be 


less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine", the words, 
"imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend 
to ten years and with fine that the court may determine after taking into consideration 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


the factors including but not limited to the age of antiquity or art treasure, rarity of 
the antiquity or art treasure and the artistic, aesthetic, historical, architectural, 
archaeological or anthropological importance of the antiquity or art treasure” shall 
be substituted; 


(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words, "for a term which may extend to 
six months", the words, "for a term which may extend to three years" shall be 
substituted; and 


(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words, "for a term which may extend to 
six months", the words, "for a term which may extend to three years" shall be 
substituted. 


460 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Despite regulations, thieves and smugglers continue to threaten India's unique cultural 
wealth and heritage. According to the National Crime Records Bureau, just over 200 Indian 
antiquities were either returned or were in the process of being deported from the United 
States, Australia, Singapore, Germany, Canada, and England. This pales in comparison to the 
enormous quantity of antiquities that have been illegally removed from the country and are 
still unaccounted for. According to an audit done by the Hindu Religious and Charitable 
Endowments Department of the Government of Tamil Nadu, in 208, 4,408 items were stolen 
from 3,676 protected monuments across India between !992 and 207. 


2. The Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 972, prohibits export of antiquities and 
allows their sale within the country only under a license and its non-compliance can result in 
jail sentences of up to three years, a fine, or both. These punitive measures are not enough, 
considering the rewards accruing from smuggling which are disproportionately large. Global 
Financial Integrity, a Washington-based advocacy group, estimates that illegal trade in 
paintings, sculptures, and other artifacts is one of the world's most lucrative criminal 
enterprises, worth six billion dollars a year. 


3. It is with this objective that the Bill is presented to re-examine and restructure the 
penal provisions with regard to the export or an attempt to export the antiquities or art 
treasures in contravention of the provisions under the aforesaid Act. The aim is to deter the 
stealing and smuggling of the antiquities by enhancing the term of imprisonment in order to 
protect and preserve the priceless and invaluable antiquities and art treasures of the country. 


Hence, this Bill. 


SUJEET KUMAR. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 6] 


BiLt No. V oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 860. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


45 of 860. 2. After section 24 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as the Code), the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely:— 


"24A. Whoever commits an act with the intention of causing death or with the 
intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death to a woman or a 
group of women because of their sex or gender, and such act results in death of the 


wou 


woman or a group of women, commits the offence of "femicide”. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
Section 24A. 


"Femicide" 


62 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Insertion of 
section 
300A. 


Murder 
amounting to 
femicide. 


Insertion of 
section 
302A. 


Punishment 
for femicide. 


3. After section 300 of the Code, the following new section shall be inserted, namely: — 


"300A. Except in the cases excepted under sections 299 and 300, murder shall 
amount to femicide, if the act by which the death caused, is done with the intention of 
causing death of the woman or a group of women, or— 


2ndly.—If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the 
offender knows to be likely to cause the death of a woman or a group of women to 
whom the harm is caused by an intimate or non-intimate partner, or— 


3rdly.—TIf it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any woman or 
a group of women and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the 
ordinary course of nature to cause death, for bringing dishonor upon the family name 
or prestige, or— 


4thly.—If the person commits sexual violation in a way that the person knows 
that it is so imminently dangerous that it will, in all probability, cause death, or such 
bodily injury resulting in death, and commits such act with the intention to establish 
superiority or ownership over a woman or a group of women.". 


4. After section 302 of the Code, the following new section shall be inserted, namely: — 


"302A. Whoever attempts to commit or commits femicide shall be punished with 
rigorous imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to pay a fine amounting to not 
less than ten lakh rupees.". 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 63 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The data from the National Crime Records Bureau shows that the rate of crime against 
women (number of incidents per | lakh population) has increased from 56.5 per cent in 2020 
to 64.5 per cent in 202. The data encompasses all crimes committed against women but does 
not specifically indicate the number of deaths caused. The murder of women is never really 
understood as the complex gendered factors behind such violence and aggression is not 
taken into cognizance. 


2. Recent murders have drawn public attention to the increasing gender-based 
violence in India. This is in the backdrop of India's continued commitment to the UN 
Declaration on ending violence against women that includes the threat of such acts or even 
coercion occurring in both public and private life. 


3. The Indian Penal Code, |860 does not define femicide nor does it provide enhanced 
punishment for crimes motivated by gendered stereotypes, emanating from discrimination 
towards women and girls and unequal power relations between women and men, or harmful 
social norms. The World Health Organization has highlighted the types of femicide as: 
dowry-related femicide, honour killings, non-intimate and intimate and sexual femicide. 


4. Therefore, it is pertinent to bring the different variations of murder amounting 
to femicide under the ambit of the Indian Penal Code which otherwise are not linked to 
gender-based motives. 


Hence, this Bill. 


SUJEET KUMAR. 


464 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Britt No. VI oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in 
Admission) Act, 2006. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and l. (J) This Act may be called the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in 
commencement. Admission) Amendment Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 2. In section 3 of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) 
of Section 3... Act, 2006, after sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(iv) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty, 
thirty three per cent. seats shall be reserved for women including the number of seats 
secured by women under sub-clauses (7), (ii) and (iii).”. 


5 of 2007. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 65 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Education is the most important tool for empowering women through knowledge, 
skills and self-confidence. It helps in reducing gender discrimination and also improves 
their status in the family and society. Numerous studies have consistently shown that 


educating girls leads to significant and wide-reaching benefits not only to women them- 
selves and their families but also to their societies and economies. 


2. Higher education is the gateway to economic security and opportunity particu- 
larly for women in India. The UNESCO Report of 202! on "Women in higher education: has 
the female advantage put an end to gender inequalities?" highlights the gender disparities 
with the following takeaways from the report: 


e Regardless of encouraging statistics on women access to higher education, women 
still encounter obstacles when seeking to occupy key academic positions in 
universities, to be involved with relevant research, and to take leadership roles. 


¢ Women are overrepresented among teaching staff at lower education levels, 
while their presence is markedly lower in tertiary education (vertical segregation). 
Women are also still underrepresented as senior faculty and in higher education 
decision-making bodies in many countries. 


3. The situation is quite similar for India as well. There are slightly more than a 
quarter of Professors in Indian academia who are women. In 20I8-209, women in India held 
27.3 per cent. of faculty positions for Professor and equivalent, 36.8 per cent. of faculty 
positions for Reader and Associate Professor and 42.6 per cent. of faculty positions for 
Lecturer or Assistant Professor (MHRD, 209). 


4. According to The Equality Equation: Advancing the Participation of Women 
and Girls in STEM, a World Bank report that provides a rich overview of global patterns of 
gender gaps in STEM education, merely |8 per cent. of girls enrolled at the tertiary level are 
pursuing studies in the field of STEM, as compared to 35 per cent. of boys. Women, in fact, 
account for only 33 per cent. of researchers, 22 per cent. of professionals working in 
artificial intelligence and 28 per cent. of engineering students across the world. In India, 
women make up just |4 per cent. of scientists, engineers, and technologists in research 
development institutions and universities. 


5. Higher education represents itself as a milestone for women empowerment by 
encouraging them to come out of their traditional role as woman despite several challenges. 
Providing reservation to women in Central Educational Institutions will be an affirmative 
step towards fulfilling the constitutional obligation to ensure equality as guaranteed by 
article |4 of the Constitution. Increasing access to higher education will make women free 
from rigid practices of gender inequalities through their potentialities. 


6. It is with this objective that the Bill is presented to address the needs of women in 
higher education and bring down systemic barriers and widen opportunities for their 
leadership and full participation in society. 


Hence, this Bill. 


SUJEET KUMAR. 


66 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bitt No. XXIII or 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 95\. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and I. (J) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) 
commencement. Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 2. In section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, l95, after sub-section (9), 43 of I95I. 


oe the following proviso shall be inserted, namely,:— 


"Provided further that the Election Commission can de-register or withdraw 
recognition of any political party, if the Commission has conclusive evidence that elected 
representatives and office bearers of a political party are engaged in propagating 
communal hatred, spreading fake information through various media, engaging in hate 
speech and functioning countrary to the principles of socialism, secularism and 
democracy enshrined in our Constitution.". 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 67 


The Preamble of the Constitution outlines the underlying ideals and philosophy, as 
well as the policy goals and objectives that our founding fathers envisaged. Giving due 
recognition to these principles, section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, !95I, in 
sub-section 5, clearly stipulates that an application for registration as a political party "shall 
be accompanied by a copy of the memorandum or rules and regulations of the association or 
body, by whatever name called, and such memorandum or rules and regulations shall contain 
a specific provision that the association or body shall bear true faith and allegiance to the 
Constitution of India as by law established, and to the principles of socialism, secularism 
and democracy, and would uphold the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India." However, 
section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, |95] is silent about the course of action 
to be taken against a registered political party, if the Election Commission found that a 
particular political party/office bearers/elected representatives have violated the specific 
provisions of the memorandum (with special reference to the principles of socialism, 
secularism and democracy) submitted at the time of application for registration. 


Over the years, it has been noted that political leaders and party representatives often 
use fake news, communal hatred and hate speech as effective tools to win elections through 
religious polarisation. A recent media report states that more than fifty politicians who hold 
elected office in the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies face charges in criminal cases related to 
inciting religious violence or stoking communal hatred. This is indeed a dangerous trend that 
can dismantle the very foundations of our democracy, secularism and ideals enshrined in the 
Constitution. Besides, this is a blatant violation of the provision of section 29A of the 
Representation of the People Act, !95 which clearly states that an association or body shall 
bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India for getting registration as a political 
party. 


Laws against fuelling communal violence and offending communal sentiments are 
contained in sections 53A, I53B, 295, 295A, 505()(c), 505(2), and 505(3) of the Indian Penal 
Code, 860 as well as in section !25 of the Representation of the People Act, !95] which 
criminalises the promotion of "feelings of enmity or hatred" between communities in 
connection with an election. But the recurrent occurrence of hate speech and fake news 
propaganda necessitate the urgent need for inserting a ‘strong provision' within the 
Representation of the People Act, 95! to make political parties accountable for this. The 
Act needs to stipulate that a particular political party/parties will lose registration and 
recognition if the leaders and representatives of that political party/parties are found to be 
engaged in propagating communal hatred, hate speech, spreading of fake news and any 
other activity that violate the principles of socialism, secularism and democracy. Unless 
and until the political parties are not made accountable for the ‘divisive activities of their 
office-bearers and representatives, this tendency will continue. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 95] to 
authorize the Election Commission to deregister a political party or withdraw recognition, if 
the elected representatives and office bearers of a political party propagate communal 
hatred, spread fake information through various media, engage in hate speech and function 
contrary to the principles of socialism, secularism and democracy enshrined in our 
Constitution. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SANDOSH KUMAR P. 


68 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


BiLt No. XII oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for the Welfare of Youth 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and l. (J) This Act may be called the National Commission for the Welfare of Youth 
commencement. Act. 2023 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 69 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "member" means a member of the National Commission; 


(c) "National Commission" means the National Commission for the Welfare of 
Youth established under clause 3; 


(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(e) "youth" means any person who has attained the age of eighteen years but is 
not above the age of forty years. 


3. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a 
body to be known as the National Commission for the Welfare of Youth to exercise powers 
conferred on and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act. 


(2) The Commission shall consist of— 


(a) a Chairperson, below the age of forty years, having specialised knowledge 
and remarkable experience in the field of youth welfare to be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) four members, below the age of forty years, to be nominated by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed, from amongst persons of ability, 
integrity and standing who have extensive professional experience in or with— 


(i) law or legislation and legal bodies; or 


(ii) voluntary organisations working for the welfare and empowerment of 
youth; or 


(iii) organisations or industrial units or educational institutions committed 
to increasing the employability of youth; or 


(iv) organisations working towards causes relating to health or social 
welfare, with a special focus on youth; 


(c) one member-secretary, who shall be a senior member of the Indian Civil 
Service having at least ten years of professional experience in the management of 
matters related to the welfare and empowerment of youth. 


4. (/) The Chairperson and members of the Commission may hold office for a period 
not exceeding three years from the date on which they assume office, or for such period as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of 
the Chairperson and members of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 


5.(/) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff, including 
experts, to the Commission as may be required for its efficient functioning in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of 
the officers and staff including experts appointed for the purpose of the Commission shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 


6. The National Commission shall function as an authority for ensuring the welfare and 
empowerment of youth in the Country and perform the following functions, namely,:— 


(a) formulate a comprehensive national policy for the welfare and 
empowerment of youth in the country; 


Definitions. 


Establishment 
of a National 
Commission 
for the 
Welfare 

of Youth. 


Term of office 
and conditions 
of service of 
the Chairperson 
and the 
members. 


Staff of the 
Commission. 


Duty and 

functions of 
the National 
Commission. 


Youth Welfare 
Fund. 


Annual report. 


Commission 
to have 
powers 

of Civil Court. 


70 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) study, investigate and review all matters relating to the safeguards provided 
for youth under the Constitution and other laws and make recommendations for the 
effective implementation of these safeguards to improve the condition of youth in the 
country; 


(c) formulate and implement schemes for the welfare of youth as may be assigned 
to it by the Central Government; 


(d) coordinate with the departments of the appropriate Government for securing 
better education, well-being and employment opportunities for youth; 


(e) undertake educational research to advise the Central Government to improve 
and ensure employment and entrepreneurial opportunities for the youth; 


(f) advise the appropriate Government in the planning process for the 
socio-economic development of the youth, especially those belonging to Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections of the society; 


(g) monitor the occupational health, safety and welfare-related issues of the 
youth working in the unorganised sector and other hazardous employment; 


(h) act as a national-level grievance redressal mechanism in matters related to 
youth development, welfare and empowerment; 


(7) receive and enquire into any complaints concerning the deprivation of rights 
of youth and recommend to the appropriate Government the action to be taken in that 
matter; 


(j) advise the appropriate Government in any other matter as may be referred for 
its consideration, from time to time. 


7. (7) The Central Government shall constitute a fund to be known as the Youth 
Welfare Fund to implement the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Youth 
Welfare Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed. 


8. (/) It shall be the duty of the Commission to present annually to the President a 
report as to the work done by the Commission within six months of the close of the year 
under report. 


(2) The President shall cause to be laid before each House of Parliament the report 
submitted to him along with a memorandum explaining the reasons for not accepting any of 
the recommendations made thereto. 


(3) Where the report or any of its part is related to any of the issues connected with a 
State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of that State, 
who shall in turn, along with an explanatory memorandum concerned with the action taken or 
proposed to be taken on the recommendations related to the State, if any, and reasons for not 
accepting any of the recommendations, cause such report to be laid before the State 
legislature. 


9. The National Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to it under 
clause (i) of section 6 of this Act, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and, in 
particular in respect of the following matters, namely,:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of 
India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) requisitioning any public record or document or copy thereof from any Court 
or office; 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7] 


(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and/or documents; 
and 


(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 


0. The appropriate Government shall consult the National Commission on all policies 
affecting the interests of the youth. 


ll. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing such difficulty. 


i2. The provisions of this Act and rules made there under shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. 


3. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to 

consult the 
Commission. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act to have 
an 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to 
make rules. 


72 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

India has one of the youngest populations in the world. Recently, the Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme Implementation released the "Youth in India 2022' Report, 
according to which India is experiencing a demographic window of opportunity, known as 
the "youth bulge". Youth bulge refers to a demographic pattern in which a large proportion 
of the population is comprised of children and young adults. In this context, there is a need 
to reap the potential of our youth population through adequate policies, schemes and 
investments that can ensure the welfare and empowernment of the young population in this 
country. 


Although youth constitute a significant share of our population, Indian youth is 
seriously constrained by various developmental challenges including lack of access to 
education and gainful employment, gender inequality, child marriage, lack of youth-friendly 
health services and adolescent pregnancy. There is an alarming rate of drug abuse among 
the youth as well. Hence, there is an urgent need to address these problems and make 
concrete efforts to ensure the welfare and empowerment of the Indian youth. 


One of the serious limitations of our current policy framework for youth is the absence 
of an institutional mechanism at the national level to design, oversee and coordinate all 
the relevant matters related to youth in the country. Besides, even after 75 years of 
independence, we do not have a comprehensive youth policy that can effectively channelise 
the potential of our young population. Therefore, setting up a National Commission for 
the Welfare of Youth equipped with necessary powers and functions is an urgent policy 
priority. 


The Bill seeks to attain the objectives mentioned above through the establishment of 
the National Commission for the Welfare of Youth. 


SANDOSH KUMAR P. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 73 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the consitution of a National Commission for the 
Welfare of the Youth to carry out the responsibilities assigned to it. It also provides for 
the appointment of a Chairperson, members and member-secretary. Clause 4 of the Bill 
provides for the term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and members 
of Commission. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of officers, staff and experts 
for the efficient functioning of the Commission and their salary and allowances. Clause 7 
provides for the Central Government to establish a Youth Welfare Fund for the effective 
functioning of the Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India which cannot be estimated at present. Recurring 
expenditure is also likely to be incurred. 


474 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


35 of 2020. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 75 


Bit No. XXXII 07 2023 


A Bill to ensure the participation of workers in the management of all industrial 
establishments in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Participation of Workers in Management Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. (/) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Board of Directors” means the collective body of the directors of an 
industrial establishment; 


(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(c) “representatives of registered trade union(s)”’ means representatives of the 
trade union(s) registered under the Industrial Relations Code, 2020. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Participation 
of workers in 
the 
management 
of industrial 


establishments. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act to have 
an overriding 
effect. 


Power to make 
rules. 


76 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(2) The words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the 
Industrial Relations Code, 2020, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have the meanings 
respectively as assigned to them in that Code. 


3. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the Board of Directors of every industrial establishment shall include at least two 
representatives of the registered trade union(s) of that establishment to ensure the 
participation of workers in the management of the establishment. 


(2) The representatives of the registered trade union(s) in the Board of Directors of 
the industrial establishment, shall be elected from amongst the workers of that industrial 
establishment, by secret ballot, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) It shall be mandatory, for such elected representatives of the registered trade 
union(s), to be present in every meeting of the Board of Directors. 


(4) In every industrial establishment, the elected representatives of the registered 
trade union(s) shall enjoy equal rights and privileges as enjoyed by the other members of 
the Board of Directors. 


(5) Any decision that directly or indirectly affects the interest of the workers of an 
industrial establishment shall be implemented only after discussing the same with the elected 
representatives of the registered trade union(s) on the Board of Directors. 


4. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may make such order or give such directions, not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


5. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. 


6. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


35 of 2020. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 77 


Article 43A of the Constitution of India, under the Directive Principles of State Policy, 
states that ‘the State shall take steps, by suitable legislation or in any other way, to secure 
the participation of workers in the management of undertakings, establishments or other 
organisations engaged in any industry’. This article was inserted by the Constitution 
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 976. The High-powered Expert Committee on Companies 
and the Monopolistic and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 969 headed by Justice Rajinder 
Sachar of the Delhi High Court also made certain recommendations about provisions to be 
made for workers’ participation in the management of companies. 


According to the International Labour Organization, workers’ participation in 
management implies the participation of workers and their representatives in the decision- 
making process, ranging from exchange of information, consultations, decisions and 
negotiations. Besides, it also implies the representation of workers in institutionalized forms 
such as the presence of workers on the board of management. 


The workers’ participation in management can certainly improve the conditions of 
workers and industrial relations. In effect, workers' participation in the board of directors 
can end the era of industrial bonded labour as rightly envisaged by Justice V.R.Krishna Iyer. 
It reflects the spirit of industrial democracy. It is envisioned that the management of the 
industrial establishment should not be left entirely in the hands of suppliers of capital, but 
the workers should also be entitled to participate in it. The workers are the real producers of 
wealth. Collective decision-making at the apex level can also ensure less industrial conflict. 
Therefore, equal partnership in the management of industrial establishments is critically 
important. 


Hence the Bill. 
SANDOSH KUMAR P. 


78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 79 


BiLt No. XIV oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In article 343 of the Constitution,— Amendment of 
article 343. 


(7) in clause (/), for the words "The official language of the Union shall be Hindi 
in Devanagari script.", the words "The Official language of the Union shall be the 
languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to this Constitution.” shall be substituted. 


(ii) in sub-clause (a) in clause (3), after the words "the English language," the 
words "or the languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to this Constitution, or" 


shall be inserted. 


Amendment of 
article 344. 


Amendment of 


article 348. 


Omission of 
article 5]. 


80 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


3. In article 344 of the Constitution, sub clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (2) shall be 
omitted. 


4. In article 348 of the Constitution, in clause (/), after the words "shall be in the 
English Language.", the words "or the languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to this 
Constitution. "shall be inserted. 


5. In the Constitution, article 35 shall be omitted. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 8] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Constitution has provided for the development of all the regional languages in 


addition to Hindi. In many countries across the world, multiple languages are recognized as 
the official national languages. 


Additionally, clause (3) of article 344 states that in making their recommendations 
under clause (2), the Commission on Official Language shall have due regard to the 
industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of India, and the just claims and the interests 
of persons belonging to the non-Hindi speaking areas in regard to the public services. 


India with a population of more than |30 crore has more than 700 languages. India, with 
such diverse languages, should promote all the languages listed in the Eighth Schedule of 
the Indian Constitution. 


Hence, this Bill. 
R. GIRIRAJAN. 


82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. XXXIV oF 2023 


A Bill to recover the black money held abroad by Indian citizens and to establish a fund 
to deposit a prescribed share of the amount from such recovery into each Indian 
citizen's bank account and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
Short title and . (/) This Act may be called the Black Money Recovery Act, 2023. 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "black money" means any asset or income that has not been reported to the 
public authorities either at the time of their generation or disclosed thereto during their 
possession or recorded for tax purposes; 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 83 


(b) "citizen" means any Indian citizen as per the provisions of the Citizenship 
Act, 955; 


(c) "Committee" means the Managing Committee of the Public Fund of India 
constituted under section 6 of this Act; 


(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(e) "Public Fund" means the Public Fund of India formed under section 4 of this 
Act. 


3. (7) The Central Government shall, formulate a policy to be known as the "National 
Policy for Black Money Recovery" to recover all of the black money held abroad by Indian 
citizens, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to implement the National Policy 
formulated under sub-section (/). 


4. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a fund with the State Bank of India to be known as the "Public Fund of 
India" for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


5. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to,— 


(a) issue a White Paper on the black money recovered in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, within seven days of each and every such recovery; 


(b) deposit such recovered black money, as per provisions of section 3, into the 
Public Fund of India within fourteen days of each and every such recovery, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 


(c) deposit the recovered black money into each and every citizen's bank 
account held within the territory of India in such quantum and manner, as may be 
prescribed; and 


(d) share the remaining recovered amount, if any, to all State Governments and 
the share of each State shall be calculated by the percentage of the Gross State 
Domestic Product contributed by each State on 3lst day of March, 2022 in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


6. (/) Within seven days of coming into effect of this Act, the Central Government 
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Managing Committee of the Public 
Fund of India to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act. 


(2) The head office of the Committee shall be at such place, as may be notified. 


7. It shall be the duty of the Managing Committee to,— 


(i) monitor, supervise and coordinate the distribution of funds from the Public 
Fund in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(ii) review the progress of distribution of funds from the Public Fund; and 
(iii) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it. 


8. (J) The Managing Committee shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 


(i) the Minister of Finance, Government of India, Chairperson, ex-officio; 


(ii) the Leader of the Opposition in Lok Sabha or Rajya Sabha or any other 
Member of Parliament nominated by the opposition parties in the absence of a Leader 
of Opposition, Co-Chairperson, ex-officio; 


(iii) the Chairman, NITI AAYOG, Vice-Chairperson, ex-officio; 


National 
Policy for 
Black 
Money 
Recovery. 


Constitution 
of the Public 
Fund of 
India. 


Duties of the 
Central 
Government. 


Constitution 
of Manage- 
ment 
Committee. 


Duties of the 
Managing 
Committee. 


Composition 
of Managing 
Committee. 


84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(iv) the Governor, Reserve Bank of India — Member, ex-officio; 


(v) six Members of Parliament representing the Lok Sabha, of which only a 
maximum of two shall belong to the ruling party, to be nominated by the Central 
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed — Member; 


(vi) six Members of Parliament representing the Rajya Sabha, of which only a 
maximum of two shall belong to the ruling party, to be nominated by the Central 
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed — Member; and 


(vil) the Finance Secretary, Government of India, Secretary of the Committee, ex- 
Officio; 
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such officers and staff, from the Ministry of 


Finance, Government of India, to assist the Committee, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


9. (।) All Members, Officers and staff of the Committee shall work on an honorary 
basis and shall not be entitled to any salary. 


(2) The Committee shall compulsorily meet once every fifteen days at the head office, 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) Any and every expenditure incurred towards the working of the Committee shall be 
borne by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India. 


(4) Members of Parliament shall be entitled for reimbursement of flight ticket 
expenses incurred by them for attending the meetings of the Committee. 


(5) All decisions of the Committee shall be taken by a simple majority. 


0. The Central Government shall, if it deems fit, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the implementation of the 
provisions of this Act. 


I. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act. 


2. () The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


Terms and 
conditions of 
service of the 
Members, 
Officers and 
staff of the 


Committee. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 


Power to 
make rules. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 85 


The amount of black money held abroad by Indians has seen an exponential rise over 
the years. This amount, when recovered can be utilised to improve the quality of life of each 
and every citizen of India. 


In view of this, there is need to enact an integrated legislation in this regard so that the 
amount is recovered by the Government of India and it finally reaches every citizen of India 
with proper oversight. Any remaining amount shall be distributed between the States for 
their development. 


This Bill seeks to recover all black money held abroad illegally by Indian citizens and 
utilise the same towards the development of the nation. 


Hence, this Bill. 
M. MOHAMED ABDULLA 


86 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the formulation and implementation of the National 
Policy for Black Money Recovery by the Central Government. Clause 4 provides that the 
Central Government shall constitute a Public Fund for depositing the recovered black money. 
Clause 6 provides for the constitution of a Management Committee to monitor, supervise 
and coordinate the distribution of the recovered black money. Clause 9 provides for the 
terms and conditions of service of the Members, officers and staff of the Managing 
Committee whereby Members of Parliament shall be reimbursed towards the flight ticket 
expenses incurred by them to attend the Committee meetings. Clause 0 provides that the 
Central Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore may involve as one-time 
non-recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 87 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause | of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


88 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Britt No. XXXII or 2023 


A Bill to provide for prohibition of crimes in the name of honour, unlawful assemblies 
and other conduct interfering with the freedom of marriage and association and to 
provide justice, compensation and rehabilitation in crimes committed in the 
name of honour in the interest of protecting individual liberty and 
preventing victimization and for the matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title and I. (/) This Act may be called the Freedom of Marriage and Association and Prohibition 


commencement. of Crimes in the Name of Honour Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 89 


2. (/) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) 'accused' is any person or persons, whether they are members of the victim's 
family, member of the victims' community, caste, clan, race, tribe or indigenous 
community, member of any religious council, or caste panchayat or katta panchayat, 
(by whatever name called) or participates, abets, finances or incites or is hired to 
commit such an act as is prohibited under this Act; 


(b) "appropriate Government" means,— 
(7) in relation to a Union territory, the Central Government; and 
(ii) in relation to a State, the Government of that State; 


(c) "association" means any association of a person with another person of any 
sex or gender, as a partner, friend, companion, or having a relationship with another 
person, and includes any interactions or meetings with another person; 


(d) "caste panchayats" or "community panchayats" means any caste or religious 
community groups of persons of the same lineage, religion or caste, registered or not, 
which may be called by another name or description including Khap panchayats or a 
‘gavki', which control the personal and social behavior of any member and collectively 
pass orders without any legal authority against persons for acts of marriage and 
association with a person based on caste, religion, gotra, or against the wishes of the 
community members, by issuing oral or written dictums; 


(e) "child" means any person below the age of eighteen years; 


(f) "couple" means persons who intend to exercise the right to freedom of marriage 
and association, as per the provisions of this Act; 


(g) "katta panchayats" means local groups that assemble and issue unlawful 
punishments against persons and are not necessarily based on caste hierarchies; 


(h) "marriage" includes a marriage that has been solemnized or registered or is 
proposed or intended to be solemnized or registered; 


(i) "person" means any person who has completed eighteen years of age; 


(j) "practices in the name of honour" means a collection of practices used 
predominantly to control the behaviour of victims, especially but not limited to women 
and girls, within families or castes, in order to protect supposed cultural, religious and 
traditional beliefs, values and social norms in the name of honour; 


(k) "safe house" means a safe house established by the appropriate Government 
as per section 28 of this Act; 


(J) "social and economic boycott" includes all such acts that may lead to the 
boycott or enforcement of social or economic sanctions on the couple or married or 
associated persons, and includes the following acts, namely: 


(7) pressurizing, coercing, threatening them or their dependents, relatives, 
families or their communities to leave the settlement, household, village or area 
of residence concerned; 


(ii) refusing to permit a person to render to other person or receive from 
them any customary service or to abstain from social relations that one would 
maintain with other person or to isolate them from others; 


(iii) indulging in any conduct which will impede or is likely to impede, 
access to markets, community facilities, places of worship or any other necessities 
of life; 


Right to 
freedom of 
marriage and 
association. 


90 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(iv) attempting or threatening to divest or dispossess the couple or their 
families of any rights to any land or property and / or imposition of fine or 
penalty of any kind; 


(v) refusing to deal with, work for hire or do business with them; 


(vi) denying opportunities including access to services or contractual 
opportunities for rendering service for consideration or refusing to do anything 
on the terms on which things would be commonly done in the ordinary course of 
business; 


(vii) abstaining from any professional or business relations with them; 


(viii) preventing or obstructing the victim from observing any social or 
religious custom or usage or ceremony or from taking a part in a social, religious 
or community functions, congregation, assembly, meeting or procession; 


(ix) refusing the right to perform marriage, funeral or other religious 
ceremonies and rites which the members of the victim's own community usually 
and ordinarily perform; 


(x) shunning or refusing to engage in the society or cut social or commercial 
ties off with the victim or the victim's family; 


(xi) preventing or obstructing access to or usage of any place used or 
intended to be used for a charitable, religious or public purpose; 


(xii) preventing or obstructing from having access to or using the facilities 
of any school, educational institution, medical institution, community hall, club 
hall, cemetery, burial ground or any other place used by, or intended to be used 
by, or for the benefit of the victim's community; or any other public place; 


(xiii) inciting or provoking or encouraging any member of the community, 
directly or indirectly, to sever social, religious, professional or business relations 
with the victim or their family or members of their community; 


(xiv) preventing or obstructing from entering, lodging in or otherwise 
using any place of worship or pilgrimage, which is ordinarily open to the members 
of the victim's community; 


(xv) creating or causing to create cultural obstacle or compel the victim to 
wear any particular type of clothes or use any specific language; 


(xvi) expelling or causing to expel the victim from their community; and 
(xvii) committing any other similar acts which amount to social boycott; 


(m) "special cell" means the special cells established under section 33 of this 
Act; 


(n) "victim" means any individual, including a minor, who has suffered any 
physical, mental, psychological, emotional, or monetary harm in relation to marriage or 
association under this Act and includes the victim's family members, guardians, 
dependants or any one supporting or sympathizing with the victim (s). 


(2) The words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the 
Indian Penal Code, |860 (hereinafter referred to as the Indian Penal Code), as the case may 
be, shall be deemed to have the meanings as respectively assigned to them in that enactment. 


CHAPTER II 
FREEDOM OF MARRIAGE AND ASSOCIATION 


3. (7) All persons in addition to the right to life, the right to liberty and freedom of 
expression guaranteed under articles 2 and 9 of the Constitution, shall have the right to 
freedom of marriage and association, movement and bodily autonomy, including the right to 
choose their own partners, the right to marry or to associate with any person of their choice. 


45 of 860. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9] 


(2) The consent of a person's family, religious community, caste or clan shall not be a 
condition precedent for any adult individual to enter into a marriage or a relationship. 


(3) All persons shall have the right to marry any person, irrespective of caste, religion, 
tribe, indigenous status, community or gender identity and there shall be no interference 
therein by anyone. 


(4) Any action to prevent or interfere with the exercise of the rights referred to in this 
section by any person or a group of persons shall be an offence under the provisions of this 
Act. 


4. Any couple desirous of marrying or being in a relationship with each other or 
associating with each other may declare their age and willingness to be together, orally or in 
writing to the District Magistrate having appropriate jurisdiction or any nodal officer 
designated for this purpose by the District Magistrate, who on receipt of such information 
shall send it to the nearest police station and no action shall be taken by the police and/or 
any other authority either swo-motu or at the instance of any party, including the family 
members or relatives or community members of either party or any third party, against the 
said couple. 


CHAPTER III 
PROHIBITION OF CRIMES IN THE NAME OF HONOUR 


5. () No person or persons shall commit any acts or practices in the name of honour 
or any caste, culture, custom, religion, tradition, against any couple on the ground that they 
have transgressed cultural, religious, social or traditional norms or customs. 


(2) Such acts, including but not limited to the following acts, shall amount to crimes in 
the name of honour:— 


(i) forcibly declaring the couple who have got married as brother and sister; 


(ii) excommunication, ostracization or forcible removal or displacement or eviction 
of the couple or their family or relatives from the village, town or area they live in; 


(iii) abducting or kidnapping the victim and / or anyone associated with them; 


(iv) asking the couple or anyone associated with them or harbouring them to pay 
a fine; 

(v) imposing social and economic boycott on the couple or their families or 
anyone associated with them; 


(vi) harassing the couple or either of them not to meet or associate with or live 
with each other, either physically or through any means of communication; 


(vii) threatening the couple or either of them or their family or anyone associated 
with them of retributive action of any kind whatsoever; 


(viii) causing physical harm or injury to the couple or either of them or anyone 
connected or related with them; 


(ix) individually or collectively exhorting or pressurizing or causing psychological 
trauma directly or indirectly upon any person or persons to prevent or disapprove of 
the marriage or association of the couple, or generating an environment of hostility 
towards such couple or either of them or their supporters; 


(x) confining any person illegally, or placing them under house arrest; 


(xi) confiscating a person's phone, laptop and any other means of communication, 
or certificates, documents, identity proofs or, other important personal effects; 


(xii) freezing the bank accounts of the couple or either of them; 


Declaration of 
intention to 
be together by 
a couple. 


Prohibition of 
crimes in the 
name of 
honour. 


Prohibition of 
unlawful 
assembly. 


Power of court 
to issue 
injunctions. 


92 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(xiii) causing the termination of job of the couple or either of them by their 
employer; 


(xiv) publishing any defamatory and false material or information about the 
couple in print or online media including social media and Whatsapp; 


(xv) committing an act of sexual violence or sexual harassment against the 
couple or either of them; 


(xvi) forcing or causing an abortion or miscarriage of the woman in such 
relationship; 


(xvii) forcing the couple or either of them to marry against their consent; 
(xviii) forcefully dissolving the marriage of the couple against their consent; 


(xix) abusing the couple or either of them with an intent to humiliate, using caste 
names in public; 


(xx) raising funds for promoting or attempting to commit or committing crimes 
under this Act; 


(xxi) spreading or inciting hate through oral/technological/written means; 


(xxii) parading the victim naked or semi-naked or making them wear a garland of 
slippers/sandals through the village, or disrobing them, tying up and hitting them, or 
their family members or anyone supporting them or connected to them; 


(xxiii) forcibly making them consume urine or faeces; 


(xxiv) burning the house or crops or properties of the victim(s), breaking or 
damaging properties belonging to them, or encroaching or forcefully occupying their 
properties; 


(xxv) causing disturbance or disruption in places of employment and education 
of the couple or either of them; 


(xxvi) publicly humiliating and degrading the couple or persons associated with 
them; 


(xxvii) preventing any person from exercising their right of marriage and 
association as provided in section 3 of this Act; 


(xxviii) committing any atrocity as defined under the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act 989; and 


(xxix) committing any other act or acts of harassment or intimidation, whether 
physical or mental or psychological against any couple, or persons supporting them. 


6. No group of five or more persons shall gather, assemble or congregate at any time 
with the view or intention to deliberate on, or condemn or prevent any marriage or association 
of any person or persons or punish any person or persons involved therein on the ground 
that such marriage or association has dishonoured the caste, tribe, indigenous status, 
community, religion, tradition or is against the wishes of the family or community including 
marriage or association of persons whose sexual orientation or gender identity is not accepted 
by their family or community. 


7. (7) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, if, on an 
application or complaint from any person or persons, a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
or a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Special Fast Track Court, is satisfied that a crime in the 
name of honour, as described in section 5, has been committed or is about to be committed, 
the Magistrate shall issue an injunction against any person or persons including a caste 
panchayat to restrain them from committing such act and providing protection to the persons 
against whom such acts were or are intended to be committed. 


33 of 989. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 93 


(2) A complaint under sub-section (/) may be made by any person or organization 
having knowledge or information or reason to believe relating to the likelihood of a crime in 
the name of honour taking place. 


(3) The Court of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan 
Magistrate or the Special Fast Track Court may also take suo motu cognizance on the basis 
of any reliable report or information received: 


Provided that in the case of any urgency, the Court shall have the power to issue an 
ad-interim and ex-parte injunction or order or direction, without giving any notice under 
this section. 


(4) An injunction, order or direction issued under sub-section (7) may be confirmed or 
vacated after giving notice and hearing the party against whom the injunction was issued. 


(5) Whoever knowing that an injunction has been issued under sub-section (/) against 
them, disobeys such injunction shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or 
with both: 


Provided that no woman shall be punishable with imprisonment. 


(6) The appropriate Government may confer such powers and impose such duties on 
the District Magistrate or any other authorities, as may be necessary to ensure that the 
provisions of the Act are properly carried out. 


CHAPTER IV 
PUNISHMENT FOR OFFENCES 


8. Whoever commits any crime in the name of honour as defined in section 5, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term not less than five years and shall also be liable to 
fine, which may extend to five lakh rupees. 


9. Whoever causes death, through any means or commits any such act that results in 
death of a couple or either of them or any other person associated or related to them in the 
name of honour, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for life and with a minimum 
fine of ten lakh rupees or confiscation of property of similar value. 


0. (7) Whoever causes hurt to a couple or either of them in the name of honour shall 
be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, 
but which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees. 


(2) Whoever causes grievous hurt, including loss of limb and causing disability, to a 
couple or either of them in the name of honour shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for 
life and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees. 


Explanation.—The expressions ‘hurt' or ‘grievous hurt' shall have the same meaning 
as is given to it in sections 39 and 320 of the Indian Penal Code. 


Il. Any person or persons participating in any unlawful assembly as described in 
section 6, either directly or indirectly, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not 
less than six months but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine which 
may extend to one lakh rupees. 


i2. Whoever, including any member of an unlawful assembly indulges in criminal 
intimidation of any couple or either of them or their family members or supporters, for their 
matriage or association or with the intention to cause their separation, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term not less than three years but which may extend to five years and 
shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five lakh rupees: 


Punishment 
for 

crimes in the 
name of 
honour. 


Punishment 
for causing 
death in the 
name of 
honour. 


Punishment 
for hurt or 
grievous hurt. 


Punishment 
for 
participation 
in 

unlawful 
assembly. 


Punishment 
for 

criminal 
intimidation. 


Offence under 
the Indian 
Penal Code. 


Application of 
certain 
provisions of 
the Indian 
Penal Code. 


Power of 
Court to grant 
compensation. 


Punishment 
for causing 
disappearance 
of evidence of 
offence, or 
giving false 
information 
to screen 
offender. 


Abetment of 
an offence. 


Punishment 
for abetment. 


94 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Provided that if the threat be to cause harm or injury of the description referred 
to in the second part of section 506 of the Indian Penal Code, the maximum imprisonment 
shall extend to seven years. 


Explanation.—The expression 'criminal intimidation’ shall have the same meaning as 
is given to it in section 503 of the Indian Penal Code. 


3. Whoever commits any offence under this Act being a crime in the name of honour, 
which is also an offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 860) punishable with 
imprisonment of ten years or more, shall be punishable with imprisonment for life. 


4. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the provisions of section 340, 
section 35][, section 354, section 355, section 357, section 359, section 326A, and section 32 
of the Indian Penal Code, shall, so far as may be, apply for the purposes of this Act as they 
apply for the purposes of the Indian Penal Code. 


5. When the Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence of which fine forms a part, 
the Court shall when passing the judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine recovered 
to be paid as compensation to any person or persons for any loss or injury caused by the 
offence. 


6. Whoever knowingly or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed 
under this Act, causes any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear with the 
intention of screening the offender from legal punishment, or with that intention gives any 
information regarding the offence which they know or believe to be false, shall be punishable 
with the punishment provided for that offence. 


7. A person abets an offence under this Act, who— 
First.—Instigates any person to do that offence; or 


Secondly.—Engages with one or more person or persons in any conspiracy for 
the doing of that offence, if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that 
conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that offence; or 


Thirdly.—Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that 
offence. 


Explanation. I—A person who, by willful misrepresentation, or by willful 
concealment of a material fact, which is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or 
procures, or attempts to cause or procure a thing to be done, is said to instigate the 
doing of that offence. 


Explanation. 2—Whoever, either prior to or at the time of commission of an act, 
does anything in order to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby facilitates 
the commission thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act. 


Explanation. 3—Whoever employs, harbours, receives or transports a victim, 
by means of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, 
abuse of power or of a position, vulnerability or the giving or receiving of payments or 
benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for 
the purpose of any offence under this Act, is said to aid the doing of that act. 


Explanation. 4—The expressions 'abetment’ and 'conspiracy' shall have the 
same Meaning as is given to it in sections 07 and |20A of the Indian Penal Code. 


8. Whoever abets any offence under this Act, if the act abetted is committed in 
consequence of the abetment, shall be punished with punishment provided for that offence. 


20 of 974. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 95 


Explanation.—An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment, 
when it is committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy or 
with the aid, which constitutes the abetment. 


9. Whoever attempts to commit any offence punishable under this Act or to cause 
such an offence to be committed, and in such attempt, does any act towards the commission 
of the offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for the 
offence, for a term which may extend to one half of the imprisonment for life or, as the case 
may be, one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence or with fine or 
with both. 


20. (/) Every person committing any of the offences under this Chapter shall be 
presumed to have also intended to commit or abet the commission of offences under this 
Act. 


(2) In a prosecution for an offence under this Chapter, if it is proved that— 


(a) the accused rendered any financial assistance in relation to the offences 
committed by a person accused of, or reasonably suspected of, committing, an offence 
under this Chapter, the Court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that such 
person had abetted the offence; 


(b) a group of persons committed an offence under this Chapter and if it is 
proved that the offence committed was a sequel to any existing dispute regarding 
marriage or association of any person, it shall be presumed that the offence was 
committed in furtherance of the common intention or in prosecution of the common 
object; and 


(c) if any person or persons intending to marry or associate or having solemnized 
the marriage, is or are murdered or are forcibly separated or face violence or any crimes 
under this Act, it will be presumed that the family members of the victim have committed 
the offence, unless explicitly stated otherwise in front of the Judicial Magistrate of first 
class by the victim themselves. 


2l. Where any person(s) is prosecuted for offences under this Act, the burden of 
proving that he or she or they have not committed the offence or offences under the said 
sections shall be on him or her or them. 


22. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, |973, 
(hereinafter referred to as the Code of Criminal Procedure) all offences under this Act shall be 
cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable. 


CHAPTER V 
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS AND WITNESSES 


23. The identity and addresses of the victims and the complainants shall not be 
published, communicated or made known to the public, press and media in any manner 
including social media platforms: 


Provided that such information may be disseminated regarding the justice secured 
to any victim under this Act without disclosing the name, address, identity or any 
other particulars calculated to lead to the identification of the victim(s) and witnesses. 


24. (/) It shall be the duty and responsibility of the appropriate Government to make 
arrangements for the protection of victims, their dependents, and witnesses against any kind 
of intimidation or coercion or inducement or violence or threats of violence, under this Act. 


(2) A victim or their dependent shall have the right to reasonable, accurate, and timely 
notice of any Court proceeding including any bail proceeding and the Public Prosecutor or 
the State Government shall inform the victim about any proceedings under this Act. 


Punishment 
for attempt to 
commit 
offence. 


Presumption 
as to offences. 


Burden of 
proof. 


Offences to be 
cognizable, 
non-bailable 
and non- 
compoundable. 


Confidentiality 
of the victims 
and 

complainants. 


Rights of 
victims and 
witnesses. 


96 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(3) A victim or their dependents shall be entitled to be heard at any proceeding under 
this Act in respect of bail, discharge, release, parole, conviction or sentence of an accused or 
any connected proceedings or arguments and file written submission on conviction, acquittal 
or sentencing. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Court 
trying a case under this Act shall provide to a victim, their dependents, informant or 
witnesses— 


(a) complete protection to secure the ends of justice; 


(b) travelling and maintenance expenses during investigation, inquiry and trial; 
and 


(c) social-economic rehabilitation during investigation, inquiry and trial including 
relocation where necessary. 


(5) The Court shall periodically review the protection being offered to victims and 
witnesses and pass appropriate orders to modify any protection measures, if necessary. 


(6) The Court may, on an application made by a victim, informant or witness in any 
proceedings before it or by the Public Prosecutor in relation to such victim, informant or 
witness or on its own motion, take such measures including but not limited to: 


(a) concealing the names and addresses of the witnesses in its orders or 
judgments or in any records of the case accessible to the public; 


(b) issuing directions for non-disclosure of the identity and addresses of the 
witnesses; 


(c) providing relocation to the victim and/or witnesses; and 


(d) take immediate action in respect of any complaint relating to harassment of a 
victim, informant or witness and on the same day, if necessary, pass appropriate orders 
for their protection. 


(7) It shall be the duty of the Investigating Officer and the Station House Officer to 
record the complaint of the victim, informant or witnesses against any kind of intimidation, 
coercion or inducement or violence or threats of violence, whether given orally or in writing, 
and a photocopy of the First Information Report shall be immediately given to them free of 
cost. 


(8) The police shall ensure that there shall be no destruction of evidence in any manner 
in all crimes and First Information Report registered under this Act. 


(9) It shall be the right of the victims or their dependents, to take assistance from the 
Non-Governmental Organizations, social workers or advocates. 


Victim 25. (/) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to frame a scheme, to be 
Compensation knownas the Victim Compensation Scheme, for protection and rehabilitation of victims and 
है 058 कर witnesses under this Act. 


(2) Such scheme may include provision of immediate relief to the victims, in the form of 
cash or kind, and may also include,— 


(i) provision of relief in respect of death or injury or damage to property; 


(ii) arrange food or water or clothing or shelter or medical aid or transport facilities 
or daily allowances to victims; 


(iii) ensure that these shelters and transport facilities are accessible to persons 
with disability; 
(iv) ensure that these resources are provided to the victims and witnesses without 


discrimination on the basis of caste, gender, disability, religion, sexual orientation, 
gender identity or age; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 97 


(०) provision of maintenance expenses to victims; and 


(vi) provision of protection to victims or their dependents and witnesses from 
intimidation and harassment and any other measures. 


(3) Such a scheme may also ensure that the child of a couple killed in the name of 
honour is fairly compensated and rehabilitated as determined by the Court. 


26. The appropriate Government shall, in co-ordination with the Central Government, 
as the case may be, in pursuance of the Victim Compensation Scheme, provide funds for the 
purpose of payment of compensation to the victim or their dependents, who have suffered 
loss or injury as a result of commission of crimes in the name of honour under this Act, 
subject to applicability of the provisions of section 357A of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 


CHAPTER VI 
POsITIVE OBLIGATIONS AND DUTIES 


27. (।) Any person(s) can make complaints, file representations or submit letters to the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate or the jurisdictional police seeking protection against any unlawful 
assembly or against any other person who have been or are likely to object to any marriage 
or association or commit crimes in the name of honour as referred to under this Act. 


(2) Upon receiving such complaint or representation, the Sub-Divisional Magistrate or 
District Magistrate shall immediately and not later than six hours take appropriate steps to 
provide protection to the said person(s), and shall give appropriate directions for the same to 
the police. 


(3) On receipt of such a complaint, or request for protection, as per sub-section (2), the 
police shall immediately and not later than six hours, provide protection and safety measures 
to the said persons, in such manner as they deem fit, but not limited to providing a shelter 
home or by any other means. 


(4) The Sub-Divisional Magistrate or the District Magistrate shall be in direct supervision 
of the protection and safety of the persons concerned and shall supervise the same. 


(5) On receipt of information about any proposed unlawful assembly or gathering of a 
caste panchayat or community panchayat or a katta panchayat in respect of crimes in the 
name of honour, to be committed against any victim(s),— 


(a) a police officer or any officer of the District Administration, shall, forthwith 
intimate the jurisdictional Deputy Superintendent of Police and Superintendent of 
Police; 


(b) on receiving such information, the Deputy Superintendent of Police (or such 
senior police officer as identified by the State Governments with respect to the area or 
district) shall immediately communicate to the members of the caste panchayat that 
convening of such meeting or gathering is not permissible and prohibit from going 
ahead with such a meeting, and shall also issue appropriate directions to the Officer 
in-charge of the jurisdictional police station to be vigilant and, if necessary, to deploy 
adequate police force for prevention of unlawful assembly of the proposed gathering; 


(c) the Sub-Divisional Magistrate or District Magistrate shall immediately issue 
an order prohibiting the convening of such unlawful assembly and the doing of any 
act towards the commission of any offence under this Act by any person in any area 
specified thereunder and such order shall be immediately published in a local newspaper 
and delivered to such persons of the said unlawful assembly; 


(d) the Sub-Divisional Magistrate or District Magistrate shall take such steps as 
may be necessary to give effect to such order(s) including directions to the police 
authorities concerned; 


Victim 
Compensation 
Fund. 


Power to 
prohibit 
certain acts 
and take 
preventive 
measures. 


98 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(e) the District Magistrate shall also take such steps as may be necessary to 
ensure the safety of the victims as to the illegal decisions taken by the unlawful 
assembly; 


(f) whoever contravenes any order made under sub-section (4) shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 
which may extend to two years and with fine; 


(g) if the Deputy Superintendent of Police has reason to believe that the assembly 
or gathering cannot be prevented and/or is likely to cause harm to the potential victims, 
he or she shall forthwith submit a proposal to the District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate of the District or the Competent Authority of the concerned area for issuing 
orders to take preventive steps under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
including by invoking prohibitory orders under section 44 thereof and causing arrest 
of the participants in the assembly under section 5 thereof; 


(h) despite the preventive measures taken by the police, if any unlawful assembly 
takes place and any such assembly or caste panchayat or khap panchayat passes any 
diktat to take action against the victims and/or their family members, the Officer in- 
Charge of the police station having jurisdiction shall cause to lodge an First Information 
Report immediately under the provisions of this Act and the appropriate provisions of 
the Indian Penal Code including sections 4, 43, 503 and 506 thereof; 45 of 860. 


(i) upon registration of First Information Report, intimation shall be 
simultaneously given to the Superintendent of Police/ Deputy Superintendent of Police; 


(j) the District Magistrate or Superintendent of Police shall deal with the complaint 
regarding threat administered to such couple or family with utmost sensitivity and if 
necessary, provide them with logistical support for solemnizing their marriage and/or 
for being duly registered under police protection, if they so desire; 


(k) after the marriage, if the couple so desire, in addition to adequate protection, 
they can be provided accommodation on payment of nominal charges in a safe house 
initially for a period of one month to be extended on a monthly basis but not exceeding 
one year in aggregate, depending on their threat assessment on a case-to-case basis; 


(J) the initial inquiry regarding the complaint received from the couple or upon 
receiving information from any other source that the relationship or marriage of such 
couple is opposed by their family members or local community or caste panchayat 
shall be entrusted by the District Magistrate or Superintendent of Police to an officer 
not below the rank of Additional Superintendent of Police and such officer shall conduct 
a preliminary inquiry in order to ascertain the authenticity, nature and gravity of threat 
and shall immediately submit a report to the Superintendent of Police not later than 
seven days of receipt of the complaint; and 


(m) the Superintendent of Police, upon receipt of such report, shall direct the 
Deputy Superintendent of Police in-charge of the concerned sub-division to cause to 
register a First Information Report against the persons threatening the couple(s)/ 
victims and, if necessary, may also invoke section 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
and the Deputy Superintendent shall also personally supervise the progress of 
investigation and ensure that the same is completed and charge sheet is filed within 
thirty days of receipt of the report. 


(6) In acase where the victim(s) has/have been killed in the name of honour, as defined 
under section 9 of this Act, the District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police shall 
ensure that:— 


(a) an intimation be given to the National Human Rights Commission within 
twenty-four hours of their death; 


43 of 954. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 99 


(b) a post-mortem be conducted of the body and the post-mortem report along 
with videography and Magisterial Inquest Report, be submitted to the Special Fast 
Track Court within thirty days of the incident; and 


(c) the body of the deceased is neither disposed off nor the last rites for the 
victim(s) performed without the written consent of the victim's family. 


(7) The appropriate Government shall be responsible for creating and maintaining a 
post of Mental Health Counsellor, who may be a mental health professional, mental health 
nurse or a psychiatric social worker at the Special Cells as described under section 33 of this 
Act and in the safe houses as described under section 28 of this Act, for providing counseling 
to victim(s) who may have been threatened or harmed in any way defined under this Act, and 
the appointment and terms of conditions of service of such counselors shall be in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(8) Every official called upon to act in terms of the above provisions shall be accountable 
for their lapses, omissions or failures and the appropriate Governments shall provide for and 
take such action against them as may be deemed fit for their lapses, omissions or failure to 
act, under the provisions of this Act. 


28. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to:— 


(a) establish a safe house at each District Headquarter for persons seeking 
protection against crimes in the name of honour and ensure that such safe houses be 
placed under the supervision of the jurisdictional District Magistrate and Superintendent 
of Police in a manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) ensure that the couple are able to stay together in the safe house, with access 
to facilities to meet with their lawyers or members from any Non-Governmental 
Organizations providing them support and assistance; 


(c) take steps to provide security to the couple or family and, if necessary, to 
remove them to a safe house within the same district or elsewhere keeping in mind their 
safety; and 


(d) ensure that in cases requiring immediate medical attention, any woman or 
transgender person(s) needing special assistance are provided the same, including 
from the One Stop Centres established by the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development. 


29. (/) Any failure by either the police or district officer or officials, including Marriage 
Officers appointed under the Special Marriage Act, 954, to comply with the, provisions of 
this Act shall be considered as an act of deliberate negligence and/or misconduct for which 
departmental action shall be taken under the relevant service rules which shall be completed 
within six months of the incident, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) In addition to imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 
which may extend to one year, disciplinary action shall be taken against the concerned 
officials if it is found that— 


(i) such official(s) did not prevent the incident, despite having prior knowledge 
of it, or 


(ii) where the incident has already occurred, such official(s) did not promptly 
apprehend and institute criminal proceedings against the culprits. 


30. (/) All village officers and such other officers as may be specified by the District 
Magistrate in relation to any area and the inhabitants of such area shall, if they have reason 
to believe or have the knowledge that any of the offences mentioned under this Act are 
about to be, or have been committed in the area shall mandatorily report such fact to the 
nearest police station forthwith. 


Protection 
Measures and 
safe houses. 


Accountability 
measures. 


Mandatory 
reporting. 


Appointment 
of State Nodal 
Officer. 


Duties of the 
appropriate 
Government 
to ensure 
effective 
implementation 
of the Act. 


200 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(2) It shall be the duty of all State Government officers and Central Government 
officers to assist the police in implementing the provisions of this Act or any rule or order 
made thereunder. 


(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this section shall be punishable with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years and shall also be 
liable to fine. 


3. (/) The State Government shall nominate a nodal officer not below the rank of a 
Secretary to the State Government, for coordinating the functioning of the District Magistrates 
and Superintendent of Police or the officers authorized by them responsible for implementing 
the provisions of the Act. 


(2) The nodal officer shall at the end of every quarter, review the status of cases 
registered under this Act; various measures adopted for providing immediate relief in cash or 
kind or both to the victims or their dependents; adequacy of immediate facilities like rationing, 
clothing, shelter, legal aid, travelling allowance, daily allowance, and transport facilities 
provided to the victims or his/her dependents; performance of Non-Governmental 
Organizations, the Special Cell, various committees and the public servants responsible for 
implementing the provisions of the Act, and accordingly prepare a report which shall be 
submitted to the State-level Monitoring Committee, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 


32. (7) The appropriate Government shall forthwith identify such districts, 
sub-divisions and/or villages where instances of crimes in the name of honour or assembly 
of caste panchayats have been reported in the last five years. 


(2) The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs in the appropriate Government shall issue 
directions to the Superintendent of Police of the concerned Districts for ensuring that the 
Officers in-charge of the police stations of the identified areas are extra cautious if any 
instance of inter-caste or inter- religious marriage within their jurisdiction comes to their 
notice. 


(3) The Central Government shall designate a nodal Ministry to oversee, supervise 
and monitor the effective implementation of this Act. 


(4) The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India shall, in coordination with the 
State Governments, take necessary measures to create awareness and sensitize law 
enforcement agencies, government departments, the police, Judges and Special Public 
Prosecutors on the provisions of this Act and also for the prevention of crimes in the name 
of honour. 


(5) The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India shall in co-ordination with the 
State Government, take necessary measures to create awareness for the prevention of crimes 
in the name of honour, and inclusion of such topics in the school curriculum and textbooks 
in the public education system, media, and other forms for spreading awareness. 


(6) Subject to such rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf, the State 
Government shall take such measures as may be necessary for the effective implementation 
of this Act, including— 


(a) provision for adequate facilities, including legal aid, to the persons subjected 
to honour crimes to enable them to avail themselves of justice; 


(9) provision for travelling and maintenance expenses to victims and witnesses 
in honour crimes during investigation and trial of offences under this Act; and 


(c) provision for a periodic survey of the working of the provisions of this Act 
with a view to suggesting measures for the better implementation of the provisions of 
this Act. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 20I 


33. (7) The appropriate Government shall establish a Special Cell in every District 
comprising the Superintendent of Police and the District Social Welfare Officer, for prevention 
of crimes in the name of honour and to receive petitions or complaints from victims regarding 
infringement of the right of freedom of marriage and association, as described in section 3 of 
this Act. 


(2) These Special Cells shall establish a dedicated 24-hours telephone and e-mail 
helpline to receive and register such complaints and to provide necessary assistance/advice 
and protection to the couple. 


34. () The Chief Minister of a State, and the Administrator of a Union Territory, shall 
establish in their State or Union Territory, as the case may be, a Committee to be known as a 
State-level Monitoring Committee, to review the implementation of the provisions of the Act, 
relief and rehabilitation facilities provided to the victims and other matters connected therewith, 
prosecution of cases under the Act, role of different officers or agencies responsible for 
implementing the provisions of the Act and various reports received by the State Government 
or the Union Territory administration. 


(2) The State-Level Monitoring Committee shall consist of: 


(i) the Chief Minister of the State, or the Administrator of the Union Territory, as 
the case may be, Chairman, ex-officio; 


(ii) the Minister of Home Affairs in the State Government—Member, ex-officio; 


(iii) the Minister of Women and Child Development in the State Government— 
Member, ex-officio; 


(iv) five elected Members of Parliament from that State to be appointed or 
nominated Members, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(v) five elected Members of the State Legislative Assembly and Legislative 
Council if any, to be appointed or nominated as Members, in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 


(vi) The Commissioner of Police of the State—Member, ex-officio; 


(vii) The Chief Secretary, Department of Women and Child Development of the 
State Government—Member, ex-officio; and 


(viii) three representatives of Non-Governmental Organisations working in the 
field of crimes in the name of honour to be appointed or nominated as Members, in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The State-level Monitoring Committee shall meet at least once in six months. 


35. (/) In each district within the State or the Union Territory, as the case may be, the 
District Magistrate shall set up a District-Level Monitoring Committee, to review the 
implementation of the provisions of the Act, relief and rehabilitation facilities provided to the 
victims and other matters connected therewith, prosecution of cases under the Act, role of 
different officers or agencies responsible for implementing the provisions of the Act and 
various reports received by the regional administration. 


(2) The District-level Monitoring Committee shall consist of the District Magistrate, 
Deputy Superintendent of Police, the Director of the District Legal Services Authority and 
three members having association with Non-Governmental Organizations, appointed or 
nominated thereto, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The District Level Monitoring Committee shall meet at least once every three 
months. 


36. (/) The appropriate Government, may after consultation with the concerned High 
Court, by notification, designate a District Court as Special Fast Track Court for the purpose 
of trying the cases pertaining to crimes in the name of honour and offences under this Act. 


Establishment 
of Special 
Cells. 


State-level 
Monitoring 
Committees. 


District-level 
Monitoring 
Committees. 


Special Fast 
Track Courts. 


Procedure of 
Special Fast 
Track Courts. 


Annual 
Report. 


202 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(2) Such Special Fast Track Court shall exercise all jurisdiction exercisable by the 
District Court under any law for the time being in force in respect of any proceedings under 
this Act. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall, after consultation with the High Court, by 
notification, extend, reduce or alter the local limits of the area to which the jurisdiction of the 
Fast Track Court extends. 


(4) The concerned District judge presiding over a designated Special Fast Track Court 
shall receive prior training on this Act, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(5) For every Special Fast Track Court, the appropriate Government shall, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify a Public Prosecutor or appoint an advocate who has been in 
practice as an advocate for not less than seven years, as a Special Public Prosecutor for the 
purpose of conducting cases in that court. 


(6) Where an application is made by a victim seeking the appointment of a particular 
Special Public Prosecutor, the same may be considered and allowed by the Special Fast Track 
Court, in a manner as may be prescribed. 


37. (7) The Special Fast Track Court may take cognizance of any offence without the 
accused being committed to it for trial upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitutes 
such offence or upon a police report of such facts. 


(2) While framing charges under this Act, the Court may also frame charges under the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 989, the 
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005, any provision of the Indian Penal 
Code, as the case may be, and under any other special legislations, if the facts disclose the 
commission of an offence under those provisions. 


(3) The Special Fast Track Court shall try cases in-camera and the trial must proceed on 
a day-to-day basis to be concluded, preferably within three months from the date of filing of 
charge sheet/final report. 


(4) If, during the course of any trial of any offence under this Act, it is found that the 
accused person has committed any other offence under this Act or any other law, the notified 
Court may convict such person of such other offence also and pass appropriate sentence 
authorized by that law. 


(5) A victim or their dependent shall have the right to apply to the Special Fast Track 
Court to summon parties for production of any documents or material, witnesses or examine 
the persons present. 


(6) A victim or their dependent shall be entitled to be heard at any proceeding under 
this Act in respect of bail, discharge, release, parole, conviction or sentence of an accused or 
any connected proceedings or arguments and file written submission on conviction, acquittal 
or sentencing. 


38. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, or in 
any other law, an appeal shall lie from every judgment or order under this Act to the High 
Court. 


(2) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days 
from the date of the judgment or order under this Act. 


(3) Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie to any Court from any judgment, 
order or decree under this Act. 


(4) An appeal preferred under sub-section (/) shall be heard by a Bench consisting of 
two or more Judges. 


39. (/) The State Government shall every year, before the first day of July, prepare and 
furnish a report to the Central Government about the measures taken for implementing the 


33 of 989. 
45 of 2005. 


2 of 974. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 203 


provisions of the Act and various schemes and plans framed by it during the previous 
calendar year. 


(2) The Central Government shall cause, a report on the measures taken by itself and 
by the State Governments in pursuance of the provisions of this section, to be laid, every 
year, before each House of Parliament. 


40. The Central Government shall issue directions to the National Crime Records 
Bureau to collect and include data on the crimes committed in the name of honour in its 
annual report. 


4l. The appropriate Government shall after due appropriation by the Parliament or the 
State Legislatures, as the case may be, provide funds for the effective implementation of the 
provision of this Act. 


CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


42. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal 
procedure, |973 shall apply to the proceedings under this Act. 


43. Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof shall, in 
relation to an area in which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as 
a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area. 


44, Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or any custom or usage or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such 
law. 


45. () The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Inclusion of 
data on 
honour crimes 
in Annual 
Report of 
Naitonal 
Crime Records 
Bureau. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Application of 
Code of 
Criminal 
Procedure, 
973. 


Application 
of other laws. 


Act to 
override other 
laws. 


Power to 
make rules. 


204 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Crimes and violence in the name of honour affect caste-marginalised communities, 
religious minorities and the LGBTQI communities disproportionately. Such violence is also 
an attack on the institution of family and community which are central to life in India. As 
family and community members turn killers, rapists, abductors, punishers, the institution of 
the family and community weakens. 


Honour-based crimes are a symptom of the rampant caste and faith-based discrimination 
that exists in Indian society. As a result of this, countless young people bear the brunt of this 
malaise. We live in the world's largest democracy, however it appears that the freedom to 
safely associate, live-in, marry a person of our choice, still evades us. We live in two Indias, 
one where some unions are celebrated with great fanfare while some lead to boycotts from 
the family and communities, police intimidation, forced separations and even death. 


The complex and dangerous nature of honour violence cannot be allowed to go 
unchecked. Further, in the absence of any codified law and no definite way to determine 
cases, convictions in cases of honour killings remain woefully low and none of the crimes 
committed in the name of honour are classified as such. 


Furthermore, there is no reliable summary data available regarding honour crimes. The 
National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) reports that only 540 cases of honour killing have 
taken place since 204. This shows that honour crimes are being drastically underreported as 
these statistics are in conflict with real life figures and reports collected by NGOs which place 
the number of honour killing deaths to be much higher. 


Since, there is no separate legislation on honour-based crimes in India, these crimes 
fall under existing provisions of the Indian Penal Code including section 300 for murder and 
and/or the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 989. 


The Law Commission has strongly recommended for formation of a separate law for 
dealing with crimes in the name of honour. There have been several judgements on honour 
crimes over the years with the Supreme Court of India stressing on the need for a separate 
legislation on honour crimes including the judgement of Shakti Vahini vs Union of India on 
27 March, 208. 


Accordingly, this Bill proposes to aid the Government address honour crimes and 
incorporates the measures suggested by grassroot activists and survivors to mitigate the 
harm caused by honour-based crimes such as— 


(i) enactment of a comprehensive legislation to address crimes based on honour 
and protection of human rights of those affected by the issue; 


(ii) mandating separate record keeping on honour-based crimes (not just killings 
but all related crimes) by the NCRB and the police; 


(iii) mandating exclusive special courts and fast-track courts to address honour- 
based crimes cases; 


(iv) stringent action against law enforcement agencies, particularly police officials 
who fail to act swiftly to stop any violence in the name of honour; 


(v) providing protection for couples dealing with honour-based intimidation or 
violence in the form of police protection, financial support, legal support, safe homes 
and mental support; and 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 205 


(vi) abolition or regularisation of bodies like caste/katta/khap panchayats that 
commit or abet honour-based crimes. 


This Bill aims to achieve the above objectives. 


Hence this Bill. 


RAM NATH THAKUR. 


206 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 25 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall frame a scheme, to 
be known as the Victim Compensation Scheme, for protection and rehabilitation of victims 
and witnesses under this Act and Clause 26 provides for provision of funds thereunder. 


Clause 27(6) of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall create and 
maintain a post of Mental Health Counsellor at the Special Cells and the Safe Houses 
established under the provisions of this Bill and for the appointment and terms and conditions 
of service of such councellors. 


Clause 28 of the Bill provides for establishment of safe houses at each District 
Headquarter for persons seeking protection against crimes in the name of honour and 
clause 33 provides that for establishment of Special Cells in every District for prevention of 
crimes in the name of honour and to receive petitions or complaints from victims. 


Clause 34 of the Bill provides for conditions of service of such counselors and for the 
appointment and terms and establishment of the State-level Monitoring Committees, and 
clause 35 provides for the establishment of District-level Monitoring Committees. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is difficult to 
estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 207 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 45 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of normal character. 


208 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. XIII oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 
Short title and I. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment), Act, 2023. 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect. 
Amendment 2. In article 24 of the Constitution, after clause (7), the following new clause shall be 


of article 24. inserted, namely:— 


“(8) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Government shall provide 
for reservation in appointments of Judges in the Supreme Court in favour of Socially 
and Educationally Backward Classes.” 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 209 


3. In article 27 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following new clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Government shall provide 
for reservation in appointments of Judges in all High Courts within the territory of 
India in favour of Socially and Educationally Backward Classes.” 


Amendment 
of article 27. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The debate on the lack of social diversity within the judiciary is not new. Time and 
again, concerns have been raised regarding the high concentration of persons belonging to 


upper castes in the higher judiciary, which has subsequently resulted in low representation 
of minority communities including Socially and Educationally Backward Classes (SEBCs). 


In the first 30 years of its functioning, that is, from !950 until [980, the Supreme Court 
had not seen any representation from the SEBCs. The present situation is no better out of the 
total sitting Judges in the Supreme Court currently, only | Judge belongs to the SEBC 
community. This is despite the fact that SEBCs constitute roughly 50% of the population in 
the country. Recently, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice also highlighted the need for social diversity in judicial 
appointments, noting that only !l% of High Court Judges belong to SEBCs. 


The Government has often defended its stance of not providing reservation in 
appointments to the higher judiciary by citing lack of explicit provisions under articles [24 
and 27 of the Constitution, which pertain to the appointment and conditions of the office of 
a Judge of the Supreme Court and High Courts respectively. Since the Constitution is silent 
on reservation in judicial appointments in favour of backward classes, social diversity within 
the higher judiciary has remained and continues to remain grossly inadequate. Resultantly, 
the benches of the higher judiciary fall short of reflecting the social realities of the country. 


Various judicial institutions across the world are making efforts to constitute a diversified 
judicial system that is representative of their respective population. For instance, the Canadian 
judicial system mandates awareness and understanding of differences arising from 
inter alia race and ethnic background. These guidelines were fundamental in establishing 
that the Canadian Government must strive for a gender-balanced and socially diverse pool of 
candidates representing all jurisdictions within their judiciary. The United Kingdom is yet 
another country that has made efforts to recognise under represented groups within its 
judiciary by implementing the Judicial Diversity and Inclusion Strategy. 


There is an urgent need to make the Indian judiciary as inclusive and socially diverse 
as possible. Active measures must be taken to ensure the representation of SEBCs within the 
higher judiciary of the country. To this end, this Bill seeks to amend articles [24 and 2|7 of the 
Constitution to provide for reservation in judicial appointments in the Supreme Court and 
High Courts in favour of SEBCs. Such affirmative action will serve to instil public confidence 
among all classes of people and strengthen the delivery of justice in the country. 


Hence this Bill. 
V. VIJAYASAI REDDY 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2]] 


Bit No. XV oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 209. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


35 of 2009. I. (/) This Act may be called the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2023. 
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect. 


2. For section 89 of the Consumer Protection Act, 209, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


"89. Any manufacturer, service provider, advertiser, advertising agency or 
endorser who causes a false or misleading or surrogate advertisement to be made 
which is prejudicial to the interest of consumers shall be punished with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh 
rupees; and for every subsequent offence, be punished with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees." 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Substitution of 
section 89. 


Punishment 
for false or 
misleading 
advertisement. 


2i2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The medium of surrogate advertising and brand extensions have often been resorted 
to for promoting products whose advertising is otherwise prohibited or restricted by law. 
The practice of roping in influential celebrities holding mass appeal to further expand the 
reach of such products through this medium has now become common. With the growing 
reach of social media, surrogate advertising has seen a considerable rise in India. Even 
public events such as festivals and sports matches are now being leveraged to promote such 
products via surrogate advertising. 


2. More often than not, brands use celebrities for the purpose of surrogate advertising, 
who due to their mass popularity have the ability to influence the buying decisions of the 
public in a negative manner. Studies show that surrogate advertisements wherein products 
are endorsed by celebrities can act as a catalyst for people to purchase such products. This 
impact is more severe among children and youth, who may get swayed by the mass appeal of 
the endorser without having an appropriate understanding of the risks associated with the 
product. 


3. In this regard, Guidelines for Prevention of Misleading Advertisements and 
Endorsement for Misleading Advertisements, 2022, have been brought into force recently to 
prohibit surrogate advertising, among other things. They also prescribe duties of 
manufacturer, service provider, advertiser and advertising agency as well as standards of 
due diligence to be followed by endorsers. While the guidelines are a step in the right 
direction, they do not impose any strict penalty on the manufacturer, service provider, 
advertiser, advertising agency and endorsers. The lack of an effective deterrent has resulted 
in surrogate advertising continuing unabated. 


4. The parent Acct, i.e., the Consumer Protection Act, 209 does prescribe a penalty for 
false and misleading advertisements under section 89, which may be extended to surrogate 
advertisements as well. However, this penalty is restricted to the manufacturer or service 
provider and hence, does not extend to the advertiser, advertising agency or endorser of the 
surrogate advertisement. It is imperative that an equal penalty be placed on the advertiser, 
advertising agency and endorser of the surrogate advertisement, which will serve as a 
significant deterrent for such individuals/entities and ensure the welfare of the consumers at 
large. 


5. Therefore, this Bill proposes to amend Section 89 of the Consumer Protection Act, 
209 by extending the punishment for false and misleading advertisements to advertisers, 
advertising agencies and endorsers. 


Hence, this Bill. 
V. VIJAYASAI REDDY. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2i3 


Bit No. XL oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
l. (J) This Act may be called the Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect. 
2. After section 22 of the Central Universities Act, 2009, the following new section [Insertion of 


shall be inserted, namely:— new Section 
22A. 


"22A. (/) It shall be mandatory for every University to constitute an Industry-  Industry- 
Academia Linkage Cell which shall be the principal body within the University for the Academia 
purpose of developing the requisite skills among the students to facilitate their transfer Linkage Cell. 
from academia to industry. 


244 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(2) The Industry-Academic Linkage Cell shall be responsible for performing such 
functions that shall include but not be limited to: 


(a) enable active and streamlined co-operation between the University and related 
industries and industrial institutions; 


(b) foster an environment of ingenuity and research within the University; 
(c) provide incubation facilities for students; 


(d) create opportunities for students to participate in real-life industrial projects; 
and 


(e) undertake any other activity that falls within its ambit in the interest of the 
students.". 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian education system is often criticised for encouraging rote memorization, a 
concept that only encourages students to learn everything through repetition. Employers 


themselves have often raised concerns about Indian students lacking intrinsic skills such as 
problem-solving, critical thinking and leadership. 


A study has revealed that about 50 per cent. of the Indian youth are not on target to 
possess the essential skills that will be required for various jobs in 2030. Around |/6th of 
Indian students pursue engineering but due to a lack of skills required to execute technical 
jobs, less than 20 per cent. are employed in the field. Another study found that 80 per cent. 
of Indian engineers are not equipped for a job in the knowledge economy, a system that is 
largely based on the consumption and production of intellectual capital. Yet another study 
of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) students in India highlighted 
that they do not gain critical thinking skills over 4 years of the undergraduate degree taken 
up by them, as compared to similarly placed students in other countries. Even though Indian 
students are known for their expertise in science and technology and undergo massive 
migration in such fields, clearly the curricula followed in Indian Universities do not help them 
acquire crucial skills to thrive in the industry. 


The persisting constraints in research and development (R&D) coupled with a lack of 
interdisciplinary opportunities have resulted in a weak innovation ecosystem in academia. It 
is no coincidence that India has 8 scientists for !000 people, as compared to 8 in Canada, 2] 
in the US and 53 in South Korea. To address this situation, there is a compelling need to 
facilitate stronger linkages between academia and industry. This will enable students to 
attain transferrable skills from Universities and carry them forward when entering industries, 
thus creating more value for the economy as a whole. 


While the National Education Policy, 2020 does emphasise the need for greater industry- 
academia linkages, it has not laid down any distinct roadmap or strategy for facilitating the 
same. Hence, this Bill mandates evry Central University in the country to constitute an 
Industry-Academic Linkage Cell that will help in the creation of an ecosystem at the University 
level for facilitating the transfer of knowledge from academic and research institutions to the 
industrial market. This will also provide a much-needed nudge towards revamping the current 
teaching mechanism and envisioning the syllabi in a manner that actively encourages 
creativity and curiosity among students. 


Hence this Bill. 
V. VIJAYASAI REDDY. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. XXXI oF 2023 


A Bill to provide a framework for the prevention of custodial torture inflicted by public 
servants, punishment and compensation for custodial crimes, rehabilitation of 
victims, protection of victims, complainants and witnesses, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and I. (7) This Act may be called the Prevention of Custodial Torture Act, 2023. 


commencement. : Cc G a हे 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 2. (/) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means relation to a State, the Government of that 
State and in relation to a Union Territory, the Central Governent. 


45 of 860. 


8 of 20]3. 


45 of 860. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2i7 


(b) "public servant" without prejudice to section 2] of the Indian Penal 
Code, 860, refers to any person acting in his/her official capacity under the 
Central Government or the State Government or employed in any Government 
Company as defined in clause 45 of section 2 of the Companies Act, 20I3, or in 
any other institution under the control of the Central Government or the State 
Government. 


(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made uder this Act. 


(2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act shall have 
the same meanings respectively as assigned to them in the Indian Penal Code, !860. 


(3) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in any area, shall, in 
relation to that area, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in 
force in that area. 


3. Whoever, being a public servant or being abetted by a public servant or with 
the consent or acquiescence of a public servant, intentionally inflicts physical or mental 
suffering on a person detained, held in custody or held in administrative detention or 
imprisoned as a result of conviction for an offence, for the purpose of:— 


(a) obtaining information or a confession from him/her or a third persons; 
or 


(b) punishment for an act he/she or a third person has committed or is 
suspected of having committed; or 


(c) intimidating or coercing him/her or a third person for any reason based 
on discrimination on the basis of caste, religion, gender, race, place of residence, 
language or sexual orientation, is said to inflict custodial torture: 


Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any pain, hurt or 
danger caused by any act which is inflicted in accordance with any procedure 
established by law or justified by law. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “custodial torture”, apart 
from physical and mental suffering, includes, but is not limited to food deprivation, 
submersion of head in water, asphyxiation, use of psychoactive drugs, maltreating 
family members, and inflicting shame upon the victim. 


4. Where custodial torture referred to in section 3 is inflicted on a person, the 
burden of proof that the torture was not intentionally caused or abetted by, or was not 
with the consent or acquiescence, of a public servant, shall shift to such public servant. 


5. (/) Where the public servant referred to in section 3 or any person abetted by 
or with the consent or acquiescence of such public servant, tourtures or attempts to 
torture any person, such public servant or person shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than three years but which can extend to ten years and 
shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees. 


(2) Where death of any person is caused due to custodial torture, the person 
committing the offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and shall also be 
liable to fine. 


6. (J) Any public servant or other person committing custodial torture or 
attempting to commit such torture shall also be liable to a fine which shall be payable 
as compensation to the affected person. 


(2) Notwithstanding the fine imposed under this Act, the appropriate Government 
may award such amount of compensation including interim compensation to the victim 
of custodial torture as may be considered necessary for rehabilitation of the victim, as 
may be prescribed. 


Custodial 
torture. 


Burden of 
Proof. 


Punishment 
for custodial 
torture. 


Compensation 
to victims of 
custodial 
torture. 


Abetment to 
torture. 


Custodial 
sexual abuse. 


Cognizance of 
the offence. 


Protection of 
victims, 

complainants 
and witnesses. 


Effect of 
provisions of 
this Act. 


Power to 
make rules. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(3) Compensation by the appropriate Government to the victim of custodial torture 
for the purpose of his rehabilitation shall be awarded taking into consideration amongst 
others, the following factors, namely: — 


(a) the gravity of the physical and mental harm and suffering inflicted, 
including death if caused as a result of custodial torture; 


(b) lost opportunities, including employment, education and social benefits; 


(c) material damages and loss of earnings including loss of earning 
potential; 


(d) cost required for legal or expert assistance, medicine and medical services, 
and psychological and social services; and 


(e) the age, family responsibilities and material condition of the dependents 
of the victim. 


(4) In case of death due to custodial torture, the dependents of the deceased 
person shall be entitled to such amount of compensation including enterim comensation 
under this Act, as may be prescribed. 


7. A public servant who abets, consents, acquiesces, or conspires to commit 
custodial torture shall be liable to the same punishment and compensation referred to in 
sections 5 and section 6. 


8. (/) Whoever, being a public servant or with the consent or acquiescence of a 
public servant, sexually abuses a person detained, held in custody or held in 
administrative detention or imprisoned as a result of conviction for an offence, shall be 
punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be 
less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 


(2) A public servant who consents, acquiesces, or conspires to commit custodial 
sexual abuse referred to in the sub-section (/), shall also be liable to the same punishment 
referred to in sub-section (/). 


9. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, 
no court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act unless the complaint is 
made within a period of two years from the date on which the offence is alleged to have 
been committed. 


0. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the State Government to make 
arrangements for the protection of victims of custodial torture and custodial sexual 
abuse, complainants and witnesses against all kinds of ill-treatment, violence, threats 
of violence, or physical harm or mental trauma, from the time of submission of the 
complaint till such time the State Government is satisfied that such protection is no 
longer required. 


l. (/) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 
any other law for the time being in force. 


(2) The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anyting 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


2. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 


2 of 974. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 


220 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Article 2 of the Indian Constitution guarantees the right to life and personal liberty to 
each and every person in the country. Custodial violence not only takes away the fundamental 
right to life but also viciously violates human dignity. Unfortunately, the existing laws in 
India do not adequately address custodial crimes. 


2. India is a signatory to the United Nation Convention against Torture and other 
Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment since ]4th October, 997, however, 
India is yet to ratify the same. Therefore, enabling legislation against torture is necessary for 
the ratification of the Convention. A legislation against custodial torture in consonance with 
the definition of torture provided under the Convention and related Indian legal provisions 
will ensure a right against custodial torture for all persons in India. 


3. The Supreme Court in the case of D.K. Basu v. State of West Begnal (997) held that 
the expression “‘life or personal liberty” in article 2] of the Constitution of India includes a 
guarantee against torture and assault even by the State and its functionaries to a person who 
is taken into custody. The Law Commission of India has also recommended ratification of the 
UN Convention against Torture and tougher laws for custodial torture. 


4. In 200, the Lok Sabha passed the Prevention of Torture Bill, 20!0 which subsequently 
lapsed in Rajya Sabha. However, the Select Committee of Rajya Sabha in its report on the 
200 Bill flagged certain gaps in the Bill and suggested stricter provisions of prevent custodial 
torture. Taking a cue from the Committee Report, the current Bill criminalises custodial torture, 
death and sexual abuse, and prescribes punishments for these offences. In addition to this, 
the Bill also provides a legal framework for compensation, rehabilitation, and protection of 
victims of custodial violence. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above-stated objectives. 


Hence this Bill. 


MANOJ KUMAR JHA. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 22] 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |2 empowers the Central Government, as the case may be, to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations 
may be made are of procedure and administrative details and as such, it is not practicable to 
provide for them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, 
of a normal character. 


222 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. XXVII or 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and l. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment), Act, 2023. 


commencement. हि ae 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment of 2. In article 5!A of the Constitution, for clause (e), the following clause shall be 
Article 5IA. substituted, namely:— 


"(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of tolerance and common brotherhood 
amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional 
diversities; to renounce any kind of discrimination, violence and practices derogatory 
to the dignity of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other 
Backward Classes and minorities and women.". 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 223 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


"Fraternity" is the most vital constitutional value that binds unity and equality, and is 
an inherent part of the Indian Constitution. While the Preamble sets out fraternity as a 
guiding principle of the Constitution, the fundamental duties translate it into a responsibility 
of each and every citizen of the country. Article 5!A(e) of the Constitution talks about the 
promotion of harmony and brotherhood amongst all people in the country. However, with 
changing times, the scope of fraternity in the Indian Constitution needs to be expanded. 


Be it geographical, linguistic, social, cultural, or religious, diversity exists in every 
corner of the country. India's diversity which has always been recognised as it's most unique 
and powerful characteristic, is being exploited as a tool of oppression, discrimination and 
communalism in the country. In the present scenario, it is our duty to revisit and rejuvenate 
the discourse on fraternity through the channels of the Constitution. 


The differences created by caste, religion, language, and gender cannot be mitigated 
solely by the State or legal instruments. The collective efforts of all citizens are required to 
uproot discrimination and intolerance in the country. Unlike fundamental rights, the 
responsibility of upholding fundamental duties vests with the citizens of India. Therefore, 
fundamental duties are the most appropriate constitutional tool to achieve the objective. 


The protection and socio-economic upliftment of marginalised communities are stated 
as objectives of the Indian Constitution, thus the principles of non-discrimination and tolerance 
should be reflected and endorsed as fundamental duties of every Indian citizen to ensure 
that these values remain uncontested. 


The Bill seeks to achieve above-mentioned objective. 


MANOJ KUMAR JHA. 


224 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bitt No. XXVIII or 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and l. (7) This Act may be called the Payment and Settlement Systems (Amendment) 
commencement. Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
sere of 2. In section 26 of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007:— 5l of 2007. 
section 5 
"(Z) for sub-section (/), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


"(॥) Where a person contravenes the provisions of section 4 or fails to 
comply with the terms and conditions subject to which the authorisation has 
been issued under section 7, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 225 


to one crore rupees and with a further fine which may extend to one lakh rupees 
for every day, after the first during which the contravention or failure to comply 
continues."; 


(ii) in sub-section (2), the words "imprisonment for a term which may extend to 


three years and shall also be liable to" shall be omitted; 


(iii) for sub-section (4), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


"(4) If any person discloses any information, the disclosure of which is 
prohibited under section 22, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend 
to five lakh rupees or an amount equal to twice the amount of the damages 
incurred by the act of such disclosure."; and 


(iv) for sub-section (5), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


"(5) Where a direction issued under this Act is not complied with within 
the period stipulated by the Reserve Bank or where no such period is stipulated, 
within a reasonable time or where the penalty imposed by the Reserve Bank 
under section 30 is not paid within a period of thirty days from the date of the 
order, the system provider or the system participant which has failed to comply 
with the direction or to pay the penalty shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to one crore rupees and where the failure to comply with the direction 
continues, with a further fine which may extend to one lakh rupees for every day, 
after the first during which the contravention continues.”. 


226 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The complexities in section 26 of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 are 
manifold. In an effort to be stricter with the issue of non-compliances, misdirection and 
withholding of relevant statements or information, the aspect of imprisonment for the 
aforementioned offences was introduced. 


2. As per the joint report of regulatory technology firms, the TeamLease RegTech and 
the Observer Research Foundation (ORF) in February, 2022, over 26,000 imprisonment clauses 
in Indian commercial laws have been deterring the spirit of entrepreneurship in India. Of the 
,536 laws that specifically govern the aspect of doing business in India, more than half carry 
imprisonment clauses. Of the 69,233 compliances that businesses have to follow, 37.8 per 
cent. (or almost two out of every five) carry imprisonment clauses. More than half the 
clauses requiring imprisonment carry a sentence of at least one year. In the light of the need 
to ease small and medium-scale businesses, as well as multinational corporates into the 
trading ecosystem of the country, it is imperative that such disproportionate burdens, in the 
form of imprisonment, be done away with. 


3. Necessity and proportionality are essentially general principles of law and legislative 
drafting. In other words, these are principles that ought to be considered whenever a law, a 
rule or a regulation is being written. Since they do not have a universal definition, for the 
purpose of regulatory compliance criminality, we shall adopt a working definition of the two 
principles. One, for imprisonment to be justified in a law or regulation creating criminality, it 
must be fundamental to securing the ends of the regulation itself (necessity). And two, such 
punishment must be commensurate with the gravity of the harm caused or likely to be caused 
or it must offer justified restitution, first and foremost. Imprisonment must be seen as a last 
resort, to deal with the most severe of harms that strikes at the roots of a country's ethos. In 
the light of the same, reforms to clauses around imprisonment shall strengthen capital flows, 
facilitate a greater exchange of privileged end-to-end corporate information and instil a general 
sense of security for upcoming business enterprises. 


4. The proposed amendment seeks to obliterate the element of criminality in the form of 
imprisonment and instead, opts for a reformative system of penalties to protect, and promote 
the interests of business. 


Hence, this Bill. 
AMAR PATNAIK. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 227 


Bit No. XXX oF 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 76609. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows: — 


. (7) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


45 of 860. 2. For section 305 of the Indian Penal Code, 860, (hereinafter referred to as the 
Code), the following section shall be substituted, namely: — 


“३05, If any person under eighteen years of age, any insane person, any 
delirious person, any idiot, any specially-abled person, or any person in a state of 
intoxication, commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide, 
shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term 
not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.” 


3. In the Code, in section 375, Exception 2, shall be omitted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Substitution of 
section 305. 


Abetment of 
suicide of child, 
insane person 
or specially- 
abled person. 


Amendment of 
section 375. 


228 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


India is a society riddled with myriad distinctions. The plight of individuals who are 
specially-abled makes them vulnerable to extraneous pressures or coercion of any kind. 
The World Bank estimates that |5 per cent of the world's population is affected by one 
disability or another. According to the 20l] Census, the number of disabled in India stands 
at 2.68 crores or 2.2 per cent of the population. In the last decade, India has unfortunately 
witnessed a spate of suicides by the specially-abled. 


Suicides can be triggered by a variety of factors. The extreme levels of inequity 
notwithstanding, he specially-abled are at a high risk of being pushed towards the extreme. 
Section 305 of the Indian Penal Code covers children, insane persons, and persons under 
intoxication. Considering the potential psychological impact of societal inequities, limitations 
of opportunity, and general hostility, it becomes essential to place the life of the specially- 
abled in the same bracket. 


Further, cases of child molestation and Rape have always been a source of tension for 
a developing society like India. As per the reports of the National Crime Records Bureau 
(NCRB) in 2020, over twenty-eight thousand crimes reported under the Protection of Children 
from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act were against girls. This was a total of 99 per cent of 
crimes against children under the POCSO act. Further, under the same report, the crimes 
against l6 to l8 year old girls were the highest at [4,092. 


The data shows that minor girls continue to be the most vulnerable sections of 
society. In this context, up until the year 2022, the Indian Penal Code, 860 did not even 
acknowledge forced sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, if she was 5 years of 
age and above. While the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 203 amended the Indian Penal 
Code to raise the age of consent to sexual intercourse to 8, but, it did not apply further to 
Exception 2 of section 375. 


It created a contradiction where exception 2 of section 375, i.e. “Sexual intercourse by 
aman with his own wife, the wife not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape” implied 
that forced sexual intercourse by a husband with a minor wife was decriminalized. However, 
in 20I8, under the Independent Tought Vs Union of India, 20/7 case, the Supreme Court 
acknowledged this and read down the exception to raise the age of consent to |8. This 
decision was taken in line with the age of consent and attaining majority as established in 
different laws and statutes across the country. It also called for Parliament to rectify the 
anomaly and address violations of girls' rights due to child marriage. However, no amendment 
has been introduced in this regard since then. 


The very existence of Exception 2, which fails to deter husbands from engaging in 
acts of forced sexual contact with their minor wives, adversely affects the physical and 
mental health of women and undermines their ability to live with dignity. Therefore, the 
provisions mentioned under the exception to this section further perpetuate inequality and 
violate the right to life and personal liberty, calling for urgent Parliamentary intervention. 


This Bill proposes to protect the specially-abled persons and bring such people, who 
abet their suicide, to justice and to bring greater clarity in preventing sexual violence 
against minor married girls. 


Hence this Bill. 


AMAR PATNAIK. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 229 


BiLt No. XLII oF 2023 


A Bill to identify areas of concern displaying vulnerability to the effects of climate 
change, to study and measure the risks posed as well as identify outcomes of 
climate change in such areas through a Climate Change Impact Assessment; 

to further formulate and implement Community Action Plans to build 
resilience, ensure rehabilitation as well as resettlement of the 
affected areas and of persons living in such areas, as the 
case may be, and provide for the rights and obligations 
of appropriate Governments and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (7) This Act may be called the Adaptation to Climate Change (Resilience, Short title and 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement) Act, 2023. commencement: 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Notifying 
Areas of 
Concern. 


230 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State; in the case of a Union Territory, the Union Territory Administration; and in 
all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "Area of Concern" means an area within the territory of India which is 
declared as such under section 3; 


(c) "climate change" means a change of climate which is in addition to natural 
climate variability observed over a comparable time period; 


(d) "Climate Change Impact Assessment" means the process of identifying, 
diagnosing, measuring, categorizing and documenting risks posed by climate change 
in an Area of Concern and its people, communities, economic activities etc., as laid 
down in section 4; 


(e) "Climate Change Impact Assessment Report" means the report compiled 
and published by the appropriate Government in accordance with sub-section (4) of 
section 4; 


(f) "effects of climate change" includes events as listed under sub-section (/) 
of section 3; 


(g) “local authority" means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council or 
Town Planning Committee or Zila Parishad or Nagar Panchayat or Panchayat, by 
whatever name called, and includes such other authority or body having administrative 
control or empowered by, or under any law for the time being in force to function as a 
local authority in any city, town or village; 


(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules and/or orders made under this Act; 


(i) "resilience" means the ability of an area to prepare for, absorb, and 
accommodate, the effects of climate change in a timely and efficient manner; 


() "rehabilitation" means a planned process by which persons or groups of 
persons, who are forced to move or are obliged to move temporarily, from the places 
of their habitual residence due to the risk of occurrence of sudden-onset disaster, are 
assisted to move from such places, and are temporarily settled in a safe location, and 
provided with the conditions for supporting their lives as prescribed under section 7 
for such temporary period until their return to the places of their habitual residence is 
ensured or until their resettlement elsewhere; and 


(k) "resettlement" means a planned process by which persons or groups of 
persons, who are forced to move or are obliged to move permanently, from the places 
of their habitual residence due to the risk of loss of territory, are assisted to move from 
such places, and are permanently settled in a safe location, and provided with the 
conditions for rebuilding their lives as prescribed under sub-section (2) of section 8. 


3. (/) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to identify and notify regions 


within its territory, both urban and rural, as Areas of Concern where it has reasons to believe 
that an identified region is vulnerable to climate change and its effects and where such 
reason is based on previous or ongoing occurrences of any of the following events or 
where it has reasons to believe that any of the following events are most likely to occur and 
re-occur in the ordinary course:— 


(a) sea level rise; 
(b) desertification; 
(c) glacial melt; 


(d) increasing temperatures; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23] 


(e) land/forest degradation; 

(f) precipitation changes; 

(g) salinization; 

(h) extreme weather events like floods and landslides; and/or 

(i) any other disasters directly or indirectly attributable to climate change. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (/), the 
appropriate Government shall notify Areas of Concern in such manner, subject to the 
considerations stipulated in sub-section (/) and based on such other considerations, as 
may be prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall as expeditiously as possible, but not later than 
three months from the date of commencement of this Act, notify areas within its territory as 
Areas of Concern in accordance with this provision. 


4. (/) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to conduct Climate Change 
Impact Assessment in each Area of Concern within its territory, in such manner and according 
to such procedure, as may be prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government and as 
per the policy framed by it for the purpose of identifying and studying the effects of climate 
change in such area(s). 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (/), the 
process of Climate Change Impact Assessment shall, amongst other matters, identify relevant 
effects of climate change in the Area of Concern, as well as record projections, forecasts 
and results that are quantifiable and measurable wherever required, of any of the following 
outcomes occurring due to the identified effects of climate change in such area(s) and upon 
people living within such area(s):— 


(a) expected loss of livelihood; 
(b) water or food security; 

(c) risk of sudden-onset disaster; 
(d) loss of territories etc.; and/or 


(e) such other results, projections or forecasts as may be considered necessary 
to be recorded by the appropriate Government or as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


(3) Whenever the appropriate Government intends to conduct a Climate Change 
Impact Assessment under sub-section (/), it shall consult the concerned local authorities in 
such area(s) as well as adequate number of persons, families and communities living in such 
area(s), and conduct the said assessment in consultation with them in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf: 


Provided that the appropriate Government shall ensure that adequate 
representation has been given to the representatives of each of the local authorities, 
and representatives of persons, families and communities living in such area(s), as the 
case may be, at the stage of carrying out the Climate Change Impact Assessment in such 
area(s). 


(4) The appropriate Government shall, as expeditiously as possible but not later 
than six months from the date of notification of the Area of Concern, compile and publish 
a report containing all the information obtained during the process of Climate Change 
Impact Assessment including the results, projections and forecasts as stipulated in 
sub-section (2) and such other information as may be deemed necessary, in such form as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf or as may be considered 
necessary to be recorded by the appropriate Government. 


Conducting 
Climate 
Change 
Impact 
Assessment. 


Community 
Action Plan 
for building 
resilience and 
ensuring 
rehabilitation 
and 
resettlement. 


Building 
resilience. 


232 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


5. () It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to formulate and implement 
a specific Community Action Plan for each Area of Concern under its jurisdiction, 
consisting of localized solutions and specific actions to be undertaken for building resilience 
as well as ensuring rehabilitation and resettlement or any combination of them or all of them, 
as the case may be in accordance with the provisions of sections 6 to 8 and the policy 
framed by the Central Government for carrying out such purposes, in such manner and 
according to such procedure as may be prescribed by the Central Government in this 
behalf. 


(2) For the purpose of formulating and implementing the Community Action Plan, the 
appropriate Government shall act in consultation with as well as take assistance of each of 
the concerned local authorities, and shall ensure adequate participation and representation 
of the persons living in such Area of Concern in the manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government in this behalf: 


Provided that in the case of building resilience, the implementation of the Community 
Action Plan shall involve the participation of at least one member from each household 
living in a particular Area of Concern. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall formulate and implement the Community Action 
Plan as expeditiously as possible, but not later than six months from the date of publishing 
of the Climate Change Assessment report as required under sub-section (4) of section 4 of 
this Act. 


6. (/) Where the Climate Change Impact Assessment Report for an Area of Concern 
suggests that one of the impacts arising out of the identified effects of climate change in 
such area(s) or upon persons living in such area(s), among others, is loss of livelihood or 
water or food insecurity or both or such other impacts where measures to build resilience 
are considered necessary by the appropriate Government, as the case may be, then in such 
cases the appropriate Government shall formulate and implement a Community Action Plan 
to build resilience, in accordance with the general provisions of section 5 of this Act and the 
policy formulated in this behalf by the Central Government, in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (/), the 
Community Action Plan for building resilience shall contain a detailed plan of action to 
ensure implementation of the following measures among others, in the relevant Areas of 
Concern and for the people living or employed in such area(s):— 


(a) watershed development; 

(b) promotion of climate resilient agriculture practices; 

(c) crop insurance; 

(d) water and forest conservation; 

(e) drought mitigation measure; 

(f) sustainable land management; 

(g) alternate rural livelihood skilling; 

(h) off farm livelihoods targeting the needs of the national labour market; 
(i) building climate proof housing and community infrastructure; 
(j) increasing green space and canopy cover; 

(k) building seawalls to prevent coastal erosion; 


(J) ensuring proper flood management through effective drainage and creating 
permeable surfaces; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 233 


(m) providing alternate skilling to vulnerable workers who are facing adverse 
productivity losses due to negative health outcomes of climate change in urban areas 
of concern, and providing suitable one-time monetary compensation, where such 
skilling is not possible on account of severe health issues faced by any such person; 


(n) increasing capacity of public health institutions to manage the expected rise 
in adverse health issues due to climate change; and 


(०) such other measures as may be deemed necessary by the appropriate 
Government or as may be prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf. 


7. (7) Where the Climate change Impact Assessment Report for an Area of Concern 
suggests that one of the impacts arising out of the identified effects of climate change in 
such area(s) or upon persons living in such area(s), among others, is risk of a sudden-onset 
disaster, then in such cases the appropriate Government shall formulate and implement a 
Community Action Plan to ensure rehabilitation, in accordance with the general provisions 
of section 5 of this Act and the policy formulated in this behalf by the Central Government, 
in such form and manner as may be prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (/) the 
Community Action Plan to ensure rehabilitation shall stipulate a detailed plan of action to 
ensure implementation of the following measures among others, for all the persons and their 
families having their places of habitual residence in the concerned Area of Concern:— 


(a) identification of the number of persons and families requiring rehabilitation; 


(b) identification of an alternative safe location to accommodate all such persons 
and families; 


(c) rescuing all such persons and families, and ensuring their temporary relocation 
in a planned manner to the location identified under clause (b); 


(d) setting up in the safe location identified under clause (b), temporary medical 
services, health and sanitation awareness workshops and educational camps for 
children, and ensuring its access to all such persons and families; 


(e) investing in early warning systems and effective dissemination of alerts to 
the vulnerable population; and 


(f) such other measures as may be deemed necessary by the appropriate 
Government for ensuring rehabilitation or as may be prescribed in this behalf by the 
Central Government. 


8. (7) Where the Climate Change Impact Assessment report for an area of concern 
suggests that one of the impact arising out of the identified effects of climate change in such 
area(s) or upon persons living in such area(s), among others, in the risk of loss of territory, 
then in such cases the appropriate Government shall formulate and implement a Community 
Action Plan to ensure resettlement, in accordance with the general provisions of section 5 of 
this Act and the policy formulated in this behalf by the Central Government, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision of sub-section (/), the 
Community Action Plan to ensure resettlement shall stipulate a detailed plan of action to 
ensure implementation of the following measures, among others, for the all the persons or 
families belonging to a common household having their homes or places of habitual residence 
in the concerned Area of Concern:— 


(a) identification of the persons and families belonging to a common household 
having their homes in such area(s) requiring resettlement; 


Ensuring 
rehabilitation. 


Ensuring 
resettlement. 


Responsibilities 
of the Central 
Government. 


234 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) identification of an alternative safe location where land or a house could be 
allotted to all the persons, or to each of the families belonging to acommon household 
having their homes or places of habitual residence in such area(s); 


(c) allotment of a house or a land to each such persons or families belonging to 
a common household in the safe place identified under clause (8), 


(d) ensuring access to basic amenities including safe drinking water, proper 
sanitation, electricity etc. to each land or house allocated under clause (c); 


(e) providing an employment opportunity to at least one person belonging to 
each such family, near or within the place identified as per clause (c), or compensation 
in lieu of such opportunity; 


(f) issuing an identity card to each such person for availing benefits of welfare 
schemes of the appropriate Government with distinction; 


(g) providing appropriate skill training to at least one person belonging to each 
such family, in order to equip such person with requisite skills to avail basic employment; 
and 


(h) such other measures as may be deemed necessary by the appropriate 
Government for ensuring resettlement, or as may be prescribed in this behalf by the 
Central Government. 


9. (7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government shall have the 


responsibility to take all such measures as it deems necessary or expedient for carrying out 


the purposes of building resilience and ensuring rehabilitation and resettlement, against or 
occurring due to or which might occur due to the effects of climate change. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision of sub-section (/), the Central 


Government shall in such manner as may be prescribed:— 


(a) lay down, publish and execute a nationwide policy in this regard including 
formulation and implementation of Community Action Plans as laid down in 
sections 6 to 8, conducting Climate Change Impact Assessment and any other policies 
on such other matters as it deems necessary or expedient for carrying out the purpose(s) 
of this Act; 


(b) ensure appropriate allocation of funds and extend financial assistance to the 
State Governments for building resilience, ensuring rehabilitation and resettlement 
against the effects of climate change and for carryig out all other purposes of this Act, 
as assigned to them thereunder; 


(c) ensure coordination of actions of the Ministries of Departments of the 
Government of India, State Governments, authorities constituted and officers appointed 
under the provisions of this Act, in relation to the duties and functions assigned to 
them under the provisions of this Act; 


(d) ensure co-operation of and assistance to State Governments, on all matters 
including conducting Climate Change Impact Assessment and preparing and 
implementing Community Action Plans in accordance with the provisions of this Act, 
either as requested by them or otherwise deemed appropriate by it for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act; 


(e) plan and organise training of all persons either of the State Governments or of 
itself, as the case may be, engaged or proposed to be engaged for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act; 


(f) collect, compile and publish technical and statistical data relating to climate 
change and its effects and necessary for building resilience, ensuring rehabilitation 
and resettlement against such effects; 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 235 


(g) formulate and prescribe a detailed procedure and format for conducting 
Climate Change Impact Assessment by the appropriate Governments including rules 
for identifying and measuring risks posed by climate change and its effects, 
consultation with persons living within the Area of Concern, preparation and publication 
of Climate Change Impact Assessment reports and other relevant aspects thereof as 
the Central Government may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act; 


(h) formulate and prescribe a detailed procedure and format for the preparation 
and implementation of Community Action Plans by the appropriate Government for 
building resilience, ensuring rehabilitation and resettlement against or due to the effects 
of climate change; 


(i) research, compile, document and disseminate, amongst each of the appropriate 
Governments and to the public, data and information on possible adverse impact of 
climate change on public health, as well as recommend measures to be taken by the 
appropriate Government and health sector including measures to train their personnel, 
develop medical infrastructure and such other measures as the Central Government 
may deem necessary to deal with such adverse impact on public health; and 


(/) take such other actions or measures as it may consider necessary for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. 


(3) The Central Government may, if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act, by order, published in the Official Gazette, constitute 
an authority or authorities, by such name or names, as may be specified in the order, for the 
purpose of exercising and performing such of the powers and functions of the Central 
Government under this Act and for taking such measures with respect to all or any of the 
matters referred to in sub-section (2) as may be mentioned in the order and subject to the 
supervision and control of the Central Government and in accordance with the provisions of 
such order, such authority or authorities may exercise the powers or perform the functions or 
take the measures so mentioned in the order as if such authority or authorities had been 
empowered by this Act to exercise those powers or perform those functions or take such 
measures. 


0. (7) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (3) of 
section 9, the Central Government may appoint such number of officers with such designation, 
as it thinks fit, and on such salary, allowances and other conditions of service, as may be 
prescribed, for carrying out the purposes of this Act and may entrust to them such powers 
and functions under this Act, as it may deem fit. 


(2) The officers appointed under sub-section (/) shall be subject to the general control 
and direction of the Central Government or, if so directed by that Government, also of the 
authority or authorities, if any, constituted under sub-section (3) of section 9 or of any other 
authority or officer, as it may deem fit. 


Il. (7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government shall have the 
responsibility to take all such measures as may be prescribed under the nationwide policy 
formulated by the Central Government under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 9 and 
any other measures, as it may deem necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of 
building resilience and ensuring rehabilitation and resettlement, against or occurring due to 
or which might occur due to the effects of climate change and such other measures as 
prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (/), the 
appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed, shall:— 


(a) identify and notify Areas of Concern in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act; 


Appointment 
of officers by 
the Central 

Government. 


Responsibilities 
of the 
appropriate 
Government. 


Appointment 
of officers 

by the 
appropriate 
Government. 


Duties of 
local 
authorities. 


236 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) conduct Climate Change Impact Assessment and publish report thereof in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act; 


(c) formulate and implement Community Action Plans, wherever required, to 
build resilience, ensure rehabilitation and resettlement, as the case may be, against or 
occurring due to or may occur due to the effects of climate change, in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act; 


(d) ensure coordination of actions of different Departments functioning under it 
as well as coordination of actions of the local authorities functioning under its 
jurisdiction for carrying out the purposes of this Act; 


(e) where the appropriate Government is the State Government, ensure 
cooperation with, and provide assistance to, the Ministries or Departments of the 
Government of India for carrying out the purposes of this Act, as requested by them or 
otherwise deemed appropriate by it; 


(f) ensure appropriate allocation of funds to its Departments and local authorities 
for building resilience, ensuring rehabilitation and resettlement against the effects of 
climate change and for carrying out all the other purposes of this Act; 


(g) take measures to develop medical infrastructure, train personnel involved in 
providing medical services and such other measures as the appropriate Government 
deems necessary or as recommended by the Central Government, to deal with the 
possible adverse impact of climate change on public health; and 


(h) take such other actions or measures as it may consider necessary for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. 


(3) The appropriate Government may, if it considers it necessary or expendient so to do 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act, by order, published in the Official Gazette, constitute 
an authority or authorities, by such name or names, as may be specified in the order, for the 
purpose of exercising and performing such of the powers and functions of the appropriate 
Government under this Act and for taking such measures with respect to all or any of the 
matters referred to in sub-section (2) as may be mentioned in the order, and subject to the 
supervision and control of the appropriate Government and in accordance with the provisions 
of such order, such authority or authorities may exercise the powers or perform the functions 
or take the measures so mentioned in the order as if such authority or authorities had been 
empowered by this Act to exercise those powers or perform those functions or take such 
measures. 


2. (7) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (3) of 
section l], the appropriate Government may appoint such number of officers with such 
designation, as it thinks fit, and on such salary, allowances and other conditions of service, 
as may be prescribed, for carrying out the purposes of this Act and may entrust to them such 
powers and functions under this Act, as it may deem fit. 


(2) The officers appointed under sub-section (/) shall be subject to the general control 
and direction of such appropriate Government or, if so directed by that Government, also of 
the authority or authorities, if any, constituted under sub-section (3) of section |] or of any 
other authority or officer, as it may deem fit. 


3. (/) It shall be the duty of the local authorities in the concerned Area of Concern 
to assist the appropriate Government in conducting the Climate Change Impact Assessment 
as well as in the formulation and the implementation of the Community Action Plans to 
build resilience or ensure rehabilitation or resettlement, as the case may be, in each such 
area, in accordance with the provisions of this Act and policy(ies) formulated and rules 
made thereunder in this behalf by the Central Government. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 237 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (/), the local 
authorities shall in such manner as may be prescribed:— 


(a) ensure that its oficers and employees are trained adequately for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act including, among others, for conducting the Climate Change 
Impact Assessment, formulating and implementing the Community Action Plans for 
building resilience, ensuring rehabilitation and providing resettlement, as the case 
may be, etc.; 


(b) ensure availability of adequate funds to support and carry out Climate Change 
Impact Assessment and formulate and implement the Community Action Plans for building 
resilience, ensuring rehabilitation and resettlement, as the case may be, etc.; 


(c) participate in, carry out and conduct Climate Change Impact Assessment 
including its consultation process in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 


(d) participate and support in the formulation as well as implementation of the 
Community Action Plans for building resilience, ensuring rehabilitation and 
resettlement, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 


(e) build awareness and ensure dissemination of information amongst persons, 
families and communities living in the Areas of Concern regarding the actions taken 
under this Act; 


(f) encourage participation from amongst the persons, families and communities 
living in the Areas of Concern, in the activities undertaken by the appropriate 
Government and itself under this Act; and 


(g) take such other actions or measures as it may deem necessary for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. 


4. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules Power to 
in respect of the following matters, namely:— make rules. 


(a) the manner, procedure and considerations, subject to the consideration 
already stipulated under sub-section (/) of section 73 of this Act, based on which the 
appropriate Government shall notify Areas of Concern under section 73 of this Act; 


(b) the manner and procedure for conducting the Climate Change Impact 
Assessment by the appropriate Government, as required under sub-section (/) of 
section 4, including rules for the results, projections or forecasts to be recorded in 
such assessment, as required under sub-section (2) of section 4, rules for the form, 
manner and procedure of conducting consultation with the relevant local authority, 
persons, families and communities living in relevant area of concern, as required under 
sub-section (3) of section 4, and the rules for the procedure, form and manner of 
compiling and publishing the report of Climate Change Impact Assessment as well as 
the information, results and projections to be included in such report, as required 
under sub-section (4) of section 4, of this Act; 


(c) the form, manner and procedure for formulating and implementing the 
Community Action Plan for building resilience by the appropriate Government, as 
required under sub-section (/) of section 5 and sub-section (/) of section 6, including 
rules for stipulating lists of measures to be formulated and implemented in such plans, 
as required under section (2) of section 6, rules for participation of local authorities 
and persons living in the relevant Areas of Concern, in the consultation as well as the 
implementation of such plans, as required under sub-section (2) of 
section 5, and sub-section (3) of section 5; 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 


238 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(d) the form, manner and procedure for formulating and implementing the 
Community Action Plan for ensuring rehabilitation by the appropriate Government, as 
required under sub-section (/) of section 5 and sub-section (/) of section 7, including 
rules for stipulating lists of measures to be formulated and implemented in such plans, 
as required under section (2) of section 7, rules for participation of local authorities 
and persons living in the relevant Areas of Concern, in the consultation as well as the 
implementation of such plans, as required under sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 5; 


(e) the form, manner and procedure for formulating and implementing the 
Community Action Plan for ensuring resettlement by the appropriate Government, as 
required under sub-section (/) of section 5 and sub-section (/) of section 8 including 
rules for stipulating lists of measures to be formulated and implemented in such plans, 
as required under section (2) of section 8, rules for participation of local authorities 
and persons living in the relevant areas of concern, in the consultation as well as the 
implementation of such plans, as required under sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 5; 
and 


(f) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed, or is considered 
expedient for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 239 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Today there are multiple reports and studies that prove the existence of climate change 
and its adverse effects on our planet and its diverse inhabitants. The Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change in their assessment reports have concluded that human activities 
are altering our climate system. These changes are not only manifesting in the form of 
increased frequency and magnitude of extreme weather events but also through a gradual 
change in weather patterns. These slow onset effects of climate change are ensuring that the 
consequences are almost invisible to all except the ones that are facing their full brunt. 


While climate change is a global phenomenon, the intensity and consequences of its 
impact are being shouldered unequally, both across and within countries. Those communities, 
whose livelihoods are dependent on natural resources are facing the maximum brunt of its 
effects, compounding their existing high vulnerabilities. Changes in temperature, precipitation, 
and land degradation are rendering agriculture and other natural resource-based livelihoods 
both unproductive and unreliable, leaving those reliant on it with very difficult choices. 
They can either stay and suffer or migrate out to sustain themselves. For some communities 
in coastal India, there isn't even a choice as increasing intensity of sea erosion has led to 
entire villages being abandoned. 


These people are already amongst the poorest and are now having to use their 
constrained resources to cope with adverse climatic conditions. This extends to the poor in 
urban areas as well, whose daily livelihoods, unlike the more fortunate, aren't insulated from 
the vagaries of environment and hence are much more vulnerable. 


While the effects of climate change are showing up in different forms throughout the 
country, acommon feature however, is their disproportionate impact on the already vulnerable 
and poor. They are paying the highest price for the growth and development that has 
ironically evaded them the most. They are victims of climate change and it is therefore the 
duty of the State to ensure their protection. 


This Bill seeks to lay out a strategy to build resilience and ensure rehabilitation and 
resettlement of the affected communities. While mitigation efforts need to continue with 
fervour and determination, they need to be complemented by building adaptive capacity to 
minimise the damage to livelihoods from climate change. For this purpose, there is a need for 
a systematic framework which institutionalises climate change adaptation at the national 
level while simultaneously allowing for localised strategies. 


Hence, this Bill. 
VANDANA CHAVAN. 


240 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Goverment shall conduct Climate 
Change Impact Assessment in each Area of Concern within its territory and compile and 
publish a report thereon. Clauses 5 to 8 of the Bill provide that the appropriate Government 
shall formulate and implement a specific Community Action Plan for building resilience and 
ensuring rehabilitation as well as resettlement in each Area of Concern under its jurisdiction 
and chalk out a detailed action plan as well as take such specific measures as laid down in the 
provisions of these sections for implementation of each specific Community Action Plan. 


Clause 9 of the Bill provides that it shall be the responsibility of the Central Government 
to take all such measures as it deems necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of 
building resilience and ensuing rehabilitation and resettlement, against or occurring due to 
or which might occur due to the effects of climate change, including formulation, publication 
and execution of a nationwide policy, ensuring appropriate allocation of funds and extend 
financial assistance to the respective State Governments, training of all persons, publishing 
technical and statistical data relating to climate change etc. as well as constitute an authority 
or authorities to carry out the provisions of the Bill, if deemed necessary. 


Clause | of the Bill inter alia provides that the appropriate Government shall take all 
such measures as it deems necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of building 
resilience and ensuring rehabilitation and resettlement, against or occurring due to or which 
might occur due to the effects of climate change, including identifying and notifying Areas 
of Concern, conducting Climate Change Impact Assessment, implementing Community Action 
Plans, ensuring appropriate allocation of funds etc., as well as constitute an authority or 
authorities to carry out the provisions of the Bill, if deemed necessary. 


Clause |0 and |2 of the Bill respectively provide for the appointment of such number 
of officers with such designations, as the Central and appropriate Governments may think fit, 
on such salary, allowances and other conditions of service, as may be prescribed. 


Clause 3 provides that the local authorities shall inter alia in the concerned Area of 
Concern assist the appropriate Government in conducting the Climate Change Impact 
Assessments, as well as ensure training of its officers and employees, availability of adequate 
funds to support and carry out Climate Change Impact Assessments etc. 


This Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve additional expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India, both recurring or non-recurring. However, at this stage, it is difficult to make 
any estimate of the expenditure. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 24] 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause |4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 


the purposes of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


242 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. XXXVIII or 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. After article 6 of the Constitution, the following new article shall be inserted, Insertion of new 
namely:— article l6A. 


+[60., Nothing in article 6 or in sub-clause (g) of clause (/) of article [9 shall Reservation in 
prevent the State from making any special provisions, by law, for the advancement of matters of 
any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or the Scheduled Castes Sp ent ae 
or the Scheduled Tribes, to provide for reservation in matters of employment in private Bee part 
sector companies, undertakings or institutions.” 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 243 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


India is a country of diverse people and religion. Some people have fared better than 
others and therefore the concept of reservation was introduced in the system to bring at par 
the marginalized and backward classes of people. Article l6 prohibits discrimination in 
employment in any government office. However, the Government can allow reservation for 
any community if they are not adequately represented in services or posts under the State. 


In this scenario, when the public sector is shrinking, the provisions for reservation of 
posts or appointments for weaker sections of the society, as contemplated under article 6(4) 
or under the Mandal Commission Report, are losing their significance, in so far as protection 
of the interests of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes are 
concerned. Moreover, with the funds being raised as loan from Public Sector Banks for their 
capital, and to get land and other services from the State Government at cheap rates, the 
private companies have an obligation to provide services including providing employment 
opportunities to the community. 


Therefore, in order to bring the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward 
Classes into the national mainstream, it is proposed that the State shall make special provision 
for reservation of posts, or appointments in government service and private sector. The Bill 
seeks to insert new article !6A in the Constitution to allow reservation in matters of employment 
and job opportunities in private sector companies, undertakings or institutions. 


Hence, this Bill. 


M. SHANMUGAM. 


244 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bitt No. XXXVI oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of a Motor Vehicle Drivers and Other Workers 
Welfare Fund and to implement measures to promote the welfare of persons engaged 
in driving and other workers engaged in motor vehicles used for 
commercial purposes and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicle Drivers and Other Workers Welfare — Short title and 
Fund Act, 2023. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different States and 
for different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any provision to the commencement 
of this Act, shall, in relation to a State, be construed as a reference to the coming into force 
of that provision in that State. 


Definitions. 


Motor Vehicle 
Drivers and 
Other 
Workers 
Welfare Fund. 


Application 
of Fund. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 245 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "Fund" means the Motor Vehicle Drivers and Other Workers Welfare Fund 
established under section 3 of this Act; 


(b) "motor vehicle drivers" means the persons who are drivers of a motor vehicle 
used for commercial purposes, including two-wheelers, three-wheeler autos, four 
wheeler taxi, cab, other multi-utility vehicles like tempo and also other commercial 
vehicles like lorry, truck, oil tanker, water tanker, dipper, dumper, trailer, either directly 
engaged or through any employer, agency, contractor, whether for wages or not, for 
transportation of persons, or goods and other materials; 


(c) "other workers" means workers like cleaners, driver's assistants who help the 
drivers while they are engaged in driving of a motor vehicle and such other supporting 
labourers like road-side mechanics, mechanic assistants etc.; and 


(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. (/) There shall be established a Fund to be called the Motor Vehicle Drivers and 
Other Workers Welfare Fund for the purpose of implementing various measures to promote 
the welfare of motor vehicle drivers and other workers engaged in motor vehicles used for 
commercial purposes. 


(2) The Central Government, shall from time to time, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, contribute such sums of money and/or funds, as may be 
necessary, to carry out the purposes of this Act. 


4. (/) The Fund shall be applied by the Central Government to meet the expenditure 
incurred in connection with measures and facilities which, in the opinion of that Government, 
are necessary or expedient to promote the welfare of drivers and other workers engaged in 
motor vehicles of commercial nature; and in particular— 


(a) to defray the cost of such measures for the benefit of such persons directed 
towards— 


(i) the improvement of public health and sanitation, the prevention of 
disease and the provision and improvement of medical facilities; 


(ii) the provision and improvement of water supplies and facilities for 
washing at the rest rooms; 


(iii) the provision and improvement of educational facilities; 


(iv) the provision and improvement of housing and recreational facilities 
including standards of living, nutrition and amelioration of social conditions; 
and 


(v) the provision and improvement of such other welfare measures and 
facilities as may be prescribed; 


(b) to grant loan or subsidy to a State Government, or to a local authority or an 
employer in aid of any scheme approved by the Central Government for the purposes 
connected with the welfare of motor vehicle drivers and other workers; 


(c) to pay annually grants-in-aid to a State Government, or to a local authority or 
to an agency which satisfies the prescribed criteria (hereinafter to be referred to as the 
agency) or to an agency who provides to the satisfaction of the Central Government, 
welfare measures and facilities of the prescribed standard for the benefit of motor 
vehicle drivers and other workers; 


(d) to meet the allowances, if any, of the members of the State Advisory 
Committees and the Central Advisory Committee constituted under sections 5 and 6 
respectively and the salaries and allowances, if any, of persons appointed under 
section 8; 


246 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(e) any other expenditure which the Central Government may direct to be defrayed 
from the Fund. 


(2) The Central Government shall have power to decide whether any particular 
expenditure is or is not debitable to the Fund, and its decision shall be final. 


5. (J) The Central Government may constitute as many State Advisory Committees as 
it thinks fit, but not exceeding one for each of the States and Union Territories, to advise the 
Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as may be 
referred to it by that Government, including matters relating to the application of the Fund. 


(2) Each State Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of persons as may be 
appointed to it by the Central Government and the members shall be chosen in such manner 
and for such term as may be prescribed: 


Provided that each State Advisory Committee shall include equal number of members 
representing the respective State Government, persons providing employment to motor 
vehicle drivers, persons engaged in the business of motor vehicles, and trade unions 
representing the motor vehicle drivers: 


Provided further that at least one member of every State Advisory Committee shall be 
a woman. 


(3) The Chairman of each State Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central 
Government, in such manner and for such term as may be prescribed; and 


(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all members 
of every State Advisory Committee. 


6. (J) The Central Government may constitute a Central Advisory Committee to 
co-ordinate the work of the State Advisory Committees constituted under section 5 and to 
advise the Central Government on any matter arising out of the administration of this Act. 


(2) The Central Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of persons as may 
be appointed to it by the Central Government and the members shall be chosen in such 
manner and for such term as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the Central Advisory Committee shall include equal number of members 
representing the Central Government, persons providing employment to motor vehicle drivers, 
persons engaged in the business of motor vehicles, and trade unions representing the motor 
vehicle drivers: 


Provided further that at least one member of the Central Advisory Committee shall be 
a woman. 


(3) The Chairman of the Central Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central 
Government, in such manner and for such term as may be prescribed; and 


(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all members 
of the Central Advisory Committee. 


7. ()AState Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Committee may, at any time 
and for such period as it thinks fit, co-opt any person or persons to the Advisory Committee. 


(2) A person co-opted under sub-section (/) shall exercise all the powers and functions 
of a member under this Act but shall not be entitled to vote. 


(3) The State Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Committee may, if it considers 
it necessary or expedient so to do, invite any person to attend its meeting and when such 
person attends any meeting, he or she shall not be entitled to vote thereat. 


State 
Advisory 
Committees. 


Central 
Advisory 
Committee. 


Power to 
co-opt. 


Appointment 
of Welfare 


Commissioners, 


etc., and their 
powers. 


Annual report 
of the 
activities 
financed 
under the Act. 


Power to call 
for 
information. 


Power to 
make rules. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 247 


8. (/) The Central Government may appoint as many Welfare Commissioners, Welfare 
Officers, Inspectors and such other officers and staff as it thinks necessary for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct a Welfare 
Commissioner to appoint such staff as is considered necessary for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act. 


(3) Every person appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of section 2 of the Indian Penal Code, 860. 


(4) Any Welfare Commissioner, Welfare Officer or Inspector may,— 


(a) with such assistance, if any, as he or she may think fit, enter at any reasonable 
time, any place which he or she considers it necessary to enter for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act; 


(9) do within such place anything necessary for the proper discharge of his or 
her duties; and 


(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 


9. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after the end of each financial 
year, cause to be published in the Official Gazette, a report giving an account of its activities 
carried out under this Act during the previous financial year together with a statement of 
accounts, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


0. The Central Government may require a State Government or a local authority or any 
such agency to furnish, for the purposes of this Act, such statistical and other information in 
such form and within such period as may be prescribed. 


Il. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject 
to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for— 


(a) the manner in which the Fund may be applied for the measures and facilities 
specified in sub-section (/) of section 4; 


(b) the composition of the State Advisory Committees and the Central Advisory 
Committee constituted under sections 5 and 6 respectively, the manner in which the 
members thereof shall be chosen, the term of office of such members, the allowances, 
if any, payable to them, and the manner in which the State Advisory Committees and 
the Central Advisory Committee shall conduct their business; 


(c) the recruitment, conditions of service and the duties of all persons appointed 
under section 8; 


(d) the power that may be exercised by a Welfare Commissioner, a Welfare 
Officer or an Inspector under section 8; 


(e) the furnishing to the Central Government by a State Government or a local 
authority or any such agency of such statistical and other information as may be 
required to be furnished under section 0; 


(f) the forms in which and the period within which statistical and other information 
are to be furnished under clause (e); and 


(g) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed, or provided for, by 
rules under this Act. 


45 of 860. 


248 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(3) In making any rule under clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (2), the Central Government 
may direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees: 


Provided that the Central Government shall have the power to condone any such 
breach, as it may deem fit. 


(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 249 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

India has the fourth largest automobile industry in the world. It has also become the 
third largest automobile market in the world, surpassing Japan and Germany. It provides 
significant contribution to the nation's Gross Domestic Product. However, the working 
conditions of drivers of commercial vehicles like All India Permit trucks, heavy loaders, 
multi-utility vehicles like tempo, and other commercial vehicles like lorry, truck, oil tanker, 
water tanker, dipper, dumper, trailer etc. are pathetic. There are crores and crores of 
commercial drivers working in the unorganized sector in the country, who are engaged in 
transportation of goods and materials, including two-wheeler bike drivers enaged by 
platforms like Swiggy, Zomato, and such other gig workers who are not covered under with 
any welfare schemes, health insurance or social security. 


This Bill seeks to establish a Motor Vehicle Drivers Welfare Fund to provide for 
implementing the requisite social security measures and welfare activities for the motor 
vehicle drivers and other workers engaged in this field including health insurance, safety, 
education, recreation and other amenities. 


Hence, the Bill. 
M. SHANMUGAM. 


250 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of Motor Vehicle Drivers and Other 
Workers Welfare Fund which would be utilized to carry out activities for the welfare of motor 
vehicle drivers and other workers. 


Clause 4 of the Bill specifies the purposes for which the Fund can be spent. 


Clause 5 provides for establishment of State Advisory Committees and clause 6 for the 
establishment of Central Advisory Committee, for which expenditure would be incurred by 
the respective offices as also for payment of allowances to the members of the 
Committee. 


Clause 8 provides for the appointment of Welfare Commissioners, Welfare Officers 
and Inspectors by the Central Government whose establishment expenditure will be met by 
the Central Government. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve certain amount of expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible at this stage to give the exact amount esti- 
mated for the purpose of implementation of this Bill. A non-recurring expenditure of about 
rupees six hundred crore is also likely to be involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Sub-clause (/) of clause || of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 


Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules 
may be made, which inter alia, includes application of fund, composition of State Advisory 
Committees, Central Advisory Committee, recruitment and conditions of service of members 
of the Advisory Committees, powers to be exercised by the Welfare Commissioner, Welfare 
Officer or Inspector and the procedure to be followed for furnishing of information. 


The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure or 
administrative details, and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The 
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


252 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


BiLt No. L 07 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 95}. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force immediately. 


43 of 95]. 2. In the Representation of People Act, 95, after sub-section (3) of Section 8, the Amendment of 
following provisos shall be inserted, namely:— peston }: 


"Provided that in case of a person who on the date of conviction is a member of 
Parliament or the Legislature of a State, the disqualification shall take effect from the 
date of dismissal of the appeal by the Supreme Court against such conviction. 


Provided further that at any stage, an appeal or application for revision in respect 
of the conviction or the sentence shall be preferred within a period of one month and 
in case such appeal is not preferred within the said period, the disqualification shall be 
deemed to be effective from the day immediately following the expiration of the said 
period." 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 253 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

In the recent years, following the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of 
Lily Thomas & Union of India, there have been instances where Members of Parliament and 
State Legislatures, who were falsely implicated by the political rivals, were convicted by the 
lower courts and subsequently disqualified from their Membership. The Election 
Commission of India notified & conducted the elections to fill the vacant seats of convicted 
Members and as a result, other individuals were elected in the by-elections. Later, the 
convicted Members were acquitted from the higher courts. However, due to election of 
other individuals as Member of Parliament/State Legislature, the membership of acquitted 
Members could not be restored. 


Hence, the Bill. 


JAVED ALI KHAN. 


254 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


But No. XLVIII or 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 
Short title and l. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023. 
er (2) It shall come into force immediately. 
Atnendient of 2. In article l] of the Constitution,— 


5 (i) after the words "President shall", the words "within a period of fifteen days" 


shall be inserted; 
(ii) in the proviso,— 
(a) for the words "as soon as possible", the words "within a period of 


fifteen days" shall be substituted; 


(b) for the words "the President shall not with hold assent therefrom", the 
words "the President shall give his assent therefrom" shall be substituted. 


Amendment of 3. In article 200 of the Constituion,— 


article 200. hats : : 
(i) after the words "Governor shall", the words "within a period of fifteen days" 


shall be inserted; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 255 


(ii) in the first proviso, for the words "as soon as possible", the words "within a 
period of fifteen days" shall be substituted; 


(iii) in the second proviso, after the words "for the consideration of the President”, 
the words "within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the Bill" shall be 
inserted. 


4. In article 20] of the Constitution,— Amendment of 
article 20I. 
(i) after the words "the President shall", the words "within a period of fifteen 


days" shall be inserted; 


(ii) in the proviso, after the words "his consideration", the words "by the Governor 
within a period of fifteen days" shall be inserted. 


256 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Article |l] of the Constitution grants the President the power to assent to Bills passed 
by both the Houses of Parliament. This power of the President applies to ordinary Bills, not 
Money Bills or Constitutional Amendment Bills. Under this article, the President can either 
assent to the Bill, withhold his assent or send the Bill for reconsideration of the Houses. 
However, the article does not specify the time period within which the President has to 
declare his intention regarding assent, withholding assent or sending the Bill for 
reconsideration. In fact, in 986, a Bill passed by both the Houses of Parliament was sent for 
reconsideration of the Houses after a gap of more than four years. It is unlikely that the 
founding fathers of our Constitution intended to grant an indefinite time to the President to 
declare his intention. 


Similar provisions exist in article 200 of the Constitution, wherein the Governor has 
been given the same powers in relation to legislature of a State as have been given to the 
President in relation to the Parliament. Recently, there have been many examples where the 
Governors in many of the States have not given assent to Bills passed by the State legislatures 
for indefinite period without taking any decision, which amounts to defeating the will of the 
people. This is not a good sign for a healthy democracy. 


It is therefore felt that the lack of a specific time limit for the President or the Governor 
to declare their intention regarding the Bills passed by an elected body is not in line with the 
concept of the supremacy of the elected representatives and a welfare State. In many countries 
around the World, when a Bill is presented to the President, there is a definite time limit within 
which the President has to declare his intention. For instance, in the USA, the President on 
presentation of a Bill to him must declare his intention within 5 days of receipt of such Bill. 


Hence, this Bill, seeks to specify a time limit for the President and Governors for giving 
or withholding their assent, sending the Bill for reconsideration or reserving it for the 
consideration of the President of India. 


A.D. SINGH. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 257 


Bit No. XLVII oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Bihar for providing 
impetus to the economic capability of the State administration; for implementation of 
development and welfare schemes for women, children, citizens, Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and poor people in the State and for the 
proper utilization of its resources and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Bihar Short title and 
Act, 2023. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India, Special 
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance financial 
to the State of Bihar to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken Poet 
by the State with approval of the Government of India for the purpose of promoting the  pihar. 


258 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


welfare of women, children, senior citizens, scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, other backward 
classes and poor people. 


Act not in 3. The Provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 


ec of Jaw to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force. 
other law. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 259 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Bihar is the third largest State of India by population. It has a glorified past as the State 
was once considered the centre of political and cultural powers and was a great learning 
place. It is the land where the great empires of Mithila and Magadh flourished during Videha, 
Maurya and Gupta Kingdoms. Culturally, it is very rich State. It is home to two UNESCO 
world heritage sites, one at Mahabodhi Temple, Gaya and other at Nalanda Mahavihara, one 
of the word’s oldest universities. Bihar was a major centre for learning where Nalanda and 
Vikramshila universities were imparting learning to students form many countries. 


Unfortunately, Bihar today is one of the backward States in the country. It is lagging 
behind in terms of social and economic development. Bihar is weakest in health outcome in 
comparison to other States. Though improved governance in the recent past has led to the 
economic revival of the State to some extent, there is a lot which is required to be done to 
improve the lives of people living in Bihar. 


There has been a continuous demand for the State Government to grant Special 
Category status to the State but the same has been denied to the State so far. It is, therefore, 
high time that special financial assistance may be given to the State for implementing the 
developmental and welfare schemes for the people of Bihar, particulalry, the women, children, 
senior citizens, scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, other backword classes and poor people. 


Hence, this Bill. 
A.D. SINGH. 


260 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as 
special financial assistance to the State of Bihar to meet the costs of such schemes of 
development and welfare, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the 
Government of India. 


2. The Bill, therefor, on enactment, will involve expinduture out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Bihar. As the sums of 
money which will be given to the State of Bihar as special financial assistance by appropriation 
by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to be implemented 
by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are identified and approved, 
it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved out 
of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage. 


3. No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 26 


But No. LII or 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 860. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2023. 
(2) It shall come into force at once. 


45 of 860. 2. After article 377 of the Indian Penal Code, 860, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
"377A. Whoever voluntarily harms the dignity or right of a dead person, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
ten years and shall also be liable to fine.". 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new section 
377A. 


262 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In a recent judgment in Rangaraju and Vajapeyi Vs. State of Karnataka, the Court has 
observed that the act of sexual assault on a dead body does not come under any provision 
of the IPC. The Court has recommended that the Indian Penal Code, 860 should be amended 
to make necrophilia, i.e., a sexual attraction or act involving a person engaging in sexual 
activities with a deceased body, an offence. The Division Bench passed the order acquitting 
the accused from the charges of raping a 25 year old woman after murdering her. 


2. The Supreme Court in its various judgments has held that the right to dignity 
prevails even after death. In S. Sethu Raja Vs. The Chief Secretary [W.P. (MD) No. 3888 of 
2007] decided on 28th August, 2007, the petitioner had brought to the court's attention, the 
Supreme Court's stand on right to accord decent burial or cremation to a dead body, as 
interpreted from its decision in Ramsharan Autyanuprasi and Another Vs. Union of India 
(AIR I989 Supreme Court 549) in which it held thus, 


"3. It is true that the life in its expanded horizons today includes all that give meaning 
to a man's life including his tradition, culture and heritage and protection of that heritage in 
its full measure would certainly come within the encompass of an expanded concept of 
Art. 2] of the Constitution." 


3. Further, the apex court, in Pt. Parmanand Katara Vs. Union of India & Ors. [[995 (3) 
SCC 248] had observed thus, 


"\.the word and expression ‘person’ in article 2!, would include a dead person in a 
limited sense and that his rights to his life which includes his right to live with human 
dignity, to have an extended meaning to treat his dead body with respect, which he 
would have deserved, had he been alive subject to his tradition, culture and the 
religion, which he professed. The State must respect a dead person by allowing the 
body of that dead person to be treated with dignity and unless it is required for the 
purposes of establishing a crime, to ascertain the cause of death and be subjected to 
post-mortem or for any scientific investigation, medical education or to save the life of 
another person in accordance with law, the preservation of the dead body and its 
disposal in accordance with human dignity." 


4. In Ashray Adhikar Abhiyan Vs. Union of India (AIR 2002 SC 554), the Supreme 
Court had upheld the right of a homeless deceased to have a decent burial as per their 
religious belief and the corresponding obligation of the State towards such people. 


5. Many countries in the world have laws on necrophilia. In the UK, any kind of sexual 
harassment or inappropriate physical conduct with a dead body is against the law, and 
conviction in this case can lead to a jail term of six months to two years or a fine. Legislation 
against necrophilia also exists in Canada, New Zealand and South Africa. In Canada, without 
using the word necrophilia, it is mentioned that maximum sentence of 
5 years can be cited for harming the dignity and rights of a dead body. At the same time, in 
New Zealand, a provision has been made for a maximum punishment of 2 years regarding this 
law. 


6. It is, therefore, the need of the society that a law for providing punishment for 
necrophilia should be made by creating a new offence under Indian Penal Code (IPC). 


Hence, this Bill. 


A.D. SINGH. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 263 


BiLt No. LV oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for compulsory teaching of Lifestyle for Environment (LiF E) in all 
schools throughout the country in order to enable students towards becoming 
Pro-Planet People in the 2\st century and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Lifestyle for Environment 
(LiFE) in Schools Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. (a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State, and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "environment" includes water, air and land and the inter-relationship which exists 
among and between water, air and land, and human beings, other living creatures, plants, 
micro-organism and property; 


(c) "lifestyle" means the particular way that a person or group lives and the values and 
ideas supported by that person or group; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Compulsory 
teaching of 
Lifestyle for 
Environment 
(LiFE) in 
Schools. 

Act not in 
derogation of 
other laws. 


Power to 
make rules. 


264 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(e) "school" means any school which is recognized by appropriate Government, 
imparting education up to the primary, middle, secondary and/or senior secondary level, and 
includes— 


(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate Government or 
a local authority; 


(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of its expenses 
from the appropriate Government or the local authority; 


(iii) a school belonging to a specified category; and 


(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to meet its expenses 
from the appropriate Government or the local authority; 


(f) "specified category", in relation to a school, means a school such as Kendriya 
Vidyalaya, Navodaya Vidyalaya, Sainik School or any other school having a distinct character 
which may be specified, by notification, by the appropriate Government. 


3. From such date, as the Central Government may by notification in the Official 
Gazette specify, the subject of ‘Lifestyle for environment’ shall be taught in every school as 
a compulsory subject in such manner as may be prescribed. 


4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject-matter of this Act. 


5. (J) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 265 


Our civilisational state has espoused the adage ““KSks ca Hh ik dak कुछ (God 
resides even in a plant as an ‘Idea of India' since centuries. At the 202! UN Climate Change 
Conference (UNFCCC COP26), Hon'ble Prime Minister of India Shri Narendra Modi announced 
Mission LiFE- Lifestyle for Environment, to bring individual behaviours at the forefront of 
the global climate action narrative. 


2. LiFE envisions replacing the prevalent 'use-and-dispose' economy-governed by 
mindless and destructive consumption-with a circular economy, which would be defind by 
mindful and deliberate utilization. The Mission LiFE intends to nudge individuals to undertake 
simple acts in their daily lives that can contribute significantly to climate change when 
embraced across the world. 


3. The youth is the future of our country. Imparting holistic education about the 
various facets related to the subject of Lifestyle for Environment (LiFE) to children in schools 
across the country is paramount for ensuring the formation of a |.4 billion strong community 
of 'Pro- Planet People' in the 2]st century. 


Hence, this Bill. 
BIPLAB KUMAR DEB. 


266 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 


the provisions of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 267 


Bit No. LIX oF 2023 
A Bill to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 20i7. 


Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows: 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Mental Healthcare (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 


notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Amendment 
of section 3. 


Amendment 
of section 34. 


Insertion of 
new Chapter 
XIIA. 


Responsibilities 
of 
Educational 
Institutions. 


268 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In section 2 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 20l7 (hereinafter referred to as the 


principal Act), in sub-section (/)— 


(a) after clause (g), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ga) "educational institution" school 


imparting primary, elementary and secondary education, encompassing all types 


means any recognised 


of school managements and categories as per the Unified District Information 
System for Education Plus (UDISE+) records;"; 


(b) after clause (zb), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely:- 


"(zc) "student" means a person between six to eighteen years of age, who 
is pursuing any course of study in any educational institution.". 


3. In section 29 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


"() The appropriate Government shall have a duty to plan, design and implement 
programmes for the promotion of mental health and prevention of mental illness in the 
country, with special emphasis on programmes catering to the needs of students in 
educational institutions.". 


4. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after clause (f), the following 


new clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(fa) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Education — 
Member ex officio;". 


5. After Chapter XIII of the principal Act, the following new Chapter shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


"CHAPTER XIIA 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 
05A. Every educational institution,— 


(a) shall be required to provide access to mental healthcare for students, 
through referrals to and partnerships with mental health establishments; 


(b) shall integrate mental healthcare services into the overall support system of 
the school, through the appointment of a nodal officer, who has been an employee of 
the educational institution for at least five years, and may streamline student referrals 
to nearby mental health establishments within the district; 


(c) shall ensure protection of privacy and confidentiality of students while 
availing all mental health services; 


(d) shall undertake initiatives to promote mental health awareness amongst 
students, and other important stakeholders such as parents and legal guardians and 
impart education on well-being, stress management, socio-emotional learning, and 
resilience-building; 


0 of 20I7. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 269 


(e) shall strive to integrate mental health education, as provided under the 
National Council of Education Research and Training's "Training and Resource 
Material: Health and Wellness of School- going Children’ within the curriculum; 
and organize co-curricular activities and teacher training programs; 


(f) shall encourage yoga, meditation, sports and other stress-mitigating 
activities for students, to increase mental wellbeing of the students; and 


(g) shall establish mechanisms for the identification of mental health concerns 
among students at an early stage.". 


270 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


India has the largest youth and adolescent population in the world, comprising 27.2 
per cent. of the population. Consequently, India's school education system has also expanded 
substantially with 5 lakh schools, and nearly 26.5 crore students. Such an expansion has 
also meant that the anxieties, fears, and mental health pressures of students has increased in 
magnitude, particularly after the COVID-l9 pandemic. 


2. As per the National Mental Health Survey, 20I5-6, the prevalence of mental 
disorders in the age group of l3-7 years is 7.3 per cent., and nearly equal in both genders. 
Facing the pressures of adolescence, and an increasingly competitive examination system, 
students also have an additional burden of resultant mental health challenges. The Mental 
Healthcare Act, 20I7, does address this challenge to a certain extent, by making provisions 
for the redressal of mental health issues of children. However, the Act fails to categorize 
students' and youth, particularly in the age group of |3-8, as a primary target group. 


3. The proposed amendments to the Mental Healthcare Act, 20!7 addresses the mental 
healthcare needs of students, while also underlining the roles and responsibilities of 
educational institutions, thus paving the way for holistic redressal of the mental health 
issues faced by students in the country. 


Hence, this Bill. 


SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill proposes addition of anew Chapter XIIIA in the Mental Healthcare 
Act, 20I7, which provides for the referral of students encountering mental health challenges 
to mental health establishments and to form partnerships with them for the said purpose as 
well as various initiatives aimed at promoting mental health awareness and overall well- 
being, potentially entailing supplementary financial requirements. The Bill, if enacted, would 
involve both non-recurring and recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, it is difficult to estimate the exact expenditure involved at this juncture. 


272 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


Bit No. LXI 07 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
Act, 2009. 


Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:- 


Short title and l. (/) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
commencement. Education (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment of 2. In section 27 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
section 27. Act, 2009, the words, "the decennial population census," shall be omitted. 


35 of 2009. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 273 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In India, there is an acute shortage of trained and experienced teaching staff in 
educational institutions. The deployment of school teachers for non-teaching roles, such as 


collecting data for decennial population census reports and as booth-duty officers in elections, 
has been a point of contention. 


The Annual Status of Education Report (ASER) 2022 shows the lowering quality of 
education in schools. According to the report, only 20.5 per cent. of class third students in 
government and private schools could read at class second level in 2022, dropping from 27.3 
per cent. in 208. Only 42.8 per cent. of students in class five could read at least class 2 level 
text, falling from 50.5 per cent. in 208. While 69.6 per cent. of children enrolled in class eight 
in government or private schools could read basic text, compared to 73 per cent. in 20I8.A 
nationwide decline in children's basic arithmetic levels in comparison to 208 levels for most 
grades has also been witnessed. 


Amidst this education crisis, the deployment of teachers for conducting the census 
places an enormous burden on schools and jeopardizes the quality of education provided to 
students. The detrimental consequences of this practice on student learning and overworking 
teachers call for urgent reform. 


The Supreme Court of India tried to come to teachers’ aid in 2007, in Election Commission 
of India v. St. Mary's School and others, ruling that government school teachers cannot be 
forced into non-academic activities like census work, election duties, or polio drop campaigns. 
Unfinished courses, poor results, high dropout rates, improper class conduction, and disrupted 
teaching plans are witnessed in schools due to census duty, which requires teachers to visit 
hundreds of households and collect extensive data. This practice is concerning in light of 
the prevalence of single-teacher schools and that census duty is mainly allotted to primary 
school teachers. 


Though the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Primary Education Act, 2009 is 
rightly focusing on students, the Act must also protect the rights and well- being of teachers. 
The deployment of school teachers for non-teaching roles such as conducting census 
compromises the education system's integrity and negatively impacts students. It is our 
collective responsibility to advocate for a more balanced and responsible approach to utilizing 
the invaluable human resources of our education system. Teachers should not be subjected 
to unreasonable workloads and non-teaching tasks, allowing them to focus on their primary 
role - educating the future of our nation. 


Hence this Bill. 


TIRUCHISIVA. 


PUBLISHED BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, RAJYA SABHA, UNDER RULE 68 OFTHE RULES OF PROCEDURE 
AND CONDUCT OF BUSINESS IN THE RAJYA SABHA Kshitiz 


Mohan= 


MGIPMRND—455GI—03-0-2024. 


