रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल० -(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


JN क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-09062025-263690 
CG-DL-E-09062025-263690 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 22] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, जून 9, 2025/ज्येष्ठ 19, 1947 (शक) 
No. 22] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, JUNE 9, 2025/JYAISTHA 19, 1947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 9th June, 2025/Jyaistha 19, 1947 (Saka) 


THE MANIPUR GOODS AND SERVICES TAX 
(AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2025 


No. 1 OF 2025 


Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-sixth year of the 
Republic of India. 


An Ordinance further to amend the Manipur Goods and Services 
Tax Act, 2017. 


WHEREAS the provisions of the Central Goods and Services 
Tax Act, 2017 were amended through sections 114 to 150 of the 
Finance (No.2) Act, 2024; 


AND WHEREAS similar amendments were required to be 
made in the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 to avoid 
repugnancy with the Central Act; 


AND WHEREAS the respective amendments were to be 
carried out at the earliest in the Manipur Goods and Services Tax 
Act, 2017 so as to bring them into effect from the 17 November, 
2024, as per the decision of the 547 GST Council; 


AND WHEREAS the Legislative Assembly of Manipur was 
prorogued by the Governor of Manipur on the 29th August, 2024; 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Manipur Act 
3 of 2017. 


AND WHEREAS the Legislative Assembly of Manipur was 
not in session and the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Eighth 
Amendment) Ordinance, 2024 was promulgated by the Governor of 
Manipur on the 30th October, 2024 to take immediate action; 


AND WHEREAS the Manipur Goods and Services Tax 
(Eighth Amendment) Ordinance, 2024 ceased to operate on the 29" 
April, 2025; 


AND WHEREAS by a proclamation issued on the 13" 
February, 2025 by the President under article 356 of the 
Constitution, the powers of the Legislature of the State of Manipur 
have been declared to be exercisable by or under the authority of 
Parliament; 


AND WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the 
President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it 
necessary for her to take immediate action; 


NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by 
clause (1) of article 123 of the Constitution, the President is pleased 
to promulgate the following Ordinance:— 


1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Manipur Goods and 
Services Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2025. 


(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Ordinance,— 


(a) sections 34 and 36 shall be deemed to have come into 
force on the 30th day of October, 2024; and 


(b) sections 2 to 5, 7 to 30, 32, 33 and 35 shall be deemed 
to have come into force on the 1st day of November, 2024. 


2. In the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), in section 9, in sub-section (1), after 
the words “alcoholic liquor for human consumption”, the words 
“and un-denatured extra neutral alcohol or rectified spirit used for 
manufacture of alcoholic liquor, for human consumption” shall be 
inserted. 


3. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), after the 
words and figures “section 73 or section 74”, the words, figures and 
letter “or section 74A” shall be inserted. 


4. After section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely: — 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


Amendment of 
section 10. 


Insertion of new 
section 11A. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


“11A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the Power not to 


Government is satisfied that — feeder 20005 
हि : and services 
(a)a practice was, or is, generally prevalent regarding levy of tax not levied 


State tax (including non-levy thereof) on any supply of goods or __ or short-levied 


services or both; and as a result of 
general 


practice. 
(b) such supplies were, or are, liable to — 


(1) State tax, in cases where according to the said practice, 
State tax was not, or is not being, levied; or 


(ii) a higher amount of State tax than what was, or is being, 
levied, in accordance with the said practice, 


the Government may, on the recommendation of the Council, by 
notification, direct that the whole of the State tax payable on such 
supplies, or, as the case may be, the State tax in excess of that 
payable on such supplies, but for the said practice, shall not be 
required to be paid in respect of the supplies on which the State tax 
was not, or is not being levied, or was, or is being, short-levied, in 
accordance with the said practice.”. 


5. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), — Amendment of 
section 13. 


(i) in clause (b), for the words “by the supplier:”, the words 
“by the supplier, in cases where invoice is required to be issued 
by the supplier; or” shall be substituted; 


(11) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely: — 


“(c) the date of issue of invoice by the recipient, in cases 
where invoice is to be issued by the recipient:”; 


(111) in the first proviso, after the words, brackets and letter 
“or clause (b)”, the words, brackets and letter “or clause (c)” 
shall be inserted. 


6. In section 16 of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the Amendment of 
following sub-sections shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have Setion 16. 
been inserted with effect from the 17 day of July, 2017, namely: — 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


“(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), in 
respect of an invoice or debit note for supply of goods or services 
or both pertaining to the Financial Years 2017- 18, 2018-19, 2019- 
20 and 2020-21, the registered person shall be entitled to take input 
tax credit in any return under section 39 which is filed upto the 
thirtieth day of November, 2021. 


(6) Where registration of a registered person is cancelled under 
section 29 and subsequently the cancellation of registration is 
revoked by any order, either under section 30 or pursuant to any 
order made by the Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal or 
court and where availment of input tax credit in respect of an 
invoice or debit note was not restricted under sub-section (4) on the 
date of order of cancellation of registration, the said person shall be 
entitled to take the input tax credit in respect of such invoice or debit 
note for supply of goods or services or both, in a return under 
section 39,— 


(i) filed upto the thirtieth day of November following the 
financial year to which such invoice or debit note pertains or 
furnishing of the relevant annual return, whichever is earlier; 
or 


(ii) for the period from the date of cancellation of 
registration or the effective date of cancellation of registration, 
as the case may be, till the date of order of revocation of 
cancellation of registration, where such return is filed within 
thirty days from the date of order of revocation of cancellation 
of registration, 


whichever is later.”’. 


7. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), in clause 
(i), for the words and figures “sections 74, 129 and 130”, the words 
and figures “section 74 in respect of any period upto Financial Year 
2023-24” shall be substituted. 


8. In section 21 of the principal Act, after the words and figures 
“section 73 or section 74”, the words, figures and letter “or section 
74A” shall be inserted. 


9. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the 
proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: — 


Amendment 
section 17. 


Amendment 
section 21. 


Amendment 
section 30. 


of 


of 


of 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


“Provided further that such revocation of cancellation of 
registration shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions, 
as may be prescribed.”. 


10. In section 31 of the principal Act, — Amendment of 
section 31. 
(a) in sub-section (3), in clause (f), after the words and figure 
“of section 9 shall”, the words “, within the period as may be 
prescribed,” shall be inserted; 


(b) after clause (2), the following Explanation shall be inserted, 
namely: — 


‘Explanation.— For the purposes of clause (f), the 
expression “supplier who is not registered” shall include the 
supplier who is registered solely for the purpose of deduction of 
tax under section 51.’. 


11. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), after the Amendment of 
words and figures “section 73 or section 74”, the words, figures and १९०० 35. 
letter “or section 74A” shall be inserted. 


12. In section 39 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the Amendment of 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: — semen 


“(3) Every registered person required to deduct tax at source 
under section 51 shall electronically furnish a return for every 
calendar month of the deductions made during the month in such 
form and manner and within such time as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the said registered person shall furnish a return 
for every calendar month whether or not any deductions have been 
made during the said month.”. 


13. In section 49 of the principal Act, in sub-section (8), in clause Amendment of 
(c), after the words and figures “section 73 or section 74”, the Section 49. 
words, figures and letter “or section 74A” shall be inserted. 


14. In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the Amendment of 
proviso, after the words and figures “section 73 or section 74”, the Section 50 
words, figures and letter “or section 74A” shall be inserted. 


15. In section 51 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), after the Amendment of 
words and figures “section 73 or section 74”, the words, figures and 9 S°*#0" 51. 


letter “0 section 74A” shall be inserted. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[Part II— 


16. In section 54 of the principal Act, — 
(a) in sub-section (3), the second proviso shall be omitted; 


(b) after sub-section (/4) and before the Explanation, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(15) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, 
no refund of unutilised input tax credit on account of zero rated 
supply of goods or of integrated tax paid on account of zero rated 
supply of goods shall be allowed where such zero rated supply 
of goods is subjected to export duty.”. 


17. In section 61 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after the 
words and figures “section 73 or section 74”, the words, figures and 
letter “or section 74A” shall be inserted. 


18. In section 62 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the 
words and figures “section 73 or section 74”, the words, figures and 
letter “or section 74A” shall be inserted. 


19. In section 63 of the principal Act, after the words and figures 
“section 73 or section 74”, the words, figures and letter “or section 
74A” shall be inserted. 


20. In section 64 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the 
words and figures “section 73 or section 74”, the words, figures and 
letter “or section 74A” shall be inserted. 


21. In section 65 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), after the 
words and figures “section 73 or section 74”, the words, figures and 
letter “or section 74A” shall be inserted. 


22. In section 66 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), after the 
words and figures “section 73 or section 74”, the words, figures and 
letter “or section 74A” shall be inserted. 


23. In section 70 of the principal Act, after sub-section (/), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(1A) All persons summoned under sub-section (1) shall be 
bound to attend, either in person or by an authorised representative, 
as such officer may direct, and the person so appearing shall state 
the truth during examination or make statements or produce such 
documents and other things as may be required.”. 


Amendment of 
section 54. 


Amendment of 
section 61. 


Amendment of 
section 62. 


Amendment of 
section 63. 


Amendment of 
section 64. 


Amendment of 
section 65. 


Amendment of 
section 66. 


Amendment of 
section 70. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


24. In section 73 of the principal Act, — 


(a) in the marginal heading, after the words “Determination of 
tax”, the words and figures “, pertaining to the period upto Financial 
Year 2023-24,” shall be inserted; 


(b) after sub-section (//), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


“(12) The provisions of this section shall be applicable 
for determination of tax pertaining to the period upto Financial 
Year 2023-24.”. 


25. In section 74 of the principal Act, — 


(a) in the marginal heading, after the words “Determination of 
tax”, the words and figures “, pertaining to the period upto Financial 
Year 2023-24,” shall be inserted; 


(b) after sub-section (11) and before Explanation 1, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(12) The provisions of this section shall be applicable for 
determination of tax pertaining to the period upto Financial 
Year 2023-24.”; 


(c) Explanation 2 shall be omitted. 


26. After section 74 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely: — 


“740. (1) Where it appears to the proper officer that any tax has not 
been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded, or where input tax 
credit has been wrongly availed or utilised, he shall serve notice on 
the person chargeable with tax which has not been so paid or which 
has been so short paid or to whom the refund has erroneously been 
made, or who has wrongly availed or utilised input tax credit, 
requiring him to show cause as to why he should not pay the amount 
specified in the notice along with interest payable thereon under 
section 50 and a penalty leviable under the provisions of this Act or 
the rules made thereunder. 


(2) The proper officer shall issue the notice under sub-section 
(1) within forty-two months from the due date for furnishing of 
annual return for the financial year to which the tax not paid or 
short paid or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised relates 
to or within forty-two months from the date of erroneous refund. 


Amendment of 


section 73. 


Amendment of 


section 74. 


Insertion of new 
section 74A. 


Determination of 
tax not paid or 
short paid or 
erroneously 

refunded or input 
tax credit wrongly 
availed or utilised 


for any reason 
pertaining to 
Financial Year 


2024-25 onwards. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(3) Where a notice has been issued for any period under sub- 
section (1), the proper officer may serve a statement, containing 
the details of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded 
or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised for such periods 
other than those covered under sub-section (1), on the person 
chargeable with tax. 


(4) The service of such statement shall be deemed to be 
service of notice on such person under sub-section (1), subject 
to the condition that the grounds relied upon for such tax periods 
other than those covered under sub-section (1) are the same as 
are mentioned in the earlier notice. 


(5) The penalty in case where any tax which has not been 
paid or short paid or erroneously refunded, or where input tax 
credit has been wrongly availed or utilised,— 


(1) for any reason, other than the reason of fraud or any 
wilful misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, 
shall be equivalent to ten per cent. of tax due from such 
person or ten thousand rupees, whichever is higher; 


(ii) for the reason of fraud or any wilful misstatement 
or suppression of facts to evade tax shall be equivalent to 
the tax due from such person. 


(6) The proper officer shall, after considering the 
representation, if any, made by the person chargeable with tax, 
determine the amount of tax, interest and penalty due from such 
person and issue an order. 


(7) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub- 
section (6) within twelve months from the date of issuance of 
notice specified in sub-section (2): 


Provided that where the proper officer is not able to issue 
the order within the specified period, the Commissioner, or an 
officer authorised by the Commissioner senior in rank to the 
proper officer but not below the rank of Joint Commissioner of 
State Tax, may, having regard to the reasons for delay in 
issuance of the order under sub-section (6), to be recorded in 
writing, before the expiry of the specified period, extend the said 
period further by a maximum of six months. 


(8) The person chargeable with tax where any tax has not 
been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded, or where input 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised for any reason, 
other than the reason of fraud or any wilful misstatement or 
suppression of facts to evade tax, may, — 


(i) before service of notice under sub-section (1), pay 
the amount of tax along with interest payable under section 
50 of such tax on the basis of his own ascertainment of such 
tax or the tax as ascertained by the proper officer and inform 
the proper officer in writing of such payment, and the proper 
officer, on receipt of such information shall not serve any 
notice under sub-section (1) or the statement under sub- 
section (3), as the case may be, in respect of the tax so paid 
or any penalty payable under the provisions of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder; 


(11) pay the said tax along with interest payable under 
section 50 within sixty days of issue of show cause notice, 
and on doing so, no penalty shall be payable and all 
proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to 
be concluded. 


(9) The person chargeable with tax, where any tax has not 
been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or where input 
tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised by reason of 
fraud, or any wilful misstatement or suppression of facts to 
evade tax, may,— 


(1) before service of notice under sub-section (1), pay the 
amount of tax along with interest payable under section 50 
and a penalty equivalent to fifteen per cent. of such tax on 
the basis of his own ascertainment of such tax or the tax as 
ascertained by the proper officer and inform the proper 
officer in writing of such payment, and the proper officer, on 
receipt of such information, shall not serve any notice under 
sub-section (1), in respect of the tax so paid or any penalty 
payable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder; 


(11) pay the said tax along with interest payable under 
section 50 and a penalty equivalent to twenty-five per cent. 
of such tax within sixty days of issue of the notice, and on 
doing so, all proceedings in respect of the said notice shall 
be deemed to be concluded; 


(11) pay the said tax along with interest payable thereon 
under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to fifty per cent. of 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


such tax within sixty days of communication of the order, 
and on doing so, all proceedings in respect of the said notice 
shall be deemed to be concluded. 


(10) Where the proper officer is of the opinion that the 
amount paid under clause (i) of sub-section (8) or clause (7) of 
sub-section (9) falls short of the amount actually payable, he 
shall proceed to issue the notice as provided for in sub-section 
(/) in respect of such amount which falls short of the amount 
actually payable. 


(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (i) or 
clause (ii) of sub-section (8), penalty under clause (7) of sub- 
section (5) shall be payable where any amount of self-assessed 
tax or any amount collected as tax has not been paid within a 
period of thirty days from the due date of payment of such tax. 


(12) The provisions of this section shall be applicable for 
determination of tax pertaining to the Financial Year 2024-25 
onwards. 


Explanation |. —For the purposes of this section, — 


(1) the expression “all proceedings in respect of the said 
notice” shall not include proceedings under section 132; 


(1) where the notice under the same proceedings is issued 
to the main person liable to pay tax and some other persons, 
and such proceedings against the main person have been 
concluded under this section, the proceedings against all the 
persons liable to pay penalty under sections 122 and 125 
are deemed to be concluded. 


Explanation 2. — For the purposes of this Act, the 
expression “suppression” shall mean non-declaration of facts or 
information which a taxable person is required to declare in the 
return, statement, report or any other document furnished under 
this Act or the rules made thereunder, or failure to furnish any 
information on being asked for, in writing, by the proper 
officer.’. 


27. In section 75 of the principal Act, — Amendment of 
section 75. 


(a) in sub-section (/), after the word and figures “section 74”, 
the words, brackets, figures and letter “or sub-sections (2) and (7) 
of section 74A” shall be inserted; 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


“(2A) Where any Appellate Authority or Appellate 
Tribunal or court concludes that the penalty under clause (ii) 
of sub-section (5) of section 74A is not sustainable for the 
reason that the charges of fraud or any wilful misstatement or 
suppression of facts to evade tax has not been established 
against the person to whom the notice was issued, the penalty 
shall be payable by such person, under clause (४) of sub- 
section (5) of section 74A.”; 


(c) for sub-section (/0), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely: — 


“(10) The adjudication proceedings shall be deemed to be 
concluded, if the order is not issued within the period 
specified in sub-section (/0) of section 73 or in sub-section 
(10) of section 74 or in sub-section (7) of section 74A.”; 


(d) in sub-section (//), after the word and figures “section 74”, 
the words, brackets, figures and letter “or sub-section (7) of 
section 74A” shall be inserted; 


(e) in sub-section (/2), after the words and figures “section 73 
or section 74”, the words, figures and letter “or section 74A” shall 
be inserted; 


(f) in sub-section (/3), after the words and figures “section 73 
or section 74”, the words, figures and letter “or section 74A” shall 
be inserted. 


28. In section 104 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in the 
Explanation, after the word and figures “section 74”, the words, 
brackets, figures and letter “or sub-sections (2) and (7) of section 
74A” shall be inserted. 


29. In section 107 of the principal Act, — 
(a) in sub-section (6), in clause (b), for the word “twenty- 


five”, the word “twenty” shall be substituted; 


(b) insub-section (11), in the second proviso, after the words 
and figures “section 73 or section 74”, the words, figures and 
letter “or section 74A” shall be inserted. 


Amendment of 
section 104. 


Amendment of 
section 107. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


30. Insection 112 of the principal Act, — 


(a) in sub-section (1), after the words “from the date on which 
the order sought to be appealed against is communicated to the 
person preferring the appeal’, the words “; or the date, as may be 
notified by the Government, on the recommendations of the 
Council, for filing appeal before the Appellate Tribunal under this 
Act, whichever is later.” shall be inserted and shall be deemed to 
have been inserted with effect from the 17 day of August, 2024; 


(b) in sub-section (3), after the words “from the date on which 
the said order has been passed”, the words “; or the date, as may be 
notified by the Government, on the recommendations of the 
Council, for the purpose of filing application before the Appellate 
Tribunal under this Act, whichever is later,” shall be inserted and 
shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1* day 
of August, 2024; 


(c) in sub-section (6), after the words, brackets and figure 
“after the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section (1)”, the 
words, brackets and figure “or permit the filing of an application 
within three months after the expiry of the period referred to in sub- 
section (3)” shall be inserted; 


(d) in sub-section (8), in clause (b), — 


(i) for the words “twenty per cent.”, the words “ten per 
cent.” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words “fifty crore rupees”, the words “twenty 
crore rupees” shall be substituted. 


31. In section 122 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1B), for the 
words “Any electronic commerce operator who”, the words and 
figures “Any electronic commerce operator, who is liable to collect 
tax at source under section 52,” shall be substituted and shall be 
deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 17 day of 
October, 2023. 


32. In section 127 of the principal Act, after the words and figures 
“section 73 or section 74”, the words, figures and letter “or section 
74A” shall be inserted. 


33. After section 128 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely: — 


Amendment of 
section 112. 


Amendment of 
section 122. 


Amendment of 
section 127. 


Insertion of new 
section 128A. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


13 


“128A. (J) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in this Act, where any amount of tax is payable by a 
person chargeable with tax in accordance with, — 


(a) a notice issued under sub-section (1) of section 73 or 
a Statement issued under sub-section (3) of section 73, and 
where no order under sub-section (9) of section 73 has been 
issued; or 


(b) an order passed under sub-section (9) of section 73, 
and where no order under sub-section (11) of section 107 or 
sub-section (1) of section 108 has been passed; or 


(c) an order passed under sub-section (11) of section 107 
or sub-section (1) of section 108, and where no order under 
sub-section (1) of section 113 has been passed, 


pertaining to the period from Ist July, 2017 to 31st March, 2020, 
or a part thereof, and the said person pays the full amount of tax 
payable as per the notice or statement or the order referred to in 
clause (a), clause (b) or clause (c), as the case may be, on or 
before the date, as may be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Council, no interest under section 50 
and penalty under this Act, shall be payable and all the 
proceedings in respect of the said notice or order or statement, 
as the case may be, shall be deemed to be concluded, subject to 
such conditions as may be prescribed: 


Provided that where a notice has been issued under sub- 
section (1) of section 74, and an order is passed or required to 
be passed by the proper officer in pursuance of the direction of 
the Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or a court in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 75, 
the said notice or order shall be considered to be a notice or 
order, as the case may be, referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) 
of this sub-section: 


Provided further that the conclusion of the proceedings 
under this sub-section, in cases where an application is filed 
under sub-section (3) of section 107 or under sub-section (3) of 
section 112 or an appeal is filed by an officer of central tax under 
sub-section (1) of section 117 or under sub-section (1) of section 


Waiver of 
interest or 
penalty or both 
relating to 
demands 

raised under 


section 73, for 
certain tax 
periods. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


118 or where any proceedings are initiated under sub-section (1) 
of section 108, against an order referred to in clause (b) or clause 
(c) or against the directions of the Appellate Authority or the 
Appellate Tribunal or the court referred to in the first proviso, 
shall be subject to the condition that the said person pays the 
additional amount of tax payable, if any, in accordance with the 
order of the Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal or the 
court or the Revisional Authority, as the case may be, within 
three months from the date of the said order: 


Provided also that where such interest and penalty has 
already been paid, no refund of the same shall be available. 


(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall be 
applicable in respect of any amount payable by the person on 
account of erroneous refund. 


(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall be 
applicable in respect of cases where an appeal or writ petition 
filed by the said person is pending before Appellate Authority 
or Appellate Tribunal or a court, as the case may be, and has not 
been withdrawn by the said person on or before the date notified 
under sub-section (1). 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where 
any amount specified under sub-section (1) has been paid and 
the proceedings are deemed to be concluded under the said sub- 
section, no appeal under sub-section (1) of section 107 or sub- 
section (1) of section 112 shall lie against an order referred to in 
clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1), as the case may 06.7. 


34. In section 171 of the principal Act, — Amendment of 
section 171. 


(a) in sub-section (2), the following proviso and Explanation 
shall be inserted, namely: — 


‘Provided that the Government may by notification, on the 
recommendations of the Council, specify the date from which 
the said Authority shall not accept any request for examination 
as to whether input tax credits availed by any registered person 
or the reduction in the tax rate have actually resulted in a 
commensurate reduction in the price of the goods or services 
or both supplied by him. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


Explanation— For the purposes of this sub-section, 
“request for examination” shall mean the written application 
filed by an applicant requesting for examination as to whether 
input tax credits availed by any registered person or the 
reduction in the tax rate have actually resulted in a 
commensurate reduction in the price of the goods or services 
or both supplied by him.’; 


(b) the Explanation shall be renumbered as Explanation 1 
thereof, and after Explanation | as so renumbered, the following 
Explanation shall be inserted, namely: — 


‘Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this section, the 
expression “Authority” shall include the “Appellate 
Tribunal”.’. 
35. In Schedule III to the principal Act, after paragraph 8 and before Amendment of 
Explanation 1, the following paragraphs shall be inserted, Schedule Il. 
namely:— 


“9. Activity of apportionment of co-insurance premium by 
the lead insurer to the co-insurer for the insurance services 
jointly supplied by the lead insurer and the co-insurer to the 
insured in co-insurance agreements, subject to the condition that 
the lead insurer pays the central tax, the State tax, the Union 
territory tax and the integrated tax on the entire amount of 
premium paid by the insured. 


10. Services by insurer to the reinsurer for which ceding 
commission or the reinsurance commission is deducted from 
reinsurance premium paid by the insurer to the reinsurer, subject 
to the condition that the central tax, the State tax, the Union 
territory tax and the integrated tax is paid by the reinsurer on the 
gross reinsurance premium payable by the insurer to the 
reinsurer, inclusive of the said ceding commission or the 


reinsurance commission.”’. 


36. No refund shall be made of all the tax paid or the input tax credit No refund of tax 
d paid or input tax 


reversed, which would not have been so paid, or not reversed, ha 
credit reversed. 


section 6 been in force at all material times. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


37. Notwithstanding the cessation of the Manipur Goods and Validation of 
Services Tax (Eighth Amendment) Ordinance, 2024, anything done tions _ taken 
; है ५ under the lapsed 
or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall always be ee 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding Oyqinance 1 of 
provisions of this Ordinance as if such provisions had been in force 2024. 


at all material time. 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


KSHITIZ) हा? 
MGIPMRND—78GI($4)—9-6-2025. MOHAN 22:85:00 -0530° 


