रजिस्ट्री We She WeIe—(T1)04/0007/2003—23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


JR का राजपनत्र 
The Gazette of India 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-01042023-244883 
CG-DL-E-01042023-244883 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग I] — खण्ड 2 
PART IT — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं" 5] नई दिल्‍ली, बुधवार, मार्च 29, 2023/चैत्र 8, 1945 (शक) 
No. 5] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29, 2023/CHAITRA 8, 1945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 29th March, 2023:— 
But No. 80 07 2023 
ABill further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 
1. (/) This Act may be called the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act, 2023. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
69 of 1980. 2. In the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), Insertion of 
after the long title and before the enacting formula, the following preamble shall be inserted, Preamble. 


namely:— 


"WHEREAS, the importance of forests is to be realised to enable achievement of 
national targets of Net Zero Emission by 2070 and maintain or enhance the forest 
carbon stocks through ecologically balanced sustainable development; 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


AND WHEREAS, Nationality Determined Contribution targets of the country 
envisage creating carbon sink of additional 2.5 to 3.0 billion tons of CO, equivalent 
by 2030; 


AND WHEREAS, the country envisages an increase in the forest and tree cover to 
one-third of its land area, which is to be given impetus with an enhanced growth 
trajectory; 


AND WHEREAS, India has a rich tradition of preserving forests and their 
bio-diversity, and, therefore, enhancing forest based economic, social and 
environmental benefits, including improvement of livelihoods for forest dependent 
communities is envisaged; 


AND WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for provisions relating to conservation 
management and restoration of forests, maintaining ecological security, sustaining 
cultural and traditional values of forests and facilitating economic needs and carbon 


neutrality.”. 
Amendment 3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words and brackets 
of section 1. "Forest (Conservation) Act", the words and brackets "Van (Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan) 


Adhiniyam" shall be substituted. 


Insertion of new 4. After section 1 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
section 1A. namely:— 


Act 16 cower “1A. (J) The following land shall be covered under the provisions of this Act, 
certain land. namely:— 


(a) the land that has been declared or notified as a forest in accordance 
with the provisions of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 or under any other law for the 
time being in force; 


(b) the land that is not covered under clause (a), but has been recorded in 
Government record as forest, as on or after the 25th October, 1980: 


Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to such land, which 
has been changed from forest use to use for non-forest purpose on or before the 12th 
December, 1996 in pursuance of an order, issued by any authority authorised by a 
State Government or an Union territory Administration in that behalf. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression 
"Government record" means record held by Revenue Department or Forest Department 
of the State Government or Union territory Administration, or any authority, local 
body, community or council recognised by the State Government or Union territory 
Administration. 


(2) The following categories of land shall not be covered under the provisions 
of this Act, namely:— 


(a) such forest land situated alongside a rail line or a public road maintained 
by the Government, which provides access to a habitation, or to a rail, and 
roadside amenity up to a maximum size of 0.10 hectare in each case; 


(b) such tree, tree plantation or reafforestation raised on lands that are 
not specified in clause (a) or clause (8) of sub-section (/); and 


(c) such forest land,— 


(7) as is situated within a distance of one hundred kilometres along 
international borders or Line of Control or Line of Actual Control, as the 
case may be, proposed to be used for construction of strategic linear 
project of national importance and concerning national security; or 


16 of 1927. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(ii) up to ten hectares, proposed to be used for construction of 
security related infrastructure; or 


(iii) as is proposed to be used for construction of defence related 
project or a camp for paramilitary forces or public utility projects, as may 
be specified by the Central Government, the extent of which does not 
exceed five hectares in a Left Wing Extremism affected area as may be 
notified by the Central Government. 


(3) The exemption provided under sub-section (2) shall be subject to such 
terms and conditions, including the conditions of planting trees to compensate felling 
of trees undertaken on the lands, as the Central Government may, by guidelines, 
specify.’. 

5. In the principal Act, section 2 shall be renumbered as sub-section (/) thereof 
and— 


(a) in sub-section (/) as so renumbered,— 


(7) in clause (iii), for the words "not owned, managed or controlled by 
Government", the words ", subject to such terms and conditions, as the Central 
Government may, by order, specify” shall be substituted; 


(17) in the Explanation, for the long line occurring after clause (9), the 
following shall be substituted, namely:— 


"but does not include any work relating to or ancillary to conservation, 
development and management of forests and wildlife, such as— 


(i) silvicultural operations including regeneration operations; 


(ii) establishment of check-posts and infrastructure for the 
front line forest staff; 


(iii) establishment and maintenance of fire lines; 
(iv) wireless communications; 


(v) construction of fencing, boundary marks or pillars, bridges 
and culverts, checkdams, waterholes, trenches and pipelines; 


(vi) establishment of zoo and safaris referred to in the Wild 
53 of 1972. Life (Protection) Act, 1972, owned by the Government or any 
authority, in forest areas other than protected areas; 


(vii) eco-tourism facilities included in the Forest Working 
Plan or Wildlife Management Plan or Tiger Conservation Plan or 
Working Scheme of that area; and 


(viii) any other like purposes, which the Central Government 
may, by order, specify."; 
(b) after sub-section (/) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


"(2) The Central Government may, by order, specify the terms and 
conditions subject to which any survey, such as, reconnaissance, prospecting, 
investigation or exploration including seismic survey, shall not be treated as 
non-forest purpose.”. 


6. In the principal Act, after section 3B, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"3C. The Central Government may, from time to time, issue such directions, to 
any authority under the Central Government, State Government or Union territory 
Administration, or to any organisation, entity or body recognised by the Central 
Government, State Government or Union territory Administration, as may be necessary 
for the implementation of this Act.”. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Insertion of 
new section 3C. 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
to issue 
directions. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (the Act) was enacted to provide for the 
conservation of forests and for matters connected therewith or ancillary or incidental thereto. 
It provides that prior permission of the Central Government is required for de-reservation of 
forest land, use of forest land for non-forest purposes, assigning of forest land by way of 
lease to private entities and for clearing of naturally grown trees for the purpose of 
reafforestation. 


2. After its enactment, new challenges relating to ecological, social and environmental 
developments, such as, mitigating the impact of climate change, achieving the national 
targets of Net Zero Emission by 2070 and maintaining or enhancing the forest carbon stock 
have emerged at national and international levels. Further, keeping in view the aims and 
objective of the country to increase the forest or tree cover for creation of carbon sink of 
additional 2.5 to 3.0 billion tons of CO, equivalent by 2030, and to carry forward the rich 
tradition of preserving forests and their bio-diversity symbiotically by enhancing forest 
based economic, social and environmental benefits, including improvement of livelihoods 
for forest dependent communities, it is necessary to broaden the horizons of the Act. 


3. Further, prior to the Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, dated the 
12th December, 1996 (in the matter of 7.1४. Godavarman Thirumulpad vs. Union of India and 
others), the provisions of the Act were applied to notified forest lands and not to revenue 
forest areas, and non-forestry use in the revenue forest areas was allowed through permissions 
granted by the Government and various authorities. Subsequent to the said Judgment, the 
provisions of the Act were applied in the recorded forest areas including such recorded 
forests which had already been put to various type of non-forestry use, thereby restraining 
the authorities from undertaking any change in the land use and allowing any development 
or utility related work. Besides this, apprehensions prevailed regarding applicability of the 
Act in the plantations raised in private and Government non-forest lands. This situation 
resulted in misinterpretation of the provisions of the Act with respect to their applicability 
especially in recorded forest lands, private forest lands, plantations, etc. Therefore, it is 
considered necessary to prescribe the extent of applicability and non-applicability of the Act 
in various types of lands. 


4. There is also a need to fast track the strategic and security related projects of 
national importance so as to ensure development of vital security infrastructures, especially 
along the international border areas such as Line of Actual Control, Line of Control and Left 
Wing Extremism affected areas. Similarly, small establishments, habitations on the side of 
public roads and railways also need to be facilitated by providing them access and 
connectivity to main arterial roads and other public utilities. 


5. Since, there is change in the ecological, social and environmental regimes and 
policies relating to conservation and development of forests during the last four decades 
since the enactment of the Act, to keep its provisions in tandem with the dynamic changes in 
the ecological, strategic and economic aspirations of country, it is proposed to introduce the 
Forest (Conservation) Amendment Bill, 2023 in Parliament. The salient features of the said 
Bill, inter alia, are to— 


(i) insert a preamble to the Act to encompass the country’s rich tradition of 
preserving forests, their bio-diversity and tackling climate change challenges within 
its ambit; 


(ii) amend the short title of the Act to be called the Van (Sanrakshan Evam 
Samvardhan) Adhiniyam, 1980, so as to ensure that the potential of its provisions is 
reflected in its short title; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(ii) clarify the scope of applicability of the Act upon various lands so as to 
remove ambiguities and bring clarity; 


(iv) exempt certain categories of lands from the purview of the Act— 


(a) to fast track strategic and security related projects of national 
importance; 


(8) to provide access to small establishments, habitations on the side of 
public roads and railways; and 


(c) to encourage plantation on non-forest land; 


(v) provide for terms and conditions including the condition of planting trees to 
compensate felling of trees undertaken on the lands while considering the proposed 
relaxations under the Act; 


(vi) include more activities, which are taken up for the cause of conservation of 
forest and wild life in to the array of forestry activities; 


(vii) bring uniformity in the applicability of the provisions of the Act in respect 
of both Government and private entities; 


(viii) empower the Central Government to specify, by order, the terms and 
conditions subject to which any survey, such as, reconnaissance, prospecting, 
investigation or exploration including seismic survey, shall not be treated as 
non-forest purpose; 


(ix) empower the Central Government to issue directions. 


6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DE Lut; BHUPENDER YADAV. 
The 27th March, 2023. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH, 


Secretary General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


MGIPMRND—2883GI($3)—01.04.2023. Kshitiz. ott 


by Kshitiz Mohan. 
Date: 2023.04.01 


Mohan 7050+030 


