रजिस्ट्री सं" डी" were 


(एन)04/0007/2003---23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


<TstGa 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-05082023-247866 
CG-DL-E-05082023-247866 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग त--- खण्ड | 
PART II — Section | 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं" 8] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, अगस्त 4, 2023/ श्रावण 3, 945 (शक) 
No. 8] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, AUGUST 4, 2023/SRAVANA 3, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 4th August, 2023/Sravana |3, [945 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
4th August, 2023 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE FOREST (CONSERVATION) AMENDMENT ACT, 2023 
(No. 5 oF 2023) 
[4th August, 2023] 
An Act further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 980. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. () This Act may be called the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act, 2023. Short title and 
commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


69 of 980. 2. In the Forest (Conservation) Act, [980 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), Insertion of 
after the long title and before the enacting formula, the following preamble shall be inserted, preamble. 
namely:— 


"WHEREAS, the importance of forests is to be realised to enable achievement of 
national targets of Net Zero Emission by 2070 and maintain or enhance the forest 
carbon stocks through ecologically balanced sustainable development; 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


AND WHEREAS, Nationality Determined Contribution targets of the country 
envisage creating carbon sink of additional 2.5 to 3.0 billion tons of CO, equivalent 
by 2030; 


AND WHEREAS, the country envisages an increase in the forest and tree cover to 
one-third of its land area, which is to be given impetus with an enhanced growth 
trajectory; 


AND WHEREAS, India has a rich tradition of preserving forests and their 
bio-diversity, and, therefore, enhancing forest based economic, social and 
environmental benefits, including improvement of livelihoods for forest dependent 
communities is envisaged; 


AND WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for provisions relating to conservation 
management and restoration of forests, maintaining ecological security, sustaining 
cultural and traditional values of forests and facilitating economic needs and carbon 
neutrality.". 


Amendment 3. In section | of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words and brackets 
of section I. "Forest (Conservation) Act", the words and brackets "Van (Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan) 
Adhiniyam" shall be substituted. 


Insertion of 4. After section | of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
new section |A. namely:— 
Act to cover ‘lA. (7) The following land shall be covered under the provisions of this Act, 
certain land. 

namely:— 


(a) the land that has been declared or notified as a forest in accordance 
with the provisions of the Indian Forest Act, !927 or under any other law for the 6 of 927. 
time being in force; 


(b) the land that is not covered under clause (a), but has been recorded in 
Government record as forest, as on or after the 25th October, 980: 


Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to such land, which 
has been changed from forest use to use for non-forest purpose on or before the 
2th December, |996 in pursuance of an order, issued by any authority authorised by 
a State Government or an Union territory Administration in that behalf. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression 
"Government record" means record held by Revenue Department or Forest Department 
of the State Government or Union territory Administration, or any authority, local 
body, community or council recognised by the State Government or Union territory 
Administration. 


(2) The following categories of land shall not be covered under the provisions 
of this Act, namely:— 


(a) such forest land situated alongside a rail line or a public road maintained 
by the Government, which provides access to a habitation, or to a rail, and 
roadside amenity up to a maximum size of 0.0 hectare in each case; 


(b) such tree, tree plantation or reafforestation raised on lands that are 
not specified in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (/); and 


(c) such forest land,— 


(i) as is situated within a distance of one hundred kilometres along 
international borders or Line of Control or Line of Actual Control, as the 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


case may be, proposed to be used for construction of strategic linear 
project of national importance and concerning national security; or 


(ii) up to ten hectares, proposed to be used for construction of 
security related infrastructure; or 


(iii) as is proposed to be used for construction of defence related 
project or a camp for paramilitary forces or public utility projects, as may 
be specified by the Central Government, the extent of which does not 
exceed five hectares in a Left Wing Extremism affected area as may be 
notified by the Central Government. 


(3) The exemption provided under sub-section (2) shall be subject to such 
terms and conditions, including the conditions of planting trees to compensate felling 
of trees undertaken on the lands, as the Central Government may, by guidelines, 
specify.’. 

5. In the principal Act, section 2 shall be renumbered as sub-section (/) thereof 
and— 


(a) in sub-section (/) as so renumbered,— 


(7) in clause (iii), for the words "not owned, managed or controlled by 
Government", the words ", subject to such terms and conditions, as the Central 
Government may, by order, specify" shall be substituted; 


(7) in the Explanation, for the long line occurring after clause (b), the 
following shall be substituted, namely:— 


"but does not include any work relating to or ancillary to 
conservation, development and management of forests and wildlife, such 
as— 


(7) silvicultural operations including regeneration operations; 

(ii) establishment of check-posts and infrastructure for the 
front line forest staff; 

(iii) establishment and maintenance of fire lines; 

(iv) wireless communications; 

(v) construction of fencing, boundary marks or pillars, bridges 
and culverts, check dams, waterholes, trenches and pipelines; 


(vi) establishment of zoo and safaris referred to in the Wild 
53 of 972. Life (Protection) Act, !972, owned by the Government or any 
authority, in forest areas other than protected areas; 


(vii) eco-tourism facilities included in the Forest Working 
Plan or Wildlife Management Plan or Tiger Conservation Plan or 
Working Scheme of that area; and 


(viii) any other like purposes, which the Central Government 
may, by order, specify."; 
(9) after sub-section (/) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


"(2) The Central Government may, by order, specify the terms and 
conditions subject to which any survey, such as, reconnaissance, prospecting, 
investigation or exploration including seismic survey, shall not be treated as 
non-forest purpose.". 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II — Sec. |] 


Insertion of 6. In the principal Act, after section 3B, the following section shall be inserted, 
new section 3C. namely:— 


Power of "3C. The Central Government may, from time to time, issue such directions, to 
Central any authority under the Central Government, State Government or Union territory 
G t ise & es 7 : Cc 

oo Administration, or to any organisation, entity or body recognised by the Central 


directions. Government, State Government or Union territory Administration, as may be necessary 
for the implementation of this Act.". 


DR. REETA VASISHTA, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 


AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054. 


MGIPMRND—236GI(S3)—04-08-2023. 


Kshitiz 
Mohan 


