रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. 0. L.-33004/99 


Jiitad = राज्जपतन्र 
Che Gazette of JSndia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-27032024-253411 
CG-DL-E-27032024-253411 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 


भाग 1---खण्ड 3--उप-खण्ड (iii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (iii) 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


a. 78] नई दिल्‍ली, बुधवार, मार्च 27, 2024/45 7, 1946 
No. 78] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, MARCH 27, 2024/CHAITRA 7, 1946 


भारत निर्वाचन आयोग 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्‍ली, 20 फरवरी, 2024 
आ.अ. 85(अ).--लोक प्रतिनिधित्व अधिनियम, 1951 (1951 का 43) की धारा 106 के अनुसरण में, भारत 


निर्वाचन आयोग वर्ष 2019 की निर्वाचन याचिका सं. 02 में माननीय उच्च न्यायालय, पंजाब एवं हरियाणा, चण्डीगढ के 
दिनांक 12 अक्टूबर, 2023 के निर्णय को WAIT प्रकाशित करता है। 


[सं. 82/भा.नि.आ./हरि.-लो.सभा/2023/(सोनीपत)] 
आदेश से, 
एस. बी. जोशी, प्रधान सचिव 
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 20th February, 2024 


O.N. 85(E).—In pursuance of Section 106 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951), the 
Election Commission of India hereby publishes the judgement dated 12" October, 2023 of the Hon’ble High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in the Election Petition no. 02 of 2019. 


[No. 82/ECI/HAR-HP/2023/(SONIPAT)] 
By Order, 
S. B. JOSHI, Principal Secy. 


2290 GI/2024 (1) 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


Election Petition No. 2-2019 2023: PHHC: 138516 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA AT CHANDIGARH 
Election Petition No. 2-2019 
Date of Decision: - 12.10.2023 
MasterRamesh KhatriLamberdar 2 eee eee ee Petitioner 
Vs. 
Ramesh Chander Kaushik eee eee Respondent 
CORAM: - HON’BLE MS. JUSTICE RITU BAHRI 
Present: - Petitioner in person 
Mr. Atul Lakhanpal, Sr. Advocate with 
Mr. Arvinder Pal Singh Grewal, Advocate 
For the respondent. 
Ritu Bahri, J 


Petitioner filed petition under Section 77,77 (1), 80 (a) and 100 (b) and) D-iii and iv), 123, 125 (A) ,126, 127 
(A) (2) of the Representation of People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act of 1951”) read with Section 49C, 
86, 89 of the Conduct of Election Rule, 1961 and also under Article 324 of the Constitution of India, for declaring the 
election of respondent-Ram Chander Kaushik, as null and void. 


Brief facts of the case are petitioner is a resident and voter in 31, Sonipat Constituency at Sr. 
358/Part No. 54 of Electoral Roll for 06 Sonipat Parliament Constituency. Pursuant to notification 
dated 16.04.2019, the petitioner contested the above election as an independent candidate, having 
election symbol as cauliflower. The following is the schedule fixed by the Election Commission: - 


Schedule Date Day 
Date of issue of gazette | 16.04.2019 Tuesday 
notification 
Last date of nomination 23.04.2019 Tuesday 
Date of scrutiny of nomination | 24.04.2019 Wednesday 
Last date of withdrawal of | 26.04.2019 Friday 
candidate 

Election Petition No. 2-2019 2023: PHHC: 138516 
Date of Poll 12.05.2019 Sunday 
Date of Counting 23.05.2019 Thursday 
Declare of election 23.05.2019 Thursday 


After the process of scrutiny, total 29 candidates were left in fray for the said 


constituency including the petitioner. The respondent contested the election on the ticket of B.J.P. 
The poll was held in accordance with the schedule mentioned above. The respondent secured 
587664 votes and the petitioner secured 1701 votes the respondent was thus declared as Returned 
candidate. 


The petitioner is challenging the election on the ground that corrupt practice was adopted 
by the respondent. Further it has been stated that the respondent was required to file an affidavit 
giving the entire list of assets, which were owned and possessed by her/his along with the details of 
the assets of the family member. The respondent needs to maintain a register of day to day accurate 
election expenditure register under Section 78 of the Act of 1951. On 19.04.2019, respondent had 
filed his nomination form being Candidate of BJP in 06- Sonipat Parliament Constituency. At the 
time of filing of nomination form, large number of vehicles around 200 and near about 5000 persons 
were came present in the office of Returning Officer, Sonipat, Mini Secretariat, Sonipat. The above 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


mentioned persons were doing road show while coming from the office of BJP to the office of 
Returning Officer. However, the respondent did not show accurate expenditure incurred on 
19.04.2019 and 23.04.2019 in the Expenditure Register. 


The Respondent also failed to submit the complete detail of expenses regarding Loud 
speaker, car, e-rickshaw, Hand puller Rickshaw, Tata Chota Hathi, rally, Nukkar Sabha and public 
meeting, Sofa Set, chairs, Tents etc. used for public meeting which were organized from 23.04.2019 
to 12.05.2019 in 9 MLA constituency i.e. Sonipat Gannaur, Jind Julana etc. The election of the 
Respondent as returning candidate may be declared void, being a corrupt practice under Section 77 
and 123 of the Act of 1951. 


As per the Appendix-A issued by the District Election Officer, Sonipat, in which the 
complete detail has been mentioned regarding the printing stationary of Pamphlet, Sticker, poster 
etc, but without getting prior approval from the competent authority, they have printed the stationary 
in much excess approximately Rs. 50 lacs, which is totally in violation of the Rules and the format 
issued by the District Election office, Sonipat. 


The respondent further failed to show the expenses for the refreshment of the guests and 
other local leader, who are organizing the public meeting in the Assembly constituencies parts of the 
06-Sonipat Parliamentary. The respondent has also failed to show the expenses for the attending the 
public meeting by the Ministers and the local leader of the locality 06- Sonipat Parliamentary 
Constituency they openly used the Govt. vehicles also misuse the Government accommodation like 
Guest House and Community centers. 


Further he has stated that Hon’ble the Chief Minister of Haryana organized a Vijay Sankalp 
Rally on 11.04.2019 at village Badwasni in Gohana assembly of 06-Sonipat Parliamentary 
constituency, in which all the BJP ministers and other ministerial staff were present and a large 
crowd approximately 70/80 thousand persons’ were gathered and to this effect light, tent with tax, 
tables, chairs, sofa sets, generator set and transportation etc were used but the respondent has not 
mentioned in the expenditure register of day to day account. Thus, the election of the respondent be 
declared null and void being a corrupt practice under Section 77 and 127 of the Act of 1951. 


The petitioner submitted a complaint dated 18.05.2019 (P-1) regarding EVM machine and 
Form 7A Rule 10 of the Act 1951 also not installed the list of the candidates, but till today no action 
has been taken by the Authority. On 06.05.2019 (P-2), the petitioner submitted another complaint at 
6:15 AM regarding campaigning the election at Railway Station, Sonipat. The returned candidate 
with Rajeev Jain Press Secretary of Chief Minister, Haryana with also 200 paid workers, violation 
of the Model Code of Conduct and Railway Protection Act. Another complaint dated 19.05.2019 (P- 
3) was submitted to Sunil Arora Chief Election Commissioner: New Delhi that Ramesh Chander 
Kaushik BJP Candidate, who is contesting candidate from 06-Sonipat Parliamentary Constituency 
along with Rajeev Jain and other party workers are campaigning and processing on Sonipat Railway 
Station without ticket and without any prior permission from R.O Sonipat or SSP, Sonipat. Another 
complaint was submitted to Dr. Shaleen, IAS Returning Officer-cum-Deputy Commissioner, 
Sonipat (P-4). 


On 20.05.2019 (P-5 to P-7), the petitioner submitted three complaints regarding 
campaigning the election at Railway Station, Sonipat. But till date no action against the. Said person 
till date. Further complaint was regarding No Demo Ballot Paper list outside of Polling Booth from 
7A Rule 10(1) in whole 06- Sonipat Parliamentary Constituency. Another complaint was submitted 
to SHO/GRP/SNP, Sr. DSC/RPF, P.K. Road, New Delhi on 20.05.2019 (Annexure P-8) regarding 
campaigning the election at Railway Station, Sonipat. The returned candidate with Rajeev Jain Press 
Secretary of CM, Haryana with also 200 paid workers, violation of the Model Code of Conduct and 
Railway Protection Act. The Returning officer has also issued the specific direction as per direction 
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India passed in SA SLP (Civil) No. 6679/2004 Dated 13.04.2004) 
that every Registered/ national and State Political party and every contesting candidate proposing to 
issue advertisement on television channels and/or on cable network will have to apply to DEO for 
pre -certification of all political advertisement on electronic media before the publication, inspite of 
the specific direction issued by the R.O., the respondent has openly used the electronic media Which 
is clear cut violation of the instructions issued by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. 


The Petitioner has moved an application dated 27.05.2019 (P-9) for issuance of certified 
copies of the documents to the District Election Officer, Sonipat. The petitioner sent 
application/letter to the Public Information Officer, Under Secretary, Election Commission of India, 
Nirvachan Sadan, New Delhi dated 03.06.2019 regarding the details asked required 
information/documents inspection photo copy softcopy etc. Copies of application for Right to 
Information Act, 2005 dated 03.06.2019 are attached as Annexures P-10 to P-15 respectively. In 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


response, the Deputy Commissioner-cum-Election Officer, Sonipat stated that only photocopy of 
election expenditure with vouchers/bills can be supplied. A copy of reply to the application dated 
14.06.2019 is attached as Annexure P-16. 


On 19.05.2019, the petitioner submitted a complaint (P-17) that Sh. Ramesh Kaushik BJP 
contesting candidate from 06- Sonipat, Parliamentary constituency along with Rajeev Jain and other 
party workers are campaigning and processing on Sonipat Railway Station. They are also without 
ticket and procession without prior permission from R.O. Sonipat or Senior Superintendent, Sonipat 
or other authority. The petitioner sent an application/letter (Right to Information Act), 2005 to the 
Public Information officer, Under Secretary, Election Commission of India, Nirvachan Sadan, New 
Delhi dated 25.06.2019 (P -18) regarding the particulars details information/documents asked 
required of Respondent/Returned Candidate dated 04.07.2019 from page No. 1 to 165 and only 
photocopy of election expenditure with vouchers/Bills of Returned candidate issued by petitioner 
and paid them Rs. 1,079/- only e-challan is attached as Annexure P/19. The Respondent has failed to 
show the detail of loan. Gift, and donation received from the concerned persons with his correct 
address, name and Place in correct manner. The expenditure observed also noted down in the 
expenditure register don’t show the name of the said person. The respondent had also opened 
various offices in 06-Sonipat Parliament Constituency, but the Respondent did not show the 
expenditures spent in these offices in the Expenditure Register 1.6. Gohana AC, Baroda AC, 
Gannaur AC, Sonipat AC, Kharkhoda AC, Rai AC, Jind AC, Safidon AC and Julana AC and also 
not shown the vehicles rent driver wages and fuel bills the expenditure register from 23.04.2019 to 
23.05.2019. 


On 09.09.2019, this Court allowed CM-11-E-2019 and the applicant/State was allowed to 
take out the EVMs. VVPATs, which were lying blocked for the purpose of utilization of the same 
for Haryana Vidhan Sabha Election, 2019. 


Thereafter, the petitioner filed reply to the application under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC seeking 
rejection of election petition for non-compliance of mandatory provisions of 83 (1) (a) and (b) of the 
Act of 1951 


Learned senior counsel for the respondent has argued that the present election petition is 
liable to be dismissed as the petitioner has challenged the election of the applicant/respondent on the 
ground of corrupt practice i.e. non disclosure of correct expenses in the expenses submitted by the 
respondent in the account submitted by him to the Election Officer. However, it is not disputed that 
right from the day of nomination till the date of polling, the entire election is videographed by the 
Election Officials and the candidate has to submit the details of the expenses incurred by him in a 
prescribed form on day to day basis and the election officials also informed the candidates that if 
some expenses have not been incorporate and are given a chance to correct the mistakes. The 
respondent has furnished the completed details of expenses to the satisfaction of the officials of the 
election office. The allegations levelled in the petition are vague, as there was no Information with 
the petitioner and he has given figures on his own. The petitioner has failed to mentioned the details 
of places which are alleged to have been taken rent by the respondent for opening offices, the 
number of total workers, has also not been mentioned. The petitioner has failed to give details of 
loud speakers, cars, e-rickshaws etc and a sweeping statement has been given that these were used 
for public meeting for 23.04.2019 to 12.05.2019 in 9 MLA’s constituencies. The statement of the 
petitioner would not amount to compliance of provisions of Section 83 of the Act of 1951. Further 
the petitioner has not given the details as to how he has arrived at a figure of Rs. 50 lacs for printing 
of pamphlet, sticker and poster etc. 


Learned senior counsel for the petitioner states the application filed by the 
applicant/respondent under Order 7 Rule 11 is liable to be allowed, as the petitioner has not 
complied with mandatory provisions of Section 83 (1) (a) and (b) of the Act of 1951 and further 
submitted that the petitioner has filed similar election petition number of times and all have been 
dismissed. 


1. Election Petition No. 12-2014 titled as Ramesh Khatri Lambardar vs Ms. Kavita Jain, decided 
no 01.06.2017 

2. Election Petition No. 1-2019 titled as Master Ramesh Khatri vs Dr. Krishan Lal Middhar, 
decided no 02.09.2022 

3. Election Petition No. 12-2019 titled as Master Ramesh Khatri Lambardar vs Surender Panwar, 
decided on 09.01.2023. 


4. Election Petition No. 11-2019 titled as Master Ramesh Khatri Lambardar vs Manohar Lal, 
decided on 02.09.2022. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


Petitioner, who is present in the Court has not disputed the above fact. All election petitions 
filed by the petitioner had been rejected on the ground that the petitioner had miserably 
failed to discharge the primary onus to rove the charges to the satisfaction of the Court as 
allegation of corrupt practice is quasi criminal in nature and material facts and full 
particulars in respect of even one corrupt practice are not stated in the election petitions. 


This issue has already been examined by Hon’ble the Supreme Court in a case of Azhar 
Hussain vs. Rajiv Gandhi, 1986 Supp SCC 315, wherein it has been held that the power lay with 
the High Court to throw out an election petition at the threshold if a reading thereof did not disclose 
any cause of action. The relevant portion of the said judgment is as under: - 


“12.Learned counsel for the petitioner has next argued that in any event the powers to 
reject an election petition summarily under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure should not 
be exercised at the threshold. In substance, the argument is that the court must proceed with the trial, 
record the evidence, and only after the trial of the election petition is concluded that the powers 
under the Code of Civil Procedure for dealing appropriately with the defective petition which does 
not disclose cause of action should be exercised. With respect to the learned counsel, it is an 
argument which it is difficult to comprehend. The whole purpose of conferment of such powers is to 
ensure that a litigation which is meaningless and bound to prove abortive should not be permitted to 
occupy the time of the court and exercise the mind of the respondent. The sword of Damocles need 
not be kept hanging over his head unnecessarily without point or purpose. Even in an ordinary Civil 
litigation the Court readily exercises the power to reject a plaint if it does not disclose any cause of 
action. Or the power to direct the concerned party to strike out unnecessary, scandalous, frivolous or 
vexatious parts of the pleadings. Or such pleadings which are likely to cause embarrassment delay 
the fair trial of the action or which is otherwise an abuse of the process of law. An order directing a 
party to strike out a part of the pleading would result pleading. The Courts in exercise of the powers 
under the Code of Civil Procedure can also treat any point going to the root of the matter such as 
one pertaining to jurisdiction or maintainability as a preliminary point and can dismiss a suit without 
proceeding to record evidence and hear elaborate arguments in the context of such evidence, if the 
Court is satisfied that the action would terminate in view of the merits of the preliminary point of 
objection. The contention that even if the election petition is liable to be dismissed ultimately it 
should be so dismissed only after recoding evidence is a thoroughly misconceived and untenable 
argument. The powers in this behalf are meant to be exercised to serve the purpose for which the 
same have been conferred on the competent Court so that the litigation comes to an end at the 
earliest and the concerned litigation are relieved of the psychological burden of the litigation so as to 
be free to follow their ordinary pursuits and discharge their duties. And so that they can adjust their 
affairs on the footing that the litigation will not make demands on their time or resources, will not 
impede their future work, and they are free to undertake and fulfil other commitment such being the 
position in regard to matters pertaining to ordinary Civil litigation, there is greater reason for taking 
the same view in regard to matters pertaining petition remains hanging an elected member of the 
Legislature would not feel sufficiently free to devote his whole-hearted attention to matters of public 
importance which clamour for his concerned constituency. the time and attention demanded by his 
elected office will have to be diverted to matters pertaining to the contest of the election petition. 
Instead of being engaged in a campaign to relive the distress of the people in general and of the 
residents of his constituency who voted him into office, and of the residents of his constituency who 
voted him into office, and instead of resolving their problems. He would be engaged in a campaign 
to establish that he has in fact been duly elected. Instead of discharging his functions as the elected 
representative of the people, he will be engaged in a struggle to establish that he has in fact won the 
verdict and the confidence of the electorate at the polls. He will have not only to win the vote of the 
people but also to win the vote of the Court in a long drawn out litigation before he can whole- 
heartedly engaged himself in discharging the trust reposed in him by the electorate. The pendency of 
the election petition would also act as a hindrance if he be entrusted with same public office in his 
elected capacity. He may even have occasions to deal with the representatives of foreign powers 
who may wonder whether he will eventually succeed and hesitate to deal with him. The fact that an 
election petition calling into question his election is pending may, in a given case, act as a 
psychological fetter and may not permit him to at with full freedom. Even if he is made of stern 
metal, the constraint introduced by the pendency of an election petition may have some impact on 
his sub-conscious mind without his ever being or becoming aware of it. Under the circumstances, 
there is greater reason why in a democratic setup, in regard to a matter pertaining to an elected 
representative of the people which is likely to inhibit him in the discharge of his duties towards the 
Nation, the controversy is set at rest at the earliest, if the facts of the case and the law so warrant. 
Since the Court has the power to act at the threshold the power must be exercised at the threshold 
itself in case the Court is satisfied that it is a fit case for the exercise of such power and that exercise 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


of such powers is warranted under the relevant provisions of low. To wind up the dialogue, to 
contend that the powers to dismiss or reject an election petition or pass appropriate orders should not 
be exercised except at the stage of final judgment after recording the evidence even if the facts of 
the case warrant exercise of such powers, at the threshold, is to contend that the legislature conferred 
these powers without point or purpose, and we must close our mental eye to the presence of the 
powers which should be treated as nonexistent. The court cannot accede to such a proposition. The 
submission urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner in this behalf must therefore be firmly 
repelled. 


To the same effect is the judgment of the Supreme Court in Dhartipatkar Madan Lal 
Aggarwal vs. Rajiv Gandhi 1987 Supp SCC 93 wherein it was held that the High Court would 
have the jurisdiction to reject an election Petition under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code if the Court 
was Satisfied that the election petition does not disclose a cause of action. Paragraphs 8 and 11 of the 
judgment, which are relevant, are reproduced below: - 


“8. The first question which falls for our determination is whether the High Court had 
jurisdiction to strike out pleadings under Order 6, Rule 16, C.P.C and to reject the election petition 
under Order 7, Rule 11 of the Code at the preliminary stage even though no written statement had 
been filed by the respondent. Section 80 provides that no election is to be called in question except 
by an election petition presented in accordance with the provisions of Part VI of the Act before the 
High Court 81 provides that an election petition may be presented on one or more of the grounds 
specified in Section 100 by an elector or by a candidate questioning the election of a returned 
candidate. Section 83 provides that an election petition shall contain a concise statement of material 
facts on which the petitioner relies and he shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that 
he may allege including full statement of the names of the parties alleged to have committed such 
corrupt practice and the date and place of the commission of each such practice. Section 86 confers 
power on the High Court to dismiss an election petition which does not comply with the provisions 
of Section 81 and 82 or Section 117. Section 87 deals with the procedure to be followed in the trial 
of the election petition and it lays down that subject to the provisions of the Act and of any les made 
thereunder, every election petition shall be tried by the High Court as nearly as may be in 
accordance with the procedure applicable to the trial of suits under the Civil procedure Code, 1908. 
Since provisions of Civil Procedure code apply to the trial of an election petition, order 6, Rule 16 
and Order 6, Rule 17 are applicable to the proceedings relating to the trial of an election petition 
subject to the provisions of the Act. On a combined reading of Section 81, 83,68 and 87 of the Act, 
it is apparent that those paras of a petition which do not disclose any cause of action, are liable to be 
struck off under Order 6, Rule 16, as the Court is empowered at any stage of the proceedings to 
strike out or delete pleading which is unnecessary, scandalous, frivolous or vexatious or which may 
tend to prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the petition or suit. It is the duty of the court to 
examine the plaint and it need not wait till the defendant files written statement and points out the 
defects. If the court on examination of the plaint or the election petition finds that it does not 
disclose any cause of action it would be justified in striking out the pleadings. Order 6. Rule 16 itself 
empowers the Court to strike out pleadings at any stage of the proceeding which may even be before 
the filling of the written statement by the respondent or commencement of the trial. If the Court is 
satisfied that election petition does not make out any cause of action and that the trial would 
prejudice embarrass and delay the proceedings, the court need not wait for the filing of written 
statement instead it can proceed to hear the preliminary objections and strike out pleadings. If after 
striking out the pleadings the court find that no triable issues remain to considered, it has power to 
reject the election petition under. Order VI, Rule 11 


11. In Bhagwati Prasad Dixit ‘Ghorawala’ v. Rajiv Gandhi, 1986 (4) SCC 78 this Court 
again reiterated that in an election pleadings have to precise, specific and unambiguous and if the 
election petition does not disclose a cause of action it should be rejected in limine. These authorities 
have settled the legal position that an election petition is liable to be dismissed in limine at the initial 
stage if it does not disclose any cause of action. Cause of action in questioning the validity of 
election must relate to the grounds specified in section 100 of the Act. If the allegations contained in 
the petition do not set out grounds of challenge as contemplated by section 100 of the Act and if the 
allegations do not conform to the requirement of Section 81 and 83 of the Act, the pleadings are 
liable to be struck off and the election petition is liable to be rejected under order 7 Rule 11. A 
pleading if vague and general is embarrassing. If the allegation contained in the election petition 
even assuming to be true and correct do not make out any case of corrupt practice or any ground 
under Section 100 of the Act, the pleading would be unnecessary, frivolous and vexatious. It is 
always open to strike out the same. If after striking out defective pleadings the Court finds that no 
cause of action remains to be tried it would be duty bound to reject the petition under Order 7, Rule 
11, Civil Procedure Code if a preliminary objection is raised before the commencement of the trial, 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3 (iii) भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 7 


the court is duty bound to consider the same it need not postpone the consideration for subsequent 
stage of the trial.” In the light of the afore discussion and the law settled by the supreme Court the 
decks are now clear to scrutinize the pleadings in the case in hand to find out as to whether the same 
disclose any cause of action. However, before adverting to the allegations of corrupt practices raised 
in the petition there is another issue which requires this Court’s attention. The main thrust of the 
allegations by the petitioner are that the respondent has not accurately accounted for the petitioner 
are that the respondent has not accurately accounted for the expenses incurred by him during the 
course of his election campaign and therefore has committed corrupt practices in terms of Section 
77 read with Section 123 (b) of the Act. 


Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner in the present case as well, has not given any 
details with respect to misuse of funds by the respondent and keeping in view the judgments 
mentioned above, this Court is of the view that Election Petition is an abuse of the process of the 
Court is of the view that Election Petition is an abuse of the process of the Court. In such 
circumstances the respondent’s application filed by him under order VII Rule 11 of the Code is 
allowed and resultantly, the main election petition is rejected. 


(RITU BAKHR) 
JUDGU 
12.10.2023 
G Arora 
Whether speaking/reasoned : Yes/No 
Whether reportable : Yes/No 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. MANOS ss 


VERMA 


