रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 २८७0. No. 0. L.-33004/99 


WRa < राजजपत्र 
Che Gazette of -ऊतातव 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-18092025-266239 
CG-DL-E-18092025-266239 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 


भाग 1--खण्ड 3--उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं. 4106] नई दिल्ली, बृहस्पतिवार, सितम्बर 18, 2025/भाद्र 27, 1947 
No. 4106] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 18, 2025/BHADRA 27, 1947 


गृह मंत्रालय 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्‍ली, 18 सितंबर, 2025 
का.आ. 4223(अ).--केंद्रीय सरकार ने, विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिनियम, 1967 (1967 का 37) 
(जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिनियम कहा गया है) की धारा 3 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते 
हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग Ul, खंड 3, उपखंड (ii), तारीख 11 मार्च, 
2024 में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 1115(अ), तारीख 11 मार्च, 2025 (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त 
अधिसूचना कहा गया है) द्वारा आवामी एक्शन कमेटी (एएसी) को विधिविरुद्ध संगम के रूप में घोषित किया था; 
और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (1) के साथ पठित धारा 5 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा 
प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग ॥, खंड 3, 
उपखंड (1), तारीख 3 अप्रैल, 2025 में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 1579(अ), तारीख 3 अप्रैल, 2025 द्वारा 
विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिकरण कहा गया है) का गठन किया था, 
जिसमें दिल्‍ली उच्च न्यायालय के न्यायाधीश न्यायमूर्ति सचिन दत्ता थे; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने, उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, 
उक्त अधिसूचना को न्यायनिर्णयन के प्रयोजन के लिए कि क्या आवामी एक्शन कमेटी (एएसी) को विधिविरुद्ध संगम के 
रूप में घोषित किए जाने का पर्याप्त कारण था या नहीं, तारीख 8 अप्रैल, 2025 को saa अधिकरण को निर्दिष्ट किया 


गया था; 


6195 GI/2025 (1) 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


और, Set अधिकरण ने, Sat अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (3) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, 
उक्त अधिसूचना में की गई घोषणा की पुष्टि करते हुए तारीख 3 सितंबर, 2025 को एक आदेश पारित किया था। 

अतः, अब, केंद्रीय सरकार उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (4) के अनुसरण में, उक्त अधिकरण के आदेश 
को प्रकाशित करती है, अर्थात्‌:- 


---: अधिकरण का आदेश अंग्रेजी भाग में छपा है :--- 
(न्यायमूर्ति सचिन दत्ता) 
विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण ” 


[फा. सं. 14017/13/2025-एन.आई.-एम.एफ.ओ.] 


राजीव कुमार, संयुक्त सचिव 


MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 18th September, 2025 

S.O. 4223(E).— Whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of 
section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967) (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), 
declared the Awami Action Committee (AAC) as an unlawful association, vide notification of the Government of 
India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, number S.O. 1115(E), dated the 11" March, 2025 (hereinafter referred to as the 
said notification) published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (ii), dated the 117 
March, 2025; 

And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 5 
read with sub-section (1) of section 4 of the said Act constituted the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal 
(hereinafter referred to as the said Tribunal) consisting of Justice Sachin Datta, Judge, High Court of Delhi, vide 
notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, number S.O. 1579(E), dated the ae April, 
2025, published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (ii), dated the 374 April, 2025; 

And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 4 of 
the said Act referred the said notification to the said Tribunal on 8" April, 2025 for the purpose of adjudicating 
whether or not there was sufficient cause for declaring the Awami Action Committee (AAC) as an unlawful 
association; 

And, whereas, the said Tribunal in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of section 4 of the said 
Act, passed an order on 37 September, 2025, confirming the declaration made in the said notification. 

Now, therefore, in pursuance of sub-section (4) of section 4 of the said Act, the Central Government hereby 
publishes the order of the said Tribunal, namely: - 


* UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL, 
NEW DELHI 
Date of Decision: 03.09.2025 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
Gazette Notification No. S.O. 1115(E) dated 117 March, 2025 declaring the Awami Action Committee (AAC) as an 
unlawful association under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. 
AND IN THE MATTER OF: 


Reference under Section 4(1) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 made to this Tribunal by the 
Government of India through Ministry of Home Affairs vide Gazette Notification No. 8.0. 1579 (E) dated 
3" April, 2025. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


Present: Ms. Aishwarya Bhati (ASG) along with Ms. Poornima Singh, Ms. Shreya Jain, Mr. Ketan Paul, 
Mr. Sharath N. Nambiar, Mr. Shantnu Sharma, Mr. Aakarsh Mishra and Mr. Arkaj Kumar, 
Advocates for Union of India. 


Mr. Parth Awasthi, Advocate, Advocate for Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir along with 
Mr. Suhaib Ashraf, Chief Prosecuting Officer, J&K. 


Dr. Sumedh Kumar Sethi, Registrar (DHJS) Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal. 
Ms. Samridhi Vats, Ms. Sanjana Lal and Ms. Sanya Sikri, Law Researchers. 


Mr. Manoj Kumar Singh, Asstt. Director, Mr. Antariksh Singh Rathore, Asstt. Commandant 
and Mr. Sameer Shukla, Asstt. Section Officer, Ministry of Home Affairs. 


ORDER 


1. This order answers the reference under Section 4(3) read with Section 3(3) of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’ or ‘UAPA’, for short) made to this Tribunal constituted 
vide Gazette Notification No. $.0.1579 (E) dated ie April, 2025 under Section 5(1) of the Act issued by the 
Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, for adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring 
Awami Action Committee (hereinafter referred to as ‘AAC’ or ‘association’ or ‘organisation’ for short) as an 
“unlawful association”. 


I. THE NOTIFICATION 
2. The Central Government published Gazette Notification (extra-ordinary) No. 8.0. 1115 (E) dated 
117 March, 2025 in exercise of powers conferred under Section 3(1) of the Act and declared AAC to be an “unlawful 
association”. A copy of the said notification has been sent to this Tribunal, as contemplated under Rule 50) of the 


Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 (“UAP Rules” in short). The said notification dated 117 March, 2025 
reads as under:- 


“8.0. 1115(E)—Whereas, the Awami Action Committee (hereinafter referred to as the AAC), 
chaired by Umar Farooq is indulging in unlawful activities, which are prejudicial to the integrity, 


sovereignty and security of the country; 


And, whereas, members of the AAC have remained involved in supporting terrorist activities and 


anti-India propaganda for fuelling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir; 


And, whereas, the leaders and members of AAC have been involved in mobilising funds for 
perpetrating unlawful activities, including supporting secessionist, separatist and terrorist activities in 


Jammu and Kashmir; 


And, whereas, the AAC and its members by their activities show sheer disrespect towards the 


constitutional authority and constitutional set up of the country; 


And, whereas, AAC is involved in promoting and aiding the secession of Jammu and Kashmir from 
India by involving in anti-national and subversive activities; sowing seeds of dis-affection amongst people; 
exhorting people to destabilise law and order; encouraging the use of arms to separate Jammu and 


Kashmir from the Union of India and promoting hatred against established Government; 


And, whereas, the Central Government is of the opinion that AAC is indulging in the activities 
which are prejudicial to the integrity and security of the country, inter alia, on the following grounds, 


namely: - 


(1) National Investigation Agency has filed charge sheet against Aftab Ahmad Shah @ Shahid-ul-Islam 
(spokesman and media advisor of AAC) and I1 others before the NIA Special Court, Patiala House, New 
Delhi in RC10/2017 on January 18, 2018 under sections 120B, 121, 121A and 124A of Indian Penal Code 
and sections 13, 16, 17,18, 20, 39 and 40 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; 


(2) Case Crime No. 96/2008 has been registered at Nowhatta Police Station, Srinagar under section 
120B and 153 Ranbir Penal Code and section 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 against 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Umar Faroog fordelivering a speech against the Government of India and for stressing upon the people for 


elections boycott etc; 


(3) Case Crime No. 128/2010 has been registered at Safakadal Police Station, Srinagar under section 
13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 against Umar Farooq and others for delivering a 


lecture and provoking the people against the Government and for raising anti-national slogans; 


(4) Case Crime No. 60/2010 has been registered at Kothi Bagh Police Station, Srinagar under section 
436, 153A, 109,147, and 336 of Ranbir Penal Code and section 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Act, 1967 against Umar Farooq, Mushtaq-ul-Islam, Nisar Ahmad Rather and Nisar Ahmad Bhat for 
shouting slogans against the integrity of India and for delivering a speech stating that they would struggle 


till Jammu and Kashmir is not separated from Union of India, and for also pelting stones; 


(5) Case Crime No. 56/2011 has been registered at Kothi Bagh Police Station, Srinagar under section 
13 ofthe Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 against Umar Farooq, wherein, he supported the 
Hartal call given by Syed Ali Shah Geelani for 03 August, 2011 and for instigating the general people and 
the youth of valley for waging waragainst the sovereignty of India; 


And, whereas, the Central Governmentis further of the opinion that if there is no immediate curb or 
control ofunlawful activities of the Awami Action Committee (AAC), it will use this opportunity to — 


(i) continue with the anti-national activities which are detrimental to the territorial integrity, 


securityand sovereignty of the country; 


(ii) continue advocating the secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India while 


disputing its accession to the Union of India; 


(iii) continue propagating false narrative and anti-national sentiments among the people of Jammu 


and Kashmir with the intention to cause disaffection against India and disrupt public order; and 
(iv) escalate secessionist movements, support militancy and incite violence in the country; 


And, whereas, the Central Government for the above mentioned reasons is firmly of the opinion that 
having regard to the activities of the Awami Action Committee (AAC), it is necessary to declare the Awami 


Action Committee (AAC) as an unlawful association with immediate effect; 


Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967), the Central Government hereby declares the Awami Action 


Committee (AAC) asan unlawful association; 


The Central Government, having regard to the above circumstances, is of firm opinion that it is 
necessary todeclare the Awami Action Committee (AAC) as an unlawful association with immediate effect, 
and accordingly, inexercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 3 of the 
said Act, the Central Government hereby directs that this notification shall, subject to any order that may 
be made under section 4 of the said Act, have effect for a period of five years from the date of its 
publication in the Official Gazette.” 


3. As can be seen, the notification also enumerates the reasons/circumstances, as contemplated under proviso to 
Section 3(3) of the Act, for declaring the association as unlawful, with immediate effect. 


Il. THE BACKGROUND NOTE 


4. Along with the reference to this Tribunal under Section 4 of the UAPA, the Central Government has 
submitted and filed before this Tribunal a background note, as contemplated under Rule 501) of the UAP Rules, 1968. 


5. The background note states that AAC advocates ‘independence’ of Jammu and Kashmir (hereinafter referred 
to as ‘J & K’ for short) from India. In pursuance to its objective, the Association in 1993, joined All Party Hurriyat 
Conference (hereinafter referred to as ‘APHC’ for short) as a founder member and continued separatist activities to 
fulfill the Pakistani agenda of generating feeling of hatred and disaffection against India and severing J & K from the 
Union of India (hereinafter referred to as ‘UOT’, for short). 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


6. As per the background note, the activists of AAC have been glorifying terrorists and have often spoken 
against the Government of J & K and the Central Government as well as Security Forces. The background note gives 
a brief summary of the association and its activities which has been duly classified/ categorized hereunder: 


i. Organisational History 


7. The background note states that AAC was formed in 1964 by Late Moulvi Mohammad Farooq for seeking 
Solution of ‘Kashmir issue’ through grant of ‘right of self-determination’ to the people. It is headquartered at Mirwaiz 
Manzil, Rajouri Kadal, Srinagar, J & K. Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, son of Late Moulvi Mohammad Farooq is heading 
AAC since 1991. 


8. This organisation extended complete support to the Pakistani infiltrators in 1965 and in response, the 
Pakistan authorities made Moulvi Faroog a member of ‘Revolutionary Council’. The organisation opposed the ‘Indira- 
Sheikh accord’ during 1975. The organization has been maintaining a strong anti-Centre stance and harping on the 
‘Kashmiri right of self-determination’. 


9. For over six decades, AAC has been actively engaged in carrying out secessionist and separatist activities, 
targeting sovereignty of India. AAC’s founder Late Moulvi Mohammad Farooq was at the forefront of fuelling and 
organizing anti-India protests. He continued to propagate secessionist views to mobilise Kashmiris in favour of the 
‘right to self-determination’. 


ii. Leadership/Office Bearers of AAC 


10. As per the background note, office of AAC is headquartered at Mirwaiz Manzil, Rajouri Kadal, Srinagar, J 
& K. Details of AAC’s main leaders and office bearers are as under:- 


SI. Name Designation 

No. 

i. Umar Farooq Chairman 

il. Ghulam Nabi Zaki General Secretary 

ili. Shahid-ul-Islam @ Aftab Hilali Shah Spokesperson 

iv. Faiz @ Fayaz Naqashbandi @Syed Faiz Naqshbandi Convenor of APHC/POK 

v. Nazir Ahmed Ronga Organiser 

vi. Farooq Ahmed Saudagar Vice President Youth Wing (Shahid-e-Millat 
Youth Forum) 

vil. Mushtaq Ahmed Sofi Youth president 

Vili. Haji Ghulam Qadir Beigh Senior Working Committee Member 


iii. Minacious Nexus with Cross-border Agencies /Establishments 


11. As per the background note, in 2005, Umar Farooq, who had been heading the APHC (Abbas Ansari group) 
since 1993, attended a summit at an International Forum, and upon his return, he highlighted the summit's 
importance, noting that the Kashmir issue was prioritised in its ten-year action plan. During the summit, Umar 
Farooq had also met the then Pakistan President Pervez Musharraf in Mecca, who had assured him of full support for 
the Hurriyat's United States of Kashmir proposal. Umar Farooq again met Parvez Musharraf in 2007, when he went 
to Pakistan along with other Hurriyat leaders and held series of meetings with him, ISI Chief, officials and several 
terrorist leaders. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


iv. Terrorist Linkages 


12. The background note further mentions that the leaders of AAC have supported terrorists on various 
occasions. Mirwaiz Umar Farooq paid tributes to Abu Qasim, a Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) Commander operating in 
South Kashmir, who had been killed during a joint operation by J & K Police and Army, and said that it was due to 
sacrifice of martyrs like him that Kashmir issue had attracted international attention. On another occasion, Mirwaiz 
Umar Farooq supported the demand for ‘martyrs memorial’ following the killing of two LeT terrorists by the 
Security Forces in 2015. He again paid tributes to four terrorists who were killed in encounters with Security Forces 
in South Kashmir in the year 2016 and declared that the sacrifices of martyrs would not go waste. 


13. Supporters of Late Maulvi Mohammad Farooq along with Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar alias Latram, a 
designated terrorist at serial number 35 in the Fourth Schedule under section 35 of the UAPA, went to Pakistan and 
received arms training. AAC dominated areas in Srinagar have acted as nerve centers of terrorism and provided ‘safe 
haven’ to terrorists in the early stages of terrorism in J & K. Subsequently, youth loyal to Farooq formed ‘Al Umar 
Mujahideen’ in December, 1989, which is a listed terrorist organisation in the First Schedule of the UAPA. 


14. Umar Farooq while paying tributes to Afzal Guru and Maqbool Butt reiterated the call for shutdown and 
protests on their death anniversaries. He also asked people to send a strong message to New Delhi that Kashmiris 
would not be “bullied into submission”. 


१. Separatist/Anti-National Activities 


15. As per the background note, while addressing a congregation on the occasion of /d-ul-Fitr at Srinagar in 
2002, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq urged the entire Muslim community to pray for the freedom of Kashmir and reiterated 
his determination to continue the ‘struggle’ till the goal was achieved. After his address, AAC activists burnt the 
Indian National Flag and resorted to pro-Pak and anti-India slogans. They also floated Pakistani flags tied with 
balloons. 


16. It is stated that in 2011, after a Friday congregation in J & K, Umar Farooq, along with other separatist 
leaders, led a protest march of around 250-300 people from Jamia Mosque to Nowhatta Chowk in Srinagar, where 
pro-azadi slogans were raised and at Nowhatta Chowk, youth pelted stones at the Police. 


17. The AAC and its office bearers, it is stated, have used various media outlets to promote anti-India and 
secessionist propaganda. The association’s social media profile advocates for ‘Kashmir's freedom’ and claims that 
freedom represents resistance to the ‘forcible occupation’ of Kashmir. AAC considers the Kashmir issue an 
unresolved international dispute that threatens the existence of Kashmiris and destabilises South Asia. 


18. AAC considers Kashmir as a disputed region and demands secession of J & K from India. The outfit believes 
that Kashmir issue should be resolved based on the right to ‘self-determination’. With active backing of Pakistan, the 
association promotes secessionist, separatist and terror activities to get ‘freedom of Kashmir’. The association does 
not have any written constitution of its own, however, it abides by the constitution of APHC-A. 


vi. Funding 


19. As per the background note, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq has received significant finding from Pakistan for 
increasing activities of secessionist groups and also for distribution of relief among family members of terrorists. 


vii. Criminal Cases against AAC activists 


20. As per the background note, leaders of AAC have been involved in various serious cases, including, among 
others, unlawful activities, large-scale protests, criminal conspiracy and sedition. Members of the association have 
remained involved in supporting terrorist activities and have provided logistical support to terrorists in J & K. Cases 
have been registered against the AAC and its activists under various provisions of law including the UAPA and other 
substantive offences which, it is stated, provide clinching evidence regarding their involvement in various unlawful 
activities. Details of some of the important cases as given in the background note are as follows:- 


viii. Case being investigated by NIA, Delhi relating to AAC 


21. On January 18, 2018, National Investigation Agency filed charge sheet against Aftab Ahmad Shah @ 
Shahid-ul-Islam (spokesman and media advisor of AAC) and 11 others in case RC 10/2017 (under sections 120B, 
121, 121A and 124A of Indian Penal Code and Sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 39 and 40 of the UAPA) before the NIA 
Special Court, Patiala House, New Delhi. 


ix. Cases being investigated by J & K Police:- 


22. In addition to the case registered by NIA, the State Police of J & K have also registered many cases against 
the AAC activists/ members. Some of the cases are as below:- 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


SI. Case Crime No. with Name of Brief of the Case Crime No. 
No. accused in 
section of law FIR 

1. Case Crime No. 96/2008 u/s 120B and 153 | Umar Registered at Nowhatta Police Station, 
of Ranbir Penal Code', u/s 13 of the | Farooq Srinagar against Umar Farooq for delivering 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 a speech against the Government of India and 

for stressing upon the people for elections 
boycott etc. 

2. Case Crime No. 83/2010 u/s 147, 148, 336, | Umar Registered at Shergrahi Police Station, 
427 & 436 of Ranbir Penal Code Farooq Srinagar against Umar Farooq, on whose 

directions a group of miscreants raising anti- 
national slogans entered into the premises of 
Chief Engineer office in Srinagar and set it 
on fire which engulfed the adjacent Crime 
Headquarter and nearby shops as well as 
Police /Traffic Booths and caused heavy 
damage to Government property 

3, Case Crime No. 128/2010 u/s 13 of the | Umar Registered at Safakadal Police Station, 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 Farooq Srinagar against Umar Farooq and others for 

delivering a lecture and provoking the people 
against the Government and for raising anti- 
national slogans; 

4. Case Crime No. 60/2010 u/s 436, 153A, | Umar Registered at Kothi Bagh Police Station, 
109,147 and 336 of Ranbir Penal Code and | Farooq, Srinagar against Umar Farooq, Mushtaq-ul- 
ws 13 of the Unlawful Activities | Mushtaq-ul- | Islam, Nisar Ahmad Rather and Nisar Ahmad 
(Prevention) Act, 1967 Islam, Nisar | Bhat for shouting slogans against the 

Ahmad integrity of India and for delivering a speech 
Rather and | stating that they would struggle till J & K is 
Nisar not separated from UOL, and for also pelting 
Ahmad Bhat | stones 

05 Case Crime No. 101/2010 u/s 121A, 153, | Umar Registered at Shaheed Gunj, Police Station, 
153A, 147, 148, 336 & 427of Ranbir Penal | Farooq Srinagar against Umar Farooq who headed a 
Code rally which raised anti-national slogans 

against the integrity of India and the 
protesters damaged Govt. property and some 
vehicles. 

हे Case Crime No. 56/2011 u/s 13 of the | Umar Registered at Kothi Bagh Police Station, 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 | Farooq Srinagar against Umar Farooq for supporting 

the Hartal call given by Syed Ali Shah 
Geelani for 03 August, 2011 and for 
instigating the general people and the youth 
of valley for waging war against the 
sovereignty of India. 

7. Case Crime No. 19/2015 u/s 147, 148, 149, | Umar Registered at Nowhatta Police Station, 
341, 336, 332, 427&307 of Ranbir Penal | Farooq Srinagar against Umar Farooq who was 
Code heading a group which pelted stones upon 

deployed troops and raised anti-national 
slogans etc. 

| Case Crime No. 394/2016 u/s 147, 148, 149, | Gh. Nabi Registered at Sopore Police Station, 
336, 427 & 153A of Ranbir Penal Code Zaki Baramulla against Gh. Nabi Zaki S/o Ab. 


Rahim R/o Khusal Matoo, Sopore, General 
Secretary, | AAC for anti-national 


'The Ranbir Penal Code (RPC) was the primary criminal law of the erstwhile Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir. It was introduced in 1932 during 
the reign of Maharaja Ranbir Singh. In 2019, with the abrogation of Article 370 and the passage of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, the 
RPC was repealed and replaced by the Indian Penal Code. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


slogans/speech during which militants fired 
upon police and mob pelted stones upon 
security forces etc 


i Case Crime No. 409/2016 u/s 147,148,149, | Gh. Nabi | Registered at Sopore Police Station, 
336,427, & 307of Ranbir Penal Code Zaki Baramulla against Gh. Nabi Zaki S/o Ab. 
Rahim R/o Khusal Matoo, Sopore, General 
Secretary, AAC for pelting stones upon the 
Police/CRPF deployed at New Colony with 
intention to kill them and disrupt the peace 
and public order. 


23. The above facts, circumstances and acts of the AAC, it is stated, lead to the conclusion that this association is 
vigorously working towards secession and separation of the State of J & K from the UOI. It has actively and 
continuously encouraged the separatist activities including terrorism in the State aimed at causing disaffection, 
disloyalty, dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and has been 
indulging and acting in a manner prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Indian Union and 
therefore, the activities of AAC fall within the purview of unlawful activities. 


x. Declaration of AAC as an Unlawful Association 


24. The background note states that keeping in view the severity of the situation and the unlawful activities by 
the association, the Central Government decided to declare AAC as an unlawful association under the provisions of 
the UAPA. 


Tl. REPLY ON BEHALF OF THE ASSOCIATION 


25: AAC has filed a reply to the background note filed by the UOI. The allegations made in the Background Note 
are denied by the association stating as follows:- 


i. Religious background of AAC 


26. In the reply, the association has given brief details regarding the religious background of AAC. It is stated 
that the Institution of Mirwaiz, which Mirwaiz Umar Farooq (Chairman of the AAC) inherited after the death of his 
father-Mirwaiz Molvi Farooq (Founder of the AAC), came into existence around 17" Century when a family of 
clerics whose religious preaching had earned a place of distinction, moved to Srinagar and began to deliver religious 
sermons from the pulpit of the historic Jama Masjid, and that over a period of time, it graduated into an institution of 
social reforms and empowerment of Muslims, and came to be known as the Institution of Mirwaiz. It is stated that 
Mirwaiz Rasool Shah established Anjuman Nusrat-e-Islam, the first association of the Muslims of Kashmir and by 
founding Islamia High School, he laid the first stone towards empowering the disempowered Muslim Society. It is 
stated that the institution of Mirwaiz played a pivotal role in establishing democratic institutions and safeguarding 
democratic rights. It is stated that when Mirwaiz Molvi Farooq inherited the mantle of the Mirwaiz, in 1964, he 
formed the AAC - a socio-political organisation. 


ii. Objectives of AAC - Social Reforms, Peace and Harmonious Coexistence 


27. It is stated that Mirwaiz Molvi Farooq always stressed upon values of unity, brotherhood, and mutual respect 
and tolerance among coexisting communities. His religious sermons echoed these beliefs. Education among masses, 
especially girls, was an area very close to his heart and he made many reforms regarding this. It is stated that being a 
great advocate of peace, he believed in dialogue and he was a respected and very active member of AIMPLB. He had 
friends across the political and religious spectrum in India who held him in high regard. He was dedicated to his 
people through his life and strived for their well-being through his religious, social and educational reforms. It is 
stated that the Mirwaizeen of Kashmir are known advocates of communal goodwill and harmonious coexistence 
among various sections of Kashmiri Society. 


28. It is stated that Mirwaiz Farooq was opposed to all forms of violence and that is the reason that he strongly 
advocated to ex. Prime Minister V.P. Singh’s government, which was in power in New Delhi at that time, to talk to 
the young men in Kashmir who had taken up arms and address their aspirations right then. He condemned the 
abduction of the young Rubiya Syed and asked the abductors to immediately release her. 


iii, AAC Advocated for dialogue and resolution. 


29. It is stated that AAC has always advocated the politics of outreach, dialogue and resolution, which includes 
the view of people of J & K. It is stated that as per AAC, dialogue in itself is a process of peace. Mirwaiz Umar 
Farooq held talks with late ex Prime Minister Vajpayee/Home Minister Advani/ late ex Prime Minister Manmohan 
Singh. These talks, it is stated, are a testimony to seeking peace and looking for solutions in good faith and sincerity. It 
is contended that asking for recognition of concerns and aspirations of the people of Jammu and Kashmir and 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9 


expressing them with the highest leadership of the land cannot be construed as being “subversive”. It is stated that 
during these talks, Abdul Ghani Lone was assassinated, followed by the assassination of Molvi Mustaq and burning 
down of Islamia High School and grenade attacks at the house of Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, by those opposed to this 
peaceful outreach. Despite that, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and his colleagues kept up their faith in talks. 


iv. Social Services being performed by AAC 


30. It is stated that AAC is also a grouping of people who double down as volunteers to provide a strong support 
system in their localities. They provide help and assistance to the needy and destitute in their areas and in times of 
emergencies, such as accidents, fires or floods, aid and assistance. It is stated that during the floods of 2014, hundreds 
of its volunteers rescued thousands of people and later as part of the ‘Akh Akis’ (for one another) initiative, they 
participated in reconstruction of dozens of homes for the displaced. Medical and blood donation camps are also 
organized by them round the year. 


v. AAC’s response to the FIRs referred to in the notification 


31. It is stated that in the first FIR (RC 10/2017), one individual who is purportedly the media advisor of the 
AAC is an accused. It is stated that it is not sufficient to ban the association as the individuals associated with an 
organisation have personal, professional and other involvements which are not necessarily that of the organisation. 


32; With regard to other FIRs, it is stated that all pertain to delivery of speeches and shouting slogans which 
cannot be the basis for holding the organisation unlawful. It is further stated that most of the relied upon FIRs are 
between 2008 and 2011 and in none of these cases, proceedings have gone beyond registration of the FIR and no 
member of the association has ever been interrogated. It is stated the cases are so flimsy that for over fifteen years, 
they have not even reached the stage of chargesheet. As such the allegations leveled in these FIRs are baseless, 
manipulated, concocted and frivolous. 


IV. STATUTORY PROVISIONS 
33. Section 2 (0) and (p) of the UAPA, read as follows:- 
“2. Definitions. — (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
XXX XXX XXX 


(o) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or association, means any action taken by such 
individual or association (whether by committing an act or by words, either spoken or written, or by 
signs or by visible representation or otherwise),- 


(i) Which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground 
whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India or, the secession of a part of the 
territory of India from the Union, or which incites any individual or group of individuals to 
bring about such cession or secession; or 


(ii) Which disclaims, questions, disrupts, or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of India; or 


(iii) Which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India; 
(p) “unlawful association” means any association, - 


(i) which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids 
persons to undertake any unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such 
activity; or 


(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable under Section 153-A or 
Section 153-B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or which encourages or aids persons 
to undertake any such activity, or of which the members undertake any such activity: 


Provided that nothing contained in sub-clause (ii), shall apply to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir”. 


34. Section 2(0) of the Act defines ‘unlawful activity’. It means “any action taken” by an association or an 
individual of the kind mentioned in clauses (i), (1) and (iii) of the said sub-section. Any action taken has reference to 
and must be of the kind stipulated in and covered by clauses (i), (ii) or (iii). Action can be either written or spoken, by 
sign or by visible representation or even otherwise. Clause (1) refers to “action taken” with the intent or which 
supports any claim for secession or cession of any part of India or incites any individual or group of individuals to 
bring about secession or cession. Clause (1) refers to “action taken” which has the effect of disclaiming, questioning, 
disrupting or intending to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. Clause (iii) refers to “action taken” 
which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


35. ‘Unlawful association’ has been defined in Section 2(p) of the Act and consists of two parts; (i) and (ii). Part 
(i) refers to unlawful activity defined in Section 2(0) and encompasses associations which have the object that 
encourages or even aids persons to undertake the said activity. The last part of Part (i) widens the definition of the 
term “unlawful association” to include an association of which members undertake unlawful activity. In a way, 
therefore, the association is vicariously liable and can be regarded as an unlawful association if members of an 
association undertake unlawful activity. 


36. The present Tribunal, constituted under the UAPA, has been vested with certain powers and the procedure to 
be adopted by it under Section 5 read with Section 9 of the said Act, which are reproduced as under: 


“5. Tribunal. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, as and 
when necessary, a tribunal to be known as the "Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal" consisting of 
one person, to be appointed by the Central Government: Provided that no person shall be so appointed 
unless he is a Judge of a High Court. 


(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the presiding 
officer of the Tribunal, then, the Central Government shall appoint another person in accordance with the 
provisions of this section to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Tribunal 
from the stage at which the vacancy is filled. 


(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Tribunal such staff as may be necessary for the 
discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


(5) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure in all 
matters arising out of the discharge of its functions including the place or places at which it will hold its 
sittings. 


(6) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this Act, have the same powers as are 
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of 
the following matters, namely: - 


(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath; 

(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as evidence; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 

(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court oroffice; 

(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses. 


(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil 
court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 
1898).” 


“9, Procedure to be followed in the disposal of applications under this Act.—Subject to any rules that may 
be made under this Act, the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding any inquiry under sub- 
section (3) of section 4 or by a Court of the District Judge in disposing of any application under sub- 
section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section 8 shall, so far as may be, be the procedure laid down in 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the investigation of claims and the decision of the 
Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall be final.” 


37. Further, under Section 4(1) of Act, the Central Government refers the notification (issued under Section 3(1) 
of the Act) to the Tribunal for “adjudicating” whether or not there is “sufficient cause” for declaring the association 
unlawful. Section 4(2) requires issuance of notice to the association to show cause why the association should not be 
declared as unlawful. Section 4(3) mandates an inquiry in the manner specified in Section 9 after calling for such 
information as may be necessary from Central Government or from office bearers or members of the association. The 
Tribunal under Section 4(3) is required to adjudicate and make an order, as it may deem fit, either confirming the 
declaration made in the notification or cancelling the same. 


V. NATURE AND SCOPE OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE PRESENT TRIBUNAL 


38. After interpreting the said provisions of the UAPA in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind vs. Union of India, (1995) 1 
SCC 428, it was held by the Supreme Court as under:- 


“11.... The entire procedure contemplates an objective determination made on the basis of material placed 
before the Tribunal by the two sides; and the inquiry is in the nature of adjudication of a lis between two 


[भाग I—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 11 


parties, the outcome of which depends on the weight of the material produced by them. Credibility of the 
material should, ordinarily, be capable of objective assessment. The decision to be made by the Tribunal is 
“whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the Association unlawful”. Such a determination 
requires the Tribunal to reach the conclusion that the material to support the declaration outweighs the 
material against it and the additional weight to support the declaration is sufficient to sustain it. The test of 
greater probability appears to be the pragmatic test applicable in the context.” 


(emphasis supplied) 


39. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind, (Supra), was rendered in the specific context 
of the provisions of the UAPA. The proceedings before this Tribunal are governed by the Code of Civil Procedure as 
set out in Section 9 of UAPA. The standard of proof is the standard prescribed by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e- 
Islami Hind (Supra). This lis has to be decided objectively by examining which version is more acceptable and 
credible. In this regard, reference may be made to following observations in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra): 


“30. The allegations made by the Central Government against the Association - Jamaat-E-Islami Hind - 
were totally denied. It was, therefore, necessary that the Tribunal should have adjudicated the controversy 
in the manner indicated. Shri Soli J. Sorabjee, learned counsel for the Association, Jamaat-E-Islami Hind, 
contended that apart from the allegations made being not proved, in law such acts even if proved, do not 
constitute "unlawful activity" within the meaning of that expression defined in the Act. In the present case, 
the alternative submission of Shri Sorabjee does not arise for consideration on the view we are taking on 
his first submission. The only material produced by the Central Government to support the notification 
issued by it under Section 3(1) of the Act, apart from a resume based on certain intelligence reports, are 
the statements of Shri T.N. Srivastava, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and Shri N.C. Padhi, Joint 
Director, IB. Neither Shri Srivastava nor Shri Padhi has deposed to any fact on the basis of personal 
knowledge. Their entire version is based on official record. The resume is based on intelligence reports 
submitted by persons whose names have not been disclosed on the ground of confidentiality. In other 
words, no person has deposed from personal knowledge whose veracity could be tested by cross- 
examination. Assuming that it was not in public interest to disclose the identity of those persons or to 
produce them for cross-examination by the other side, some method should have been adopted by the 
Tribunal to test the credibility of their version. The Tribunal did not require production of those persons 
before it, even in camera, to question them and test the credibility of their version. On the other hand, the 
persons to whom the alleged unlawful acts of the Association are attributed filed their affidavits denying 
the allegations and also deposed as witnesses to rebut these allegations. In such a situation, the Tribunal 
had no means by which it could decide objectively, which of the two conflicting versions to accept as 
credible. There was thus no objective determination of the factual basis for the notification to amount to 
adjudication by the Tribunal, contemplated by the statute. The Tribunal has merely proceeded to accept 
the version of the Central Government without taking care to know even itself the source from which it 
came or to assess credibility of the version sufficient to inspire confidence justifying its acceptance in 
preference to the sworn denial of the witnesses examined by the other side. Obviously, the Tribunal did not 
properly appreciate and fully comprehend its role in the scheme of the statute and the nature of 
adjudication required to be made by it. The order of the Tribunal cannot, therefore, be sustained." 


(Emphasis supplied) 


40. With regard to confidentiality and with regard to nature of evidence, reference is apposite to the following 
observations in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra):- 


“20. As earlier mentioned, the requirement of specifying the grounds together with the disclosure of the 
facts on which they are based and an adjudication of the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the 
association to be unlawful in the form of decision after considering the cause, if any, shown by the 
association in response to the show cause notice issued to it, are all consistent only with an objective 
determination of the points in controversy in a judicial scrutiny conducted by a Tribunal constituted by a 
sitting High Court Judge, which distinguishes the scheme under this Act with the requirement under the 
preventive detention laws to justify the anticipatory action of preventive detention based on suspicion 
reached by a process of subjective satisfaction. The scheme under this Act requiring adjudication of the 
controversy in this manner makes it implicit that the minimum requirement of natural justice must be 
satisfied, to make the adjudication meaningful. No doubt, the requirement of natural justice in a case of 
this kind must be tailored to safeguard public interest which must always outweigh every lessor interest. 
This is also evident from the fact that the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Act itself permits 
the Central Government to withhold the disclosure of facts which it considers to be against the public 
interest to disclose. Similarly, Rule 3(2) and the proviso to Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Rules, 1968 also permit nondisclosure of confidential documents and information which the 
Government considers against the public interest to disclose. Thus, subject to the non-disclosure of 
information which the Central Government considers to be against the public interest to disclose, all 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


information and evidence relied on by the Central Government to support the declaration made by it of an 
association to be unlawful, has to be disclosed to the association to enable it to show cause against the 
same. Rule 3 also indicates that as far as practicable the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 must be followed............. 


(Emphasis supplied) 
XXX XXX XXX 


22. ...The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a procedure 
would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in controversy after 
assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without abdicating its function by merely 
acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a course would satisfy the minimum requirement 
of natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, while protecting the rights of the 
association and its members, without jeopardizing the public interest. This would also ensure that the 
process of adjudication is not denuded of its content and the decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is 
reached by it on all points in controversy after adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion 
already formed by the Central Government. 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer [408 US 471; 33 L Ed 2d 484 (1972) ] the 
United States Supreme Court, in a case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum requirements to be 
followed, as under: (L Ed pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They include (a) written 
notice of the claimed violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of evidence against him; (c) 
opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and documentary evidence; (d) the right to 
confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses (unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause 
for not allowing confrontation); (e) a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a traditional parole 
board, members of which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement by the 
factfinders as to the evidence relied on and reasons for revoking parole. We emphasis there is no 
thought to equate this second stage of parole revocation to a criminal prosecution in any sense. It is a 
narrow inquiry; the process should be flexible enough to consider evidence including letters, affidavits, 
and other material that would not be admissible in an adversary criminal trial.”’. 


XXX XXX XXX 


26. ......The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a show-cause notice, of existence of 
sufficient cause to justify the declaration must necessarily imply and import into the inquiry, the minimum 
requirement of natural justice to ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is its own opinion, formed on the 
entire available material, and not a mere imprimatur of the Tribunal affixed to the opinion of the Central 
Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a fair procedure to prevent the vitiating element of arbitrariness. 
What is the fair procedure in a given case, would depend on the materials constituting the factual 
foundation of the notification and the manner in which the Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to 
be determined by the Tribunal keeping in view the nature of its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of 
natural justice, the fact that the materials in such matters are not confined to legal evidence in the strict 
sense, and that the scrutiny is not a criminal trial. The Tribunal should form its opinion on all the points 
in controversy after assessing for itself the credibility of the material relating to it, even though it may 
not be disclosed to the association, if the public interest so requires.” 


(Emphasis supplied) 


41. On the question of confidential information that is sought to be withheld, the Supreme Court emphasized that 
the same can be relied upon by the Tribunal. It was observed that in certain situations, source of information or 
disclosure of full particulars may be against public interest. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality 
of such information and its source, in public interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of 
confidential information for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the conflicting evidence of the 
other side. It was emphasized that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine in nature 
and, therefore, material or information for various reasons may require confidentiality. Disclosure, it was held, can 
jeopardize criminal cases pending investigation and trial. 


42. On the question of nature and type of evidence, which can be relied upon by the Tribunal, the Supreme Court 
referred to Rule 3 of UAP Rules, 1968. Rule 3(1) stipulates that the Tribunal subject to sub-rule (2) shall follow, “as 
far as practicable”, the rules of evidence laid down in Indian Evidence Act. As regards the evidentiary standard/s 
applicable to these proceedings, it is instructive to refer to the legal position enunciated in a report under Section 4(3) 
of the Act authored by Justice Sanjiv Khanna, for the purpose of adjudicating the ban on ‘Students Islamic Movement 
of India’ (SIMD (dated 04.08.2010). The same is as follows: 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 13 


“62. Section 9 uses the words "so far as may be” The words signify that the Legislature's intent does-not 
mandate that the Code should be followed in its entirety, section by section, order by order or. Word by 
word. Use of the words "so far as may be" ensure sufficient flexibility and freedom to the Tribunal to follow 
and regulate its own procedure which should be in consonance with, the procedure stipulated as per the- 
Code. The procedure prescribed in the Code can be modified and changed keeping in view the practical 
requirements, need and necessity. This may be required in view of the object and purpose of the Act and 
practical problems which may be faced in case the requirements of the Code are strictly and entirely 
followed, in Abdul Haji Mohd. Versus R. R. Naik AIR 1951 Bom, 440, it was held that the, words "as far as 
practicable" must be construed to mean to the extent it is practicable. Bombay, High Court in a subsequent 
decision Keshrimal Jeevli Shah and another versus Bank of Maharashira and others, 2004 (122) 
Company cases 831 has held that whenever words like “as far as possible" or as far as practicable etc. are 
used, the legislative intent is not to apply all the provisions in their entirety, but the provision have to be 
applied as far “as possible" and subject to such modifications as the context as well as the object and 
purpose of the enactment require. The setting in which the words occur, the statute in which they occur, the 
object and purpose behind the enactment and mischief which is sought to be taken care of and remedy which 
are relevant in determining to what extent and subject to what modifications the required enactment should 
be applied. 


63. Section 5(5) of the Act states that the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its procedure in matters’ 
arising out of discharge of its functions including the place/places at which it will hold sittings. Therefore, 
the aforesaid sub-Section gives flexibility and freedom to the Tribunal to fix and regulate the procedure. to 
be followed subject of course to the requirement of fair and just hearing. Sub-section (6) to Section 5 further 
stipulates that the Tribunal while making the enquiry will have the power of a civil court in respect of 
matters stipulated in clauses (a)to (e). As per Section 4(3) of the Act, the Tribunal has to hold an enquiry 
within a period of six months from the date of issue of Notification under sub-section (1) of Section 3. There 
is no provision under which this time can be extended. The use of the expression "as far as may be" in 
Section 9 of the Act and the power given to the Tribunal to regulate its own procedure in Section 5(5) of the 
Act indicates that the strict procedure as stipulated and applicable to trial of civil suits is not envisaged or 
required. One will also have to keep in mind the time limit of six months within which the Tribunal is 
required to complete the enquiry and answer the reference: A summary procedure or a hybrid procedure 
which may be akin or similar to and in consonance with the procedure for adjudication of claims in the Code 
can be followed. 


64. The above ratio and reasoning will equally apply to Rule 3(1) which uses the expression "as far as 
practicable" the rules of evidence, as laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, will apply. It may be noticed 
that Rule 3(1) uses the words "rules of evidence" and does not use the words "provisions of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 would apply". Therefore general principles or rules of evidence underlying the 
Evidence Act are applicable to the extent practicable. In these circumstances, I do not think that the Act or 
the Rules envisage and require an elaborate, and a detailed procedure for summoning of each and every 
witness mentioned in the charge-sheets, presence and examination of witnesses present at the time of 
preparation of panchanama or all police officers who were involved in the investigation. Summoning of 
record will be counter-productive, cumbersome and time consuming. There will be concerns about safety 
and security of the persons appearing as well as the records which may have to be summoned or produced. 
Normally, cases relied upon by the central government will be cases of serious cases and the chargesheet 
etc. will be voluminous and number of witnesses also substantial. The nature of material in-most-cases 
where unlawful activity is alleged would include oral evidence, documentary evidence; as well as 
confidential inputs based on information received from intelligence. These cases can have inter-State or 
trans-border involvement and a-large number of persons are normally involved in conspiracy. This aspect 
cannot be ignored as proceedings before the Tribunal have to be pragmatic and the provisions of the Code 
and the Evidence Act have to be applied to the extent possible and practicable. ” 


(Emphasis supplied) 


43. As per Sections 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act, confessions made to a police officer or while in custody shall 
not be proved against a person accused of any offense during the trial of that offense. As per Section 162 of the 
Cr.P.C., no statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII 
(which includes Section 161 Cr.P.C.) can be used, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation 
at the time when such statement was made. However, these sections do not prohibit the use of such statements in 
proceedings where the accused is not being tried for the specific offense in question, or in civil proceedings or 
ancillary proceedings. 


44. The Supreme Court in Mahesh Kumar v. State of Rajasthan, 1990 Supp SCC 541 (2), noted the possible use 
of statement made to the police by the accused persons for being used as evidence against the accused in an “enquiry” 
although inadmissible as evidence against them at the trial for the offence with which they were charged. Relevant 
extract of the said judgment is as under: 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“3. In Queen Empress v. Tribhovan Manekchand a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court laid down 
that the statement made to the police by the accused persons as to the ownership of property which was the 
subject matter of the proceedings against them although inadmissible as evidence against them at the trial 
for the offence with which they were charged, were admissible as evidence with regard to the ownership of 
the property in an enquiry held by the Criminal Procedure Code. The same view was reiterated 
in Pohlu v. Emperor where it was pointed out that though there is a bar in Section 25 of the Evidence Act, 
or in Section 162 CrPC for being made use of as evidence against the accused, this statement could be 
made use of in an enquiry under Section 517 CrPC when determining the question of return of property. 
These two decisions have been followed by the Rajasthan High Court in Dhanraj Baldeokishan v. Stateand 
the Mysore High Court in Veerabhadrappa v. Govinda. In the present case, the amount in question was 
seized from the accused in pursuance of statements made by them under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. 
The High Court as well as the courts below have found the property to be the subject of theft and the 
acquittal of the accused is upon benefit.” 


45. The Supreme Court in Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar, (1981) 2 SCC 493 with reference to the bar under 
Section 162 of the Cr.P.C viz. against use in evidence of statement made before a police officer in the course of 
investigation, held, the same would not apply where the court calls for such statement in a civil proceeding provided 
the statement is otherwise relevant under the Evidence Act, 1872. Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“3. Before we refer to the provisions of Sections 162 and 172 of the Criminal Procedure Code, it would be 
convenient to set out briefly a few relevant provisions of that Code. Section 2 is the definition section and 
clause (g) of that section defines “inquiry” to mean “every inquiry, other than a trial conducted under this 
Code by a Magistrate or court”. Clause (a) of Section 2 gives the definition of “investigation” and it says 
that investigation includes “all the proceedings under this Code for the collection of evidence conducted by 
a police officer or by any person (other than a Magistrate) who is authorised by a Magistrate in this behalf”. 
Section 4 provides: 


“4. (1) All offences under the Penal Code, 1860 shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and 
otherwise dealt with according to the provisions hereinafter contained. 


(2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt 
with according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the time being in force 
regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or otherwise dealing with 
such offences.” 


It is apparent from this section that the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code are applicable where an 
offence under the Penal Code, 1860 or under any other law is being investigated, inquired into, tried or 
otherwise dealt with. Then we come straight to Section 162 which occurs in Chapter XII dealing with the 
powers of the police to investigate into offences. That section, so far as material, reads as under: 


“162. (1) No statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an investigation 
under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed by the person making it; nor shall any 
such statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or otherwise, or any part of such 
statement or record, be used for any purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in 
respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made: 


Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose 
statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved, may 
be used by the accused, and with the permission of the court, by the prosecution, to contradict such 
witness in the manner provided by Section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872; and when any part 
of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be used in the re-examination of such 
witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the provisions of 
clause (1) of Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, or to affect the provisions of Section 27 of 
that Act.” 


It bars the use of any statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter 
XII, whether recorded in a police diary or otherwise, but, by the express terms of the section, this bar is 
applicable only where such statement is sought to be used “at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence 
under investigation at the time when such statement was made”. If the statement made before a police officer 
in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII is sought to be used in any proceeding other than an 
inquiry or trial or even at an inquiry or trial but in respect of an offence other than that which was under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made, the bar of Section 162 would not be attracted. This 
section has been enacted for the benefit of the accused, as pointed out by this Court in Tahsildar 
Singh v. State of U.P. it is intended “to protect the accused against the user of statements of witnesses made 
before the police during investigation, at the trial presumably on the assumption that the said statements 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 15 


46. 
under: 


were not made under circumstances inspiring confidence”. This Court, in Tahsildar Singh case approved the 
following observations of Braund, J. in Emperor v. Aftab Mohd. Khan: 


“As it seems to us it is to protect accused persons from being prejudiced by statements made to 
police officers who by reason of the fact that an investigation is known to be on foot at the time the 
statement is made, may be in a position to influence the maker of it, and, on the other hand, to 
protect accused persons from the prejudice at the hands of persons who in the knowledge that an 
investigation has already started, are prepared to tell untruths” 


and expressed its agreement with the view taken by the Division Bench of the Nagpur High Court 
in BaliramTikaram Marathe v. Emperorthat “the object of the section is to protect the accused both against 
overzealous police officers and untruthful witnesses”. Protection against the use of statement made before 
the police during investigation is, therefore, granted to the accused by providing that such statement shall 
not be allowed to be used except for the limited purpose set out in the proviso to the section, at any inquiry 
or trial in respect of the offence which was under investigation at the time when such statement was made. 
But, this protection is unnecessary in any proceeding other than an inquiry or trial in respect of the offence 
under investigation and hence the bar created by the section is a limited bar. It has no application, for 
example in a civil proceeding or in a proceeding under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution and a statement 
made before a police officer in the course of investigation can be used as evidence in such proceeding, 
provided it is otherwise relevant under the Indian Evidence Act. There are a number of decisions of various 
High Courts which have takenthis view and amongst them may be mentioned the decision of Jaganmohan 
Reddy, J. in Malakala Surya Rao v.G. Janakamma. The present proceeding before us is a writ petition under 
Article 32 of the Constitution filed by the petitioners for enforcing their Fundamental Rights under 
Article 21 and it is neither an “inquiry” nor a “trial” in respect of any offence and hence it is difficult to see 
how Section 162 can be invoked by the State in the present case. The procedure to be followed in a writ 
petition under Article 32 of the Constitution is prescribed in Order XXXV of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966, 
and sub-rule (9) of Rule 10 lays down that at the hearing of the rule nisi, if the court is of the opinion that an 
opportunity be given to the parties to establish their respective cases by leading further evidence, the court 
may take such evidence or cause such evidence to be taken in such manner as it may deem fit and proper and 
obviously the reception of such evidence will be governed by the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act. It is 
obvious, therefore, that even a statement made before, a police officer during investigation can be produced 
and used in evidence in a writ petition under Article 32 provided it is relevant under the Indian Evidence Act 
and Section 162 cannot be urged as a bar against its production or use. The reports submitted by Shri LV. 
Singh setting forth the result of his investigation cannot, in the circumstances, be shut out from being 
produced and considered in evidence under Section 162, even if they refer to any statements made before 
him and his associates during investigation, provided they are otherwise relevant under some provision of 
the Indian Evidence Act.” 


With reference to police diaries and Section 172 of the Cr.P.C., the Supreme Court in Khatri (supra) held as 


“9.... These reports are clearly relevant under Section 35 of the Indian Evidence Act which reads as 
follows: 


“35. An entry in any public or other official book, register or record, stating a fact in issue or relevant fact, 
and made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by any other person in performance of 
a duty specially enjoined by the law of the country in which such book, register or record is kept, is itself a 
relevant fact.” 


These reports are part of official record and they relate to the fact in issue as to how, and by whom the 
twenty-four under-trial prisoners were blinded and they are admittedly made by Sh L.V. Singh, a public 
servant, in the discharge of his official duty and hence they are plainly and indubitably covered by Section 
35. The language of Section 35 is so clear that it is not necessary to refer to any decided cases on the 
interpretation of that section, but we may cite two decisions to illustrate the applicability of this section in 
the present case. The first is the decision of this Court in Kanwar Lal Gupta v. Amar Nath Chawla. There 
the question was whether reports made by officers of the CID (Special Branch) relating to public meetings 
covered by them at the time of the election were relevant under Section 35 and this Court held that they 
were, on the ground that they were (SCC p. 667) “made by public servants in discharge of their official 
duty and they were relevant under the first part of Section 35 of the Evidence Act, since they contained 
statements showing what were the public meetings held by the first respondent”. This Court in fact 
followed an earlier decision of the Court in P.C.P. Reddiar v. S. Perumal. So also in Jagdat v. Sheopal, 
Wazirhasan, J. held that the result of an inquiry by a Kanungo under Section 202 of the Code of 
CriminalProcedure, 1898 embodied in the report is an entry in a public record stating a fact in issue and 
made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duties and the report is therefore admissible in 
evidence under Section 35. We find that a similar view was taken by a Division Bench of the Nagpur High 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Court in Chandulal v. Pushkar Rajwhere the learned Judges held that reports made by Revenue Officers, 
though not regarded as having judicial authority, where they express opinions on the private rights of the 
parties are relevant under Section 35 as reports made by public officers in the discharge of their official 
duties, insofar as they supply information of official proceedings and historical facts. The Calcutta High 
Court also held in Lionell Edwards Limited v. State of W.B. that official correspondence from the Forest 
Officer to his superior, the Conservator of Forests, carried on by the Forest Officer in the discharge of his 
official duty would be admissible in evidence under Section 35. There is therefore no doubt in our mind 
that the reports made by Sh L.V. Singh setting forth the result of the investigation carried on by him and his 
associates are clearly relevant under Section 35 since they relate to a fact in issue and are made by a 
public servant in the discharge of his official duty. It is indeed difficult to see how in a writ petition against 
the State Government where the complaint is that the police officials of the State Government blinded the 
petitioners at the time of arrest or whilst in police custody, the State Government can resist production of a 
report in regard to the truth or otherwise of the complaint, made by a highly placed officer pursuant to the 
direction issued by the State Government. We are clearly of the view that the reports made by Shri L.V. 
Singh as a result of the investigation carried out by him and his associates are relevant under Section 35 
and they are liable to be produced by the State Government and used in evidence in the present writ 
petition. Of course, what evidentiary value must attach to the statements contained in these reports is a 
matter which would have to be decided by the court after considering these reports. It may ultimately be 
found that these reports have not much evidentiary value and even if they contain any statements adverse to 
the State Government, it may be possible for the State Government to dispute their correctness or to 
explain them away, but it cannot be said that these reports are not relevant. These reports must therefore 
be produced by the State and taken on record of the present writ petition. We may point out that though in 
our order dated February 16, 1981 we have referred to these reports as having been made by Shri L.V. 
Singh and his associates between January 10 and January 20, 1981 it seems that there has been some error 
on our part in mentioning the outer date as January 20, 1981 for we find that some of these reports were 
submitted by Shri L.V. Singh even after January 20, 1981 and the last of them was submitted on January 
27, 1981. All these reports including the report submitted on December 9, 1980 must therefore be filed by 
the State and taken as forming part of the record to beconsidered by the court in deciding the question at 
issue between the parties.” 


47. The Supreme Court in Vinay D. Nagar v. State of Rajasthan, (2008) 5 SCC 597, again held that bar of 
Section 162 of the Cr.P.C. is with regard to the admissibility of the statement recorded of a person by the police 
officer under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and by virtue of Section 162 Cr.P.C. would be applicable only where such statement 
is sought to be used at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such 
statement was made. The relevant extract of the said decision is as under: 


“14. On account of Section 162 CrPC, a statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of 
investigation under Chapter XII, if reduced into writing, will not be signed by the person making it, nor 
such statement recorded or any part thereof be used for any purpose at any inquiry or trial in respect of 
any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made. Such statement may be used by 
an accused and with the permission of the court by the prosecution to contradict the witness whose 
statement was recorded by the police in the manner provided under Section 145 of the Evidence Act and 
can also be used for re-examination of such witness for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred 
to in his cross-examination. Bar of Section 162 CrPC of proving the statement recorded by the police 
officer of any person during investigation however shall not apply to any statement falling within the 
provision of Clause (1) of Section 32 of the Evidence Act, nor shall it affect Section 27 of the Evidence Act. 
Bar of Section 162 CrPC is in regard to the admissibility of the statement recorded of a person by the 
police officer under Section 161 CrPC and by virtue of Section 162 CrPC would be applicable only where 
such statement is sought to be used at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at 
the time when such statement was made. 


15. In Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar this Court has held that Section 162 CrPC bars the use of any statement 
made before the police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII, whether recorded in the 
police diary or otherwise. However, by the express terms of Section 162, this bar is applicable only where 
such statement is sought to be used “at any inquiry or trial” in respect of any offence under investigation 
at the time when such statement was made. If the statement made before a police officer in the course of an 
investigation under Chapter XII is sought to be used in any proceeding, inquiry or trial in respect of an 
offence other than which was under investigation at the time when such statement was made, the bar of 
Section 162 will not be attracted.” 


48. It is in the light of the aforesaid principles that this Tribunal is to examine whether there is sufficient cause 
for declaring AAC as an unlawful association. It needs to be borne in mind that the inquiry before this Tribunal does 
not entail adjudicating the guilt of the accused but rather assessing the adequacy of material before the Central 
Government to designate AAC as an unlawful association. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 17 


VI. PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THIS TRIBUNAL 


49. Upon due consideration of the aforesaid Notification No. S.O. 1115(E) dated 11.03.2025 and Notification 
No.S.O. 1579(E) dated 03.04.2025, this Tribunal held a preliminary hearing on 16.04.2025, whereupon on a 
consideration of the material placed on record by the Central Government, notice under Section 4(2) of the Act was 
issued to the AAC to show cause, within a period of 30 days, as to why they ought not to be declared as unlawful 
association. The notices issued were given due publicity as required under Section 3(4) of the Act. 


50. The Gazette Notification dated 11.03.2025 was also published in National Newspapers (all India Edition). 
The said notification was also published in two local newspapers having wide circulation in the Union Territory of J & 
K where the activities of the AAC were or are believed to be ordinarily carried out. The method of affixation and 
proclamation by beating of drums, as well as loudspeakers, was also adopted. Proclamation was made at the last 
known address of the AAC along with all their leaders, members, factions, wings and front organisation as well as that 
of their principal office bearers. 


51. The notice issued by the Tribunal along with the Gazette Notification dated 11.03.2025 was displayed on the 
notice board of the Deputy Commissioner/District Magistrate/Tehsildar in all the district headquarters of the U.T. 
where the activities of the association were or are believed to be ordinarily carried on. Help of All-India Radio and 
electronic media of the State edition was also taken. Announcements were made through radio/electronic media at 
prime time. Notices were also pasted at the prominent places in the U.T. where the activities of the association were or 
are believed to be carried on. 


32: Apart from above, notices were also issued to the Union Territory of J & K through its Chief Secretary. 


53. The Registrar attached to the Tribunal was directed to ensure the compliance of the service of notice issued to 
AAC in the manner indicated. The Registrar was directed to file an independent report in that behalf before the next 
date of hearing, i.e. 16.05.2025. Accordingly, the Union Territory of J & K filed its affidavit along with supporting 
documents contained in Envelopes-F1 to F7 containing therein Annexures E1 to E.7, in compliance with the order 
dated 16.04.2025 affirming that service had been affected as directed by the Tribunal. On 16.05.2025, learned 
Additional Solicitor General (ASG) for the UOI and learned counsel for the Union Territory of J & K were heard and 
this Tribunal recorded the satisfaction as regards effecting of service in compliance of the order dated 16.04.2025. 


54. The Registrar, vide his report dated 15.05.2025, also confirmed service of notice issued by the Tribunal. 


55. During the course of hearing on 16.05.2025, Mr. Sparsh Aggarwal, Advocate entered appearance on behalf 
of AAC and sought time to file his vakalatnama and reply on behalf of the association. This Tribunal granted him ten 
days’ time to file the same and listed the matter for directions on 26.05.2025. 


56. On 26.05.2025, none appeared for the association. Also, no vakalatnama was filed. However, a reply along 
with covering letter was filed on behalf of the association duly signed by Mr. G.N. Zaki, Acting General Secretary, 
AAC, the details of which have been discussed above. 


37. In the covering letter, it was categorically stated that AAC would not contest the ban in a formal manner 
before this Tribunal as the ban was allegedly politically motivated and that the accompanying reply may be treated as 
defense to the ban imposed on the association. An elaborate reply was filed on behalf of the association giving details 
of the association as to how it came into existence, its activities, its objectives, etc. and also responding to the 
grounds/FIRs on the basis of which the notification has been issued. Copy of the said reply along with covering letter 
was duly served upon the UOI. This Tribunal directed learned counsel for UOI and UT of J& K to file their rejoinder 
within a period of 4 weeks. The Central Government was also directed to file its affidavit/s along with documents in 
support of the grounds on which the concerned association was declared as unlawful. Learned ASG assured that the 
affidavits of all the witnesses from the Union Territory of J & K would be filed on or before the next date of hearing 
covering all the FIRs referred to in the reference/notification. The matter was fixed for further proceedings on 
01.07.2025. 


58. On 26.05.2025, this Tribunal recorded that the UOI had filed nine (9) affidavit/s of evidence along with 
documents in support of the grounds on which the association was declared as unlawful. The affidavits of the 
following officers from the Union Territory of J & K were filed:- 


- PW-1 Mr. Adil Rashid, Inspector, SHO, PS Kothibagh, Srinagar. 

- PW-2. Mr. Azhar Rashid, SDPO, Khanyar, Srinagar. 

- PW-3 Mr. Naseer Ahmad, Inspector, SHO, PS Nowhatta, Srinagar. 

- PW-4 DYSP (PROB.) Dr. Barleen Kour, SHO, PS Shergarhi, Kashmir. 
- PW-5 Mr. Shiekh Wakeel, Inspector, SHO, PS Safakadal, Kashmir. 

- PW-6 Mr. Hilal Ahmad, Inspector, SHO, PS Shaheed Gunj, Kashmir. 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


- PW-7 Mr. Bashir Ahmad, Sub-Inspector, PS Kothibagh, Srinagar. 
- PW-8 = Mr. Sarfaraz Bashir, SDPO, Sopore, Kashmir. 
- PW-9 शा. Showkat Hussain, Inspector, SHO, PS Nigeen, Srinagar. 


59. The said affidavits were directed to be taken on record. During the course of the proceedings, learned counsel 
for the UOI handed over a list of 11 witnesses. Learned ASG for the UOI submitted that affidavit of additional witness 
i.e. an official from the NIA would be filed on or before 12.07.2025 and that the affidavit on behalf of another 
additional witness i.e. an official from the Ministry of Home Affairs would be filed on or before 19.07.2025. 
Accordingly, the matter was fixed for directions and fixation of schedule for recording of evidence of the witnesses on 
behalf of UOI on 21.07.2025. 


60. On 21.07.2025, as per the directions, the UOI filed affidavit of one more witness i.e. PW-11 Mr. B.B. Pathak, 
Additional Superintendent of Police, NIA, along with supporting documents. The same was taken on record. 


61. It was submitted by the learned ASG that two more affidavits would be filed on behalf of the UOI. 
Accordingly, the proceedings were fixed for recording of evidence of the witnesses on behalf of UOI at Srinagar for 
01.08.2025 and 02.08.2025. Accordingly, a public notice was issued for the hearing at Srinagar. Thereafter, affidavit 
of PW-10/Mr. Liyaqat Ali, Inspector, CID, J & K, Srinagar was also filed. 


62. On 01.08.2025 statements of the following five (05) witnesses produced by the UOI were recorded: 


1. Mr. Adil Rashid, Inspector, SHO, PS Kothibagh, Srinagar PW-1 
2 Mr. Azhar Rashid, SDPO, Khanyar, Srinagar PW-2 
3 Mr. Naseer Ahmad, Inspector, SHO, PS Nowhatta, Srinagar PW-3 
4. DYSP (PROB.) Dr. Barleen Kour, SHO, PS Shergarhi, Kashmir PW-4 
5 Mr. Shiekh Wakeel, Inspector, SHO, PS Safakadal, Kashmir PW-5 


The witnesses for the UOI brought the original records pertaining to all cases filed against the association in respect of 
which the witnesses deposed. The original records were perused. After comparison with the copies filed on record, the 
same were returned. 


63. On the directions of this Tribunal, e-mail and postal address at which any interested party could contact the 
Tribunal, was published in the public notice with regard to the hearing of the Tribunal on 01.08.2025 and 02.08.2025 
at Srinagar. Pursuant thereto, total five (05) emails were received i.e. three (03) emails dated 28.07.2025 from email 
IDs: 


(i)<mgmt @jkpeaceforum.in> (containing | affidavit), 

(ii)<yasirrouf@ gmail.com> (containing 2 affidavits), 

(i1i)<mohammedtamim2202 @ gmail.com> (containing | affidavit); 

one (01) email dated 29.07.2025 from email ID: 

(iv) <yasirrouf @ gmail.com> (containing 4 affidavits); 

and one (01) email dated 29.07.2025 of Mr. Sandeep Pandey from email ID: 

(v) <socialistpartyindia@ gmail.com>. 

Total eight (08) affidavits were filed by the following deponents:- 
1. Mr. Satish Mahaldar 

Mr. Bashir Muzafar Pandit 

Mr. Sheikh Yasir Rouf 

Mr. Rameez Raja 

Mr. Jagmohan Singh Raina 

Mr. Rouf Ahmed Punjabi 

Mr. Firdous Ahmed Bazaz 

Mr. Vikram Malhotra 


20: SL GON, COS de oN nS 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 19 


64. Mr. Sandeep Pandey did not file any affidavit. However, vide his email from email 
ID <socialistpartyindia @ gmail.com>, he stated that the ban on the association must be lifted. 


65. The Registrar of this Tribunal informed that all the aforesaid emails containing the affidavits had already 
been forwarded to the learned counsel for the UOI and J & K. A perusal of the affidavits of the aforesaid 
deponents/public witnesses revealed that each affidavit is a two-page affidavit containing similar averments opposing 
the notification dated 11.03.2025. 


66. On 01.08.2025, following deponents / public witnesses were present before this Tribunal: - 
(i)Mr. Bashir Muzafar Pandit 
(ii)Mr. Sheikh Yasir Rouf 
(11), Rameez Raja 
(iv)Mr. Firdous Ahmed Bazaz 


67. The aforesaid four deponents categorically stated that they have not been members of the association. Three 
of them i.e., Mr. Bashir Muzafar Pandit, Mr. Rameez Raja, Mr. Firdous Ahmed Bazaz stated that their affidavits were 
prepared by Mr. Sheikh Yasir Rouf, who himself was a public witness, and they signed on the same. Remaining 
deponents / public witnesses were directed to remain present on 02.08.2025. The UOI was directed to facilitate any 
interested party who desired to appear physically before the Tribunal. Learned counsel appearing for UOI submitted 
that the UOI would not cross-examine the aforesaid deponents. However, the UOI sought to reserve its right to make 
appropriate submissions as regards the relevance of the said affidavits at the time of final arguments. The Registrar of 
this Tribunal was directed to send a reply to the aforesaid emails of the public witnesses conveying them to appear 
before the Tribunal on 02.08.2025 at 11.30 A.M. at Srinagar. 


68. On 02.08.2025, statements of the following five (5) witnesses produced by the UOI were recorded: 


1. Mr. Hilal Ahmad, Inspector, SHO, PS Shaheed Gunj, Kashmir PW-6 
2 Mr. Bashir Ahmad, Sub-Inspector, PS Kothibagh, Srinagar PW-7 
3 Mr. Sarfaraz Bashir, SDPO, Sopore, Kashmir PW-8 
4. Mr. Showkat Hussain, Inspector, SHO, PS Nigeen, Srinagar PW-9 
5 Mr. Liyagat Ali, Inspector, CID, J & 1९, Srinagar PW-10 


69. In response to the order dated 01.08.2025, an email dated 01.08.2025 was received from one of the public 
witnesses, namely, Mr. Sandeep Pandey (who did not file any affidavit) requesting the Tribunal to pardon him for 
being not able to appear before this Tribunal that day. He however stated that he could appear in Delhi at a mutually 
convenient date. Further, in compliance of the order dated 01.08.2025 the following deponents/public witnesses 
appeared before the Tribunal on 02.08.2025:- 


(i) Mr. Jagmohan Singh Raina 
(ii) Mr. Rouf Ahmed Punjabi 
(iil) Mr. Vikram Malhotra 


The aforesaid public witnesses categorically stated that they are neither the members of the Association nor have they 
been actively involved in the activities of the Association. However, they were deposing in their capacity as a public- 
spirited citizen. The affidavits of all the public witnesses were taken on record subject to the objections of learned 
counsel for the UOI. On perusal of the affidavits of the said public witnesses, it also transpired that the affidavits are 
identical in nature. The witnesses stated that their affidavits were drafted by one public witness i.e. Mr. Sheikh Yasir 
Rouf (who is an advocate by profession). 


70. The matter was fixed for recording statements of the witnesses from the Ministry of Home Affairs and NIA 
on 08.08.2025. However, the matter was taken up on 06.08.2025 on being mentioned by the learned ASG for the UOI 
who submitted that the witness from the National Investigating Agency (NIA) would not be available for deposition 
on the date already fixed i.e., 08.08.2025 and requested that the date already fixed for the deposition of the witnesses 
from the Ministry of Home Affairs and NIA be re-scheduled. 


71. In view thereof, the date for recording the statements of the witnesses from the Ministry of Home Affairs and 
NIA was re-scheduled to 11.08.2025 and the date already fixed i.e., 08.08.2025 stood cancelled. 


72. On 11.08.2025, statements of the following two (2) witnesses produced by the UOI were recorded: 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


1. Mr. 3. B. Pathak, Addl. S. P., NIA, New Delhi PW-i1 


2. Mr. Rajeev Kumar, Joint Secretary, (CTCR Division), MHA PW-12 


The matter was listed for Final Arguments on 19.08.2025. However, the said was subsequently cancelled and the 
matter was fixed for arguments on 27.08.2025. On date, the learned counsel for the UOI was heard at length. The 
arguments stood concluded with liberty to the UOI to file additional written submissions within a period of 3 days and 
the order was reserved. Such additional written submissions were filed on behalf of the UOI on 01.09.2025. 


Vil. (NON) REPRESENTATION OF THE ASSOCIATION IN THESE PROCEEDINGS 


73. Mr. Sparsh Aggarwal, Advocate entered appearance on behalf of AAC on 16.05.2025 (first hearing after the 
notice) and sought time to file his vakalatnama and reply on behalf of the association. Though no vakalatnama was 
filed, however, a reply along with covering letter was filed on behalf of the association duly signed by Mr. G.N. Zaki, 
Acting General Secretary, AAC stating that AAC would not contest the ban in a formal manner before this Tribunal 
and that the accompanying reply may be treated as defense to the ban imposed on the association. 


74. After 16.05.2025, there was no appearance on behalf of the association. However, this Tribunal is conscious 
that despite non-appearance of the concerned organisation, this Tribunal is required to make an “objective 
determination” as mandated in the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind(Supra). The credibility 
of the material/evidence placed on record by the Central Government is required to be tested; the Supreme Court has 
cautioned that the procedure to be adopted must achieve this purpose and must not be reduced to mere acceptance of 
the “ipse dixit of the Central Government”. 


TD: Thus, notwithstanding the non-appearance on behalf of the concerned association, this Tribunal is required to 
independently assess the credibility of the material / evidence placed on record by the Central Government as also the 
reply filed by the association, and on that basis, come to a conclusion as to whether or not there is sufficient cause for 
declaring the association unlawful. 


VII. EVIDENCE ADDUCED BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL 
PW-1 


76. Adil Rashid (PW-1) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-1/A and stated that he is posted as a Station House 
Officer, Police Station Kothibagh, Kashmir and is the Investigating Officer of the FIR Nos. 60/2010 and 46/2014. He 
stated that FIR No.60/2010 was registered u/s 436/153A/109/147/336 RPC, u/s 13 of the UAPA and u/s 3 of Jammu 
and Kashmir Public Property (Prevention of Damage) Act at Police Station, Kothibagh on 11.09.2010 when a mob 
headed by the leader of AAC, Molvi Umar Farooq alongwith other prominent separatist leaders Mustaq-ul-Islam, 
Advocate Mohammad Yaqoob, Nisar Ahmed Rather and many other activists of hurriyat came from Eid Gah Srinagar 
towards Lal Chowk Srinagar, and all the people who participated in the said mob, shouted anti national slogans and in 
favour of freedom of Kashmir. He further stated that the said unruly mob when entered in the jurisdiction of Police 
Station Kothibagh raised slogans loudly, “Hum kya Chahatay Azadi, Go India Go Back”, and also delivered speech 
for the secession of J & K from the UOJ, incited the public to agitate against the sovereignty and integrity of the 
nation, provoked large number of people and placed Green Hilali flags on govt as well as Semi Govt. Buildings, set 
ablaze a traffic booth situated at Regal Chowk and pelted stones on Ghanta Ghar, damaging it alongwith bulbs placed 
on electric poles etc. 


He further stated that statements of the witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., which revealed 
that Molvi Umar Farooq delivered provocative speeches containing anti-national contents and raised slogans like 
“Hum ka Chahatay Azadi, Go India Go Back”, which were against the nation and in favour of Pakistan and which 
was a direct attack on the sovereignty of the country trying to incite sentiments sympathetic towards Pakistan. He also 
stated that the speech was clearly intended to incite public sentiment, provoke unrest and undermine the sovereignty of 
the Indian State. The slogans that came to be raised were clearly seditious in nature, aimed at disturbing public order 
and provoking separatist sentiments. He further stated that 2 local newspapers, namely, Rozana Roshni and Daily 


Kashmir Times, reflecting the scene of the crime were also seized by the then I.O of the case. 


77. With regard to FIR No. 46/2014, he stated that FIR No. 46/2014 was registered u/s 13 of the UAPA and 
section 188, 124-A, 147 RPC at Police Station, Kothibagh on 19.06.2014 as on the said date at Residency Road, 
Activists of AAC, headed by the leader of AAC, Mirwaiz Molvi Umar Farooq alongwith Hilal Ahmad War R/o 
Maisuma and Shahid ud Islam R/o Dalgate held a vehicular procession from S.K Park to Lal Chowk, Srinagar and 
raised anti-national slogans like “Hum ka Chaihtai Azadi etc” violating section 144 Cr. P.C. imposed in the valley 
and were marching towards Lal Chowk in shape of unruly mob without obtaining any permission. He further stated 
that they also delivered speech for the secession of J & K from the UOI, creating fear/ hatred among the general public 
and incited public to agitate against the sovereignty and integrity of the nation. He further stated that statements of the 
witnesses were recorded under Section 161/164 Cr.P.C., which revealed that Molvi Umar Farooq Molvi Umar Farooq 
delivered provocative speeches containing anti-national contents and sentiments sympathetic towards Pakistan. The 
speech was clearly intended to incite public sentiment, provoke unrest and undermine the sovereignty of the Indian 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 21 


State. The slogans that came to be raised were clearly seditious in nature, aimed at disturbing public order and 
provoking separatist sentiments. 


78. He relied upon the true copies of FIR Nos. 60/2010 and 46/2014; the statements of the witnesses recorded in 
the aforesaid cases and also the true copy of Seizure Memo dated 12.09.2010 filed in FIR No. 60/2010 along with 
their English version of translated copies, which have been exhibited as EX. PW1/1A to PW1/7A in the present 
proceedings. 


79. He stated that the investigations in the aforesaid FIRs faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation 
in the valley orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from 
across the border and terrorist organisations. This climate of fear deterred individuals from coming forward to provide 
statements, hindering the progress of the investigations. It is stated that any attempt to probe these separatist 
organisations and their leaders triggered widespread unrest and turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in 
concluding the investigations and that it was only after the reorganization of the State that significant progress could 
be made in the investigations of both the above stated cases which are now at their fag end and chargesheet is 
expected to be filed soon. 


80. He stated that during his service, he has been posted in various parts of the Kashmir valley and has come 
across various incidents caused by AAC and the FIRs registered against it and its leaders and from the knowledge he 
has gathered with regard to the said organisation during the course of his service, he stated, that it is manifest that 
AAC, its leaders and members who also had support from the cross-border have been actively and continuously 
supporting the separatist and banned organisations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring 
about a secession of J & K from the UOI and cession of constitutional authority of the nation. It is also established 
that the activities of AAC are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government and the members of AAC are indulging and acting in a manner 
which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the UOI and hence the ban imposed upon it was 
necessary and should be upheld in the larger interest of the nation and its citizens. 


81. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed of in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
association. 
PW-2 


82. Azhar Rashid (PW-2) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-2/A and stated that he is working as a Sub-Divisional 
Police Officer, Khanyar, Srinagar, Kashmir and is the investigating officer of the FIR No. 96/2008, which was 
registered at Police Station, Nowhatta, Srinagar under Section 13 of the UAPA and under Sections 153-A/120-B of 
RPC_ on 09.12.2008 based on an information received on the said date that after the EID prayers Mirwaiz Moulvi 
Umar Farooq, the leader of the AAC, delivered a speech provoking general public for not taking part in the 2008 
General Assembly Elections of the State of J & K and against the sovereignty of the nation and also raised slogans for 
freedom of Kashmir from India. He stated that statements of the witnesses were recorded U/s 161 Cr.P.C. He further 
stated that the trial in the matter stands concluded and the judgment is pending and he will place on record the 
judgment before this Tribunal as and when the judgment is pronounced by the concerned trial court. 


83. He relied upon the true copies of FIR No.96/2008; the statements of the witnesses recorded in the aforesaid 
case along with their English version of the translated copies which have been exhibited as EX. PW-2/1 to PW-2/3A 
in the present proceedings. 


84. He stated that the investigations in the aforesaid FIR faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation 
in the valley orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from 
across the border and terrorist organisations. This climate of fear deterred individuals from coming forward to provide 
statements, hindering the progress of the investigations. It is stated that any attempt to probe these separatist 
organisations and their leaders triggered widespread unrest and turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in 
concluding the investigations and that it was only after the reorganization of the State that significant progress could 
be made in the investigation of the above stated case which is now at its fag end and chargesheet is expected to be 
filed soon. 


85. He stated that he has been working in J & K police service since the year 2013 and during this period, he was 
posted in various parts of the Kashmir Valley. He deposed that during his service, he has come across various 
incidents caused by AAC and the FIRs registered against it and its leaders and from the knowledge he has gathered 
with regard to the said organisation during the course of his service, he stated that it is manifest that AAC, its leaders 
and members who also had support from the cross-border have been actively and continuously supporting the 
separatist and banned organisations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring about a 
secession of J & K from the UOI and cession of the constitutional authority of the nation. It is stated that the activities 
of AAC are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred 
against the lawful government and the members of AAC are indulging and acting in a manner which is prejudicial to 
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the UOI and hence the ban imposed upon it was necessary and should be 
upheld in the larger interest of the nation and its citizens. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


86. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
association. 
PW-3 


87. Naseer Ahmad (PW-3) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-3/A and stated that he is posted as Station House 
Officer, Police Station Nowhatta, Srinagar and is the Investigating Officer of the FIR No. 19/2015. He stated that FIR 
No. 19/2015 was registered at PS Nowhatta under Section 13 UAPA and_ under sections 
147/148/341/336/353/332/307/427 of RPC on 17.04.2015 on the basis of a written docket received from SHO Police 
Station Nowhatta Camp, Nowhatta chowk to the effect that some unknown miscreants nearly about 100 to 200 person 
headed by Moulvi Umar Farooq (the leader of AAC) came from lines by lane and started Stone Pelting upon deployed 
Police party and also raising anti national slogans. During the course of recording of his statement, he specifically 
deposed that the slogans, being raised by the accused person i.e. Molvi Umar Farooq (repeated by a group of persons 
accompanying him) which led to registration of FIR, were as follows: 


i. Hum Kya Chahtehai, Azaadi; 
il. Kashmir Banega Pakistan; and 
ii. Hindustan Murdabad. 


88. He further stated that statements of the material witnesses were recorded U/s 161 Cr.P.C. which disclose 
active role that has been played by Moulvi Umar Farooq and his organisation raising anti national slogans, stone 
pelting and injuring Police forces and damaging vehicles which all points out the secessionist activities of the 
organisation and its chairman. 


89. He relied upon the true copies of FIR No. 19/2015 and the statements recorded in the aforesaid case along 
with their English version of translated copies which have been exhibited as Ex. PW-3/1 to PW-3/3A. 


90. He stated that the investigations faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the valley 
orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from across the border 
and terrorist organisations. This climate of fear deterred individuals from coming forward to provide statements, 
hindering the progress of the investigations. It is stated that any attempt to probe these separatist organisations and 
their leaders triggered widespread unrest and turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in concluding the 
investigations. It is further stated that reorganization of the erstwhile State of J & K into two separate Union 
Territories of J & K and Ladakh and Covid 19 has also caused enormous delay. It is also stated that there are certain 
sympathizers of these separatist organisations within the government and various departments obstructed the timely 
resolution of these cases. It is stated that the investigation is now at its fag end and chargesheet is expected to be filed 
soon. 


91. He states that he has been working in J & K police since the year 2010 and during this period, he was posted 
in various parts of the Kashmir Valley. It is stated that during his service, he has come across various incidents caused 
by AAC and the FIR's registered against it and its leaders and from the knowledge he has gathered with regard to the 
said organisation during the course of his service, he stated that it is manifest that AAC, its leaders and members who 
also had support from the cross-border have been actively and continuously supporting the separatist and banned 
organisations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring about a secession of J & K from the 
UOI and cession of the constitutional authority of the nation. It is stated that it is also established that the activities of 
AAC are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred 
against the lawful government and the members of AAC are indulging and acting in a manner which is prejudicial to 
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the UOI and hence the ban imposed upon it was necessary and should be 
upheld in the larger interest of the nation and its citizens. 


92. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
association. 
PW-4 


93. Barleen Kour (PW-4) tendered her affidavit as Ex.PW-4/A and stated that she is posted as Station House 
Officer, Police Station Shergarhi and is the investigating officer of FIR No. 83/2010. She stated that FIR No. 83/2010 
was registered at Police Station Shergarhi, Srinagar under Sections 147/148/427/436/153/153-A/121/121-A of RPC 
when on the occasion of Eid-ul-Fitr, a large congregation assembled at Eidgah, Srinagar, for the purpose of offering 
Eid prayers. The congregational prayers were led by Molvi Umar Farooq, son of Late Molvi Farooq Ahmad, resident 
of Nigeen Bagh, Srinagar, who, in his capacity as Imam and as the Chairman of the AAC as well as Hurriyat 
Conference (faction "A"), delivered a public address to the gathering. She further stated that in the course of his 
speech, Molvi Umar Farooq made provocative and inflammatory statements exhorting the assembled persons to 
participate in a protest and to march towards Lal Chowk, Srinagar. As a result of such instigation, a group of 
approximately 150 to 200 individuals, led by Molvi Umar Farooq and acting in furtherance of a common intent, 
engaged in unlawful and violent acts. It is stated that the said group proceeded to commit acts of arson, including the 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 23 


setting ablaze of the Crime Headquarters building, and caused extensive damage to various other Government 
properties encountered along their route. These acts were carried out in clear violation of law, disturbing public order 
and peace, and resulting in serious loss to public infrastructure. 


94. She relied upon the true copies of FIR No. 83/2010; the statements recorded in the aforesaid case and the 
Seizure Memo filed in FIR No. 83/2010 along with their English version of translated copies which have been 
exhibited as Ex. PW-4/1 to PW-4/5A. 


95. It is stated that the investigation faced several serious challenges due to the unstable situation in the Kashmir 
Valley. This unrest was deliberately caused by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who were continuously 
supported by terrorist organisations and received backing from across the border. Because of the fear created by these 
groups, many individuals were afraid to come forward and given their statements, which slowed down the 
investigation. Every attempt to investigate these separatists groups or their leaders led to protests, violence, and large- 
scale disturbances in the region, further delaying the process of the case. In addition, some individuals within the 
government and various departments acted in support of these groups and created obstacles that prevented the timely 
conclusion of the investigation. 


96. She stated that sufficient material has been brought on record which manifests that AAC and leaders and 
members of the said organisation who also had support from the cross-border have been actively and continuously 
supporting the separatist and banned organisations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring 
about a secession of J & K from the UOI. Further, the activities of AAC are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty 
and disharmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and the members of AAC 
are indulging and acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the UOI. 


97. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
association. 
PW-5 


98. Sheikh Wakeel (PW-5) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-5/A and stated that he is posted as Station House 
Officer, Police Station Safakadal, Kashmir and is the Investigating Officer of FIR No. 128/2010. He stated that FIR 
No. 128/2010 was registered at Police Station Safakadal under Section 13 of the UAPA on 11.09.2010 when an 
incident was reported by the police officials that the leader of AAC, Molvi Umar Farooq alongwith other prominent 
separatist leaders Manzoor Ahmad Tota, Altaf Dar and others had gathered at Eidgah ground Srinagar where large 
number of people were present for offering prayers on the occasion of Eid where during the congregation, a protest 
was led by Molvi Umar Farooq and had raised anti-national slogans such as "वहां Hind Tasleem Nai" ("We do not 
accept accession to India") and "Go India Go Back" and also delivered speech for the secession of J & K from the 
UOI and incited the public to agitate against the sovereignty and integrity of the nation and provoked large number of 
people to march towards Lal Chowk as a mark of protest against Indian sovereignty. He further stated that statements 
of the relevant witnesses were recorded U/s 161 Cr.P.C. which revealed that Molvi Umar Farooq delivered a 
provocative speech containing anti-national contents and sentiments sympathetic towards Pakistan. The speech was 
clearly intended to incite public sentiment, provoke unrest and undermine the sovereignty of the Indian State. The 
slogans that came to be raised were clearly seditious in nature, aimed at disturbing public order and provoking 
separatist sentiments. 


99. During deposition, he specifically deposed that it has not been possible to apprehend the leader of the AAC - 
Molvi Umar Farooq, who is the prime accused in FIR No.128/2010 on account of the fact that the area, in which he 
lives, is heavily inhabited by the people who have separatist ideology. Therefore, there has been a genuine 
apprehension that serious law and order situation would be created in the event of his arrest. He further deposed that 
investigation is now being carried out in a right earnest and would be completed as expeditiously as possible and it is 
expected that chargesheet will be filed within a period of 3 months. 


100. He relied upon the true copies of FIR No. 128/2010 and the statements of the witnesses recorded in the 
aforesaid case along with their English version of translated copies which have been exhibited as Ex. PW-5/1 
to PW-5/3A. 


101. He stated that he is in police service since the year 2011 and has been posted in various parts of the Kashmir 
Valley. He deposed that during his service, he has come across various incidents caused by AAC and the FIRs 
registered against it and its leaders and from the knowledge he has gathered with regard to the said organisation during 
the course of his service, he deposed that it is manifest that AAC, its leaders and members who also had support from 
the cross-border have been actively and continuously supporting the separatist and banned organisations and have 
been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring about a secession of J & K from the UOI and cession of the 
constitutional authority of the nation and that the activities of AAC are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and 
dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and the members of AAC are 
indulging and acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the UOI and hence 
the ban imposed upon it was necessary and should be upheld in the larger interest of the nation and its citizens. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


102. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
association. 
PW-6 


103. Hilal Ahmad (PW-6) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW- 6/A and deposed that he is presently working as 
Station House Officer, Police Station Shaheed Gunj and is the Investigating Officer of the case FIR No. 101/2010. It 
is stated that FIR No.101 of 2010 was registered at Police Station Shaheed Gunj u/s 153/153-A/121/121- 
A/147/148/336/427/436 RPC on account of the fact that on 117 September, 2010, the leader of AAC, Mirwaiz Umar 
Farooq after conclusion of Eid Prayers at Eidgah Srinagar announced Lal Chowk Chalo in response to which a mob 
proceed towards Lal Chowk, Srinagar. The members of the unlawful assembly were chanting anti-national slogans 
such as ‘Hum Kya Chahtay Azadi’ and demolished the bunker at Jehangir Chowk. The crowd was violent and 
damaged street lights and vehicles including Police vehicle No.JK-01L-6479 and private vehicles by stone pelting, the 
crowd also set ablaze Govt. Buildings. The incident of violence and stone pelting by the crowd occurred because of 
vindication and provocation by Mirwaiz Umar Farooq. The incident was reported by the police officials present there 
and based on which FIR No.101/2010 was registered. 


104. He relied upon the true copies of FIR No 101/2010; the statements recorded in the aforesaid case under 
Section 162 Cr.P.C. and the Seizure memo along with their English version of translated copies which have been 
exhibited as Ex. PW-6/1 to PW-6/4A. 


105. He further stated that investigations faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the valley 
orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from across the border 
and terrorist organisations and that this climate of fear deterred individuals from coming forward to provide 
statements, hindering the progress of the investigations and any attempt to probe these separatist organisations and 
their leaders triggered widespread unrest and turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in concluding the 
investigations. Furthermore, certain sympathizers within the government and various departments obstructed the 
timely resolution of these cases and it was only after the reorganization of the State that significant progress could be 
made in the investigations which is now at its fag end and chargesheet is expected to be filed soon. 


106. He stated that based on the records of the investigation of the aforesaid FIR and based on his 
knowledge/experience acquired as a police officer in the State of J & K since the last 24 years, he can say that AAC, 
its leaders and members who also had support from the cross-border have been actively and continuously supporting 
the separatist and banned organisations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring about a 
secession of J & K from the UOI and cession of the constitutional authority of the nation. It is also established that the 
activities of AAC are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and 
hatred against the lawful government and the members of AAC are indulging and acting in a manner which is 
prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the UOI and hence the ban imposed upon it was necessary and 
should be upheld in the larger interest of the nation and its citizens. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but 
not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the association. 


PW-7 


107. Bashir Ahmad (PW-7) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-7/A and deposed that he is presently working as 
Sub Inspector, Police Station Kothibagh, Srinagar and is the Investigating Officer of FIR No. 46/2010. He stated that 
FIR No. 46/2010 was registered u/s 341 of RPC at PS Kothibagh on 17.06.2010 when on the said date at about 12:45 
hrs., when the informant along with his team was on patrolling duty at R.K. Crossing, they saw a group of Hurriyat 
Conference leaders (i) Aga Syed Hassan Budgami (ii) Professor Abdul Gani Bhat (1) Nayeem Ahmad Khan (iv) Bilal 
Gani Lone (v) Zaffar Akhtar Bhat (vi) Masroor Abbad Ansari who under the command of Moulvi Umar Farooq had 
stopped their vehicles at R.K. Crossing and sat down on the street and blocked and disrupted the vehicular movement 
in the said area. The incident was reported by the police officials present there and based on which FIR No. 46/2010 
was registered. 


108. He relied upon the true copies of FIR No 46/2010 and the statements recorded in the aforesaid case under 
Section 161 Cr.P.C. along with their English version of translated copies which have been exhibited as Ex. PW-7/1 to 
PW-7/3A. 


109. He further stated that investigations faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the valley 
orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from across the border 
and terrorist organisations and that this climate of fear deterred individuals from coming forward to provide 
statements, hindering the progress of the investigations and any attempt to probe these separatist organisations and 
their leaders triggered widespread unrest and turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in concluding the 
investigations. Furthermore, certain sympathizers within the government and various departments obstructed the 
timely resolution of these cases and it was only after the reorganization of the State that significant progress could be 
made in the investigation which is now at its fag end and chargesheet is expected to be filed soon. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 25 


110. He deposed that he has been working in J & K police since the year 1991 and during this period, he was 
posted in various parts of the Kashmir Valley. He deposed that during his service, he has come across various 
incidents caused by AAC and the FIRs registered against it and its leaders and from the knowledge he has gathered 
with regard to the said organisation during the course of his service, he deposed that it is manifest that AAC, its 
leaders and members who also had support from across the border have been actively and continuously supporting the 
separatist and banned organisations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring about a 
secession of J & K from the UOI and cession of the constitutional authority of the nation. It is stated that it is also 
established that the activities of AAC are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting 
feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and the members of AAC are indulging and acting in a 
manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the UOI and hence the ban imposed upon it 
was necessary and should be upheld in the larger interest of the nation and its citizens. 


111. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
association. 
PW-8 


112. Sarfaraz Bashir (PW-8) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-8/A and deposed that he is posted as Sub- 
Divisional Police Officer, Sopore, Kashmir and is the Supervisory officer of the FIR No. 394/2016 and FIR No. 
409/2016. 


113. He stated that FIR No. 394/2016 was registered at PS Sopore u/s 147/148/149/153-A/336/307/427 RPC, u/s 3 
PPD Act and u/s 7/27 of Arms Act on 12.09.2016 when at 1505 hours, Police Station Sopore received a written docket 
from Constable Ashiq Hussain No. 341/Spr on behalf of the Station House Officer (SHO), Police Station Sopore. The 
contents of the docket state that while SHO Sopore, along with his team and personnel of CRPF 179 Bn and other 
officials from DPL and the Police Component Sopore, were performing their duty for maintaining law and order at 
Khushal Matoo, Sopore, some Hurriyat (G) leaders namely (i) Abdul Gani Bhat @ Gani Guroo, S/o Ghulam Ahmad 
Bhat, R/o Baba Raza, Sopore (11) Manzoor Ahmad Kaloo @ Mam Kul, S/o Abdul Kabir, R/o Hanfiya Colony, Sopore 
(iii) Mohammad Ashraf Malik, S/o Abdullah Malik, R/o Tawheed Bagh, Sopore (iv) Ghulam Muhammad Khan @ 
Khan Sopore, S/o Mohd. Khan, R/o Shalpora, presently Hamdania Colony, Chanpora, Srinagar (v) Muhammad 
Shaban Khan, S/o Habibullah Khan, R/o Chinkipora, Sopore (vi) Yadullah Mir, S/o Ghulam Ahmad, R/o Dangerpora 
(vii) Ghulam Nabi Zaki, S/o Abdul Aziz, R/o Khushal Matoo, Sopore were observed delivering anti-national speeches 
and provoking local youth to agitate for the secession of J & K from the UOI, thereby attempting to disturb the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the nation. 


114. He further stated that while this instigation was ongoing, some unknown terrorists appeared at the scene and 
opened fire upon the deployed Police and Security Forces (SFs), as a result of which HC Shakeel Ahmad No. 26/Spr 
sustained injuries. Subsequently, a mob comprising an unlawful assembly emerged from various streets and pelted 
stones at the deployed police and SF personnel, causing damage to multiple police vehicles. To disperse the violent 
mob, the Police and SF personnel were compelled to use tear gas shells for crowd control and dispersal. He further 
stated that as the above information disclosed commission of cognizable offences FIR No. 394/2016 was registered. 


115. It is further stated that during the course of investigation, IO of the case visited the crime scene, prepared site 
plan, recorded statements of the witnesses, prepared recovery memo, seizure memo and filled injury memo of injured 
Police Personnel who were treated. He further deposed that during investigation sufficient material had been collected 
to prove the guilt of the accused persons and hence a chargesheet was filed in the case on 18.12.2024 against all the 
Accused persons U/s 147/148/149/153-A/336/307/427 RPC, U/s 3 PPD Act. It is stated that cognizance on the 
chargesheet has been taken by the magistrate and the case is at the stage of Prosecution Evidence. 


116. With regard to FIR No. 409/2016, it is stated that the same was registered at Police Station Sopore u/s 147, 
148, 149, 427, 307, 336, 153A, 34 of Ranbir Penal Code, u/s 3 PPD Act on 18.09.2016 when a mob headed by the 
General Secretary of AAC, Ghulam Nabi Zaki along with other prominent separatist leaders of the APHC namely, 
Abdul Ghani Bhatt, Mohammad Shaban Khan, Mohammad Ashraf Beigh and Ghulam Nabi Khan arrived at New 
Sopore Colony. These individuals raised slogans and incited communal hatred in the mob with the intention to disrupt 
the peace and tranquility of the area. The mob pelted stones upon the police and security forces with the intention to 
kill them and caused huge loss to public and private property. Some Police Personnel were severely injured due to 
pelting of stones and had to resort to the use of tear gas to disperse the mob. The incident was reported by the police 
officials present at the place of the incident based on which FIR No. 409/2016 was registered. 


117. He relied upon the true copies of FIR Nos.394/2016 and 409/2016; the statements of the witnesses recorded 
in the aforesaid cases; Seizure Memo and the charge-sheets filed in the aforesaid FIRs along with their English version 
of translated copies which have been exhibited as Ex. PW-8/1 to PW-8/10A. 


118. During his deposition, he specifically stated that he has mentioned in his affidavit that one of the wings of the 
association AAC is Al- Umar Mujjahideen which is a notified terrorist organisation under the UAPA and that some of 
its members are also notified as terrorist under Section 35 (1) of the UAPA. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


119. He stated that he has been working in J & K Police since the year 2012 and during this period, he was posted 
in various parts of the Kashmir Valley. He deposed that during his service, he has come across various incidents 
caused by AAC and the FIR's registered against it and its leaders and from the knowledge he has gathered with regard 
to the said organisation during the course of his service, he deposed that it is manifest that AAC, its leaders and 
members who also had support from the cross-border have been actively and continuously supporting the separatist 
and banned organisations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring about a secession of J & K 
from the UOI and cession of the constitutional authority of the nation. It is stated that it is also established that the 
activities of AAC are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and 
hatred against the lawful government and the members of AAC are indulging and acting in a manner which is 
prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the UOI and hence the ban imposed upon it was necessary and 
should be upheld in the larger interest of the nation and its citizens. 


120. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
association. 
PW-9 


121. Showkat Hussain (PW-9) tendered his affidavit as PW-9/A and deposed that he is presently working as 
Station House Officer, P.S. Nigeen and is the Investigating Officer of the FIR No. 56/2011. 


122. He stated that FIR No. 56/2011 was registered at Police Station, Nigeen u/s 13 of the UAPA when on 
03.08.2011, a press note was published in various newspapers of Srinagar wherein the Hurriyat Leader Syed Ali Shah 
Geelani, Chairman, Hurriyat (G) gave call for agitation on 03.08.2011. The said call for agitation was fully supported 
by Mirwaiz Umer Farooq, Chairman of AAC and warned the government that if bans imposed on Hurriyat leaders are 
not withdrawn they will start a comprehensive agitation programme against the Government. The press note was 
published in newspapers wherein general public particularly youth has been instigated to disturb the peaceful 
atmosphere in the valley and based on the abovementioned incident, FIR No. 56/2011 was registered 


123. He relied upon the true copies of FIR No. 56/2011; statements of the witnesses recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C. in 
the aforesaid case and the Seizure Memo along with their English version of translated copies which have been 
exhibited as Ex. PW-9/1 to PW-9/7A. 


124. It is stated that AAC has supported terrorist organisations Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) which have played 
prominent roles in causing violent disturbance in the erstwhile State of J & K and has also openly paid tributes to the 
terrorists killed by the Security Forces. It is also stated that AAC and its leaders had also paid tributes to Afzal Guru 
and Maqbool Bhat and called shutdowns in protest on their death anniversary. 


125. It is further stated that one of the wings of AAC is 'Al Umar Mujahideen’ which is a listed terrorist 
organisation in the UAPA and some of its erstwhile members are also listed terrorists which leaves no doubt about the 
objects and intents of the proclaimed organisation. 


126. During the course of deposition, a question was asked by the learned counsel for UOI which was answered 
by PW-9 as under: 


Question: Have you arrested the accused person i.e. Mirwaiz Umer Farooq in FIR No. 56/2011? 


Answer: No. The reason being that the accused person is staying in an area which is heavily 
populated by the secessionist elements and their sympathizers, therefore, it is apprehended that there would 
be a law and order problem in case of arrest of the concerned accused person. 


127. It is stated that the investigations faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the valley 
orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from across the border 
and terrorist organisations. This climate of fear deterred individuals from coming forward to provide statements, 
hindering the progress of the investigations and any attempt to probe these separatist organisations and their leaders 
triggered widespread unrest and turmoil in the affected regions, causing delays in concluding the investigations. 
Furthermore, reorganization of the erstwhile State of J & K into two separate Union Territories of Jammu & Kashmir 
and Ladakh and occurrence of Covid-19 has caused severe delay apart from that there had been certain sympathizers 
within the government and various departments for the said separatist organisations which also obstructed timely 
completion of the investigation against the organisations and their leaders. It was only after the reorganization of the 
State that significant progress could be made in the investigations which are now at their fag end and chargesheet is 
expected to be filed soon. 


128. He further deposed that he has been working in J & K Police since the year 2011 and during this period, he 
was posted in various parts of the Kashmir Valley. He deposed that during his service, he has come across various 
incidents caused by AAC and the FIR's registered against it and its leaders and from the knowledge he has gathered 
with regard to the said organisation during the course of his service, he deposed that it is manifest that AAC, its 
leaders and members who also had support from across the border have been actively and continuously supporting the 
separatist and banned organisations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring about a 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 27 


secession of J & K from the UOI and cession of the constitutional authority of the nation. It is stated that it is also 
established that the activities of AAC are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting 
feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and the members of AAC are indulging and acting in a 
manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the UOI and hence the ban imposed upon it 
was necessary and should be upheld in the larger interest of the nation and its citizens. 


129. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
association. 


PW-10 


LIYAQAT ALI (PW-10) tendered his affidavit as PW-10/A and deposed that he is presently posted as Inspector 
Crime Investigation Department, J & K at Srinagar and he is working as In-charge of Social Media Cell at CID 
Headquarters and has investigated the activities of AAC. 


130. It is stated that AAC has supported terrorist organizations like Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) which have played a 
prominent role in causing violent disturbance in the erstwhile State of J & K and has also openly paid tributes to the 
terrorists killed by the Security Forces. It is also stated that AAC and its leaders had also paid tributes to Afzal Guru 
and Maqbool Bhat and called for shutdowns in protest on their death anniversary. It is further stated that one of the 
wings of AAC is 'Al Umar Mujahideen’ which is a listed terrorist organisation in the UAPA and some of its erstwhile 
members are also listed terrorists which leaves no doubt about the objects and intents of the proclaimed organisation. 


131. It is stated that Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, Chairman, AAC has delivered various secessionist speeches for 
Kashmir at various national and international forums which were uploaded on YouTube Channel maintained in the 
name of ‘Mirwaiz Manzil’ and from a verified page of Mirwaiz Umar Farooq on Facebook and as were obtained by 
CID, Kashmir from the said Facebook page and YouTube Channel which are preserved in a Compact Disk (CD) and 
were provided to Central Government before preparing of the brief note. Details of the links of the abovesaid 
provocative speeches delivered by Mirwaiz Umar Farooq have been given in the affidavit. It is stated that the videos 
were obtained electronically and requisite certificate u/s 63(4) of the Bhartiya Sakhshya Adhiniyam, 2023 has also 
been filed alongwith the affidavit which is marked as Ex. PW-10/3. 


132. It is stated that from the investigations and input received by him and his team and with his personal 
experience gained during the course of his service, he can state that it is manifest that AAC and its leaders have been 
actively and continuously but covertly and discreetly working for secession of J & K from the UOI and Cession of the 
territory of J & K to Pakistan which is apparent from the speeches filed along with the affidavit and are obviously 
against the national interest and integrity of the nation and have promoted feelings of enmity and hatred in the masses 
against the Government of India and hence, are acting in a manner prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
sovereignty of the UOI. Hence, the ban imposed upon the organisation is necessary and correct. 


133. He relied upon a Compact Disc (CD) and a pen drive containing Nine (9) videos of Mirwaiz Umer Farooq 
containing secessionist speeches; true transcripts of the speeches of Mirwaiz Umer Farooq which have been exhibited 
as Ex.PW10/1 to PW10/2. 


134. During the course of deposition, a question was asked by learned counsel for UOI which was duly answered 
by PW-10 as under: 


“Question: Are the videos referred to in your affidavit, re-circulated on social media from time to time 
and/or are currently in circulation? 


Answer: Yes. The said videos are already uploaded on various social media channels/platforms and there are 
various anti-national elements who keep proliferating/sending these videos so as to increase their circulation 
and accessibility. This is done to create an inimical atmosphere. 


I state that the videos which have been referred to in paragraph 6 & 7 of my affidavit are between the period 
2011-2019.” 


PW-11 


135. B.B. Pathak (PW-11) tendered his affidavit as PW-11/A and deposed that he is serving as Additional 
Superintendent of Police in the National Investigation Agency (hereinafter referred to as “NIA”), New Delhi and is 
fully conversant with the facts of the case based upon his knowledge derived from the relevant records of the case and 
that he is the Chief Investigation Officer of the NIA in Case No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI. 


136. He deposed that NIA, being India’s Federal Counter Terrorism Investigation Agency has investigated the 
instant case in which connection of accused Aftab Ahmad Shah @ Shahid-ul-Islam and the organisation sought to be 
banned i.e. AAC has surfaced. 


137. He stated that on 30.05.2017, the Ministry of Home Affairs issued the Order No.11011/2017-IS-IV directing 
the NIA to register a regular case and take up the investigation of the same as credible information was received by 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


the Central Government that Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, Amir of Jamat-ud-Dawah and secessionist and separatist 
leaders, including the members/cadres of the Hurriyat Conference, have been acting in connivance with the active 
militants of proscribed terrorist organisations, viz. Hizb-ul-Mujahideen (HM), Dukhtaran-e-Millat, Lashkar-e-Taiba 
(LeT) and other terrorist organisations/associates/gangs for raising, receiving and collecting funds domestically and 
abroad through various illegal channels, including hawala, for funding separatist and terrorist activities in J & K 
through the funds so collected and as such have entered into a larger criminal conspiracy for causing disruption in the 
Kashmir Valley by way of pelting stones on the security forces, systematically burning of schools, damage to public 
property and waging war against India. Accordingly on 30.05.2017, NIA registered a case being No.RC- 
10/2017/NIA/DLI U/s 120B, 121 & 121A of the IPC and U/s 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 and 40 of the UAPA in 
pursuance of MHA Order No.11011/2017-IS-IV. 


138. He further stated that the investigation revealed that various terrorist organisations, viz., Jammu & Kashmir 
Liberation Front (JKLF), HM, LeT, in connivance with various secessionist groups, particularly the AHPC and its 
constituents, funded by Pakistan and its agencies and terror groups, have entered into a criminal conspiracy to wage 
war against the Government of India and that the said Hurriyat Leaders and their supporters are following the ideology 
of “freedom”, i.e., secession of the State of J & K from the UOI. He further stated that the investigation further 
revealed that APHC was formed as a conglomerate of 26 political/social/religious organisations in 1993 to give a 
political mask to the secessionist activities and AAC was one of them. It is stated that this alliance has been 
consistently promoted and supported by Pakistan to fulfill its evil motive and establish its claim over the State 
of J& K. 


139. It is further stated in the affidavit that though APHC poses a political front, however, it is manifest that the 
agenda of AHPC is to create an atmosphere conducive to the fulfillment of their goal, i.e., secession of J & K from the 
UOI and that AHPC had entered into a criminal conspiracy and had been engaged in instigating the general public of 
Kashmir for taking part in violent activities to create a charged atmosphere in the valley, which is conducive for 
propagation of their secessionist agenda and it has repeatedly asked the people to observe strikes on various non- 
existent issues and then incited and instigated them to get involved in unlawful activities, such as stone-pelting, 
burning of public properties etc. The motive behind the disturbances caused by the frequent strikes and the stone- 
pelting incidents is stated to create such circumstances which will lead to the secession of the State of J & K from the 
UOI. It is further stated in the affidavit that the said agenda of AHPC is also reflected in its website 
www.hurriyatconference.com, which speaks about “Freedom Struggle” and that the “people of Jammu & Kashmir 
have been fighting against Indian occupation”. 


140. It has further been stated in the affidavit that the investigation revealed that Aftab Ahmad Shah @ Shahid-ul- 
Islam, apart from his involvement in the activities of AAC, was also Spokesman and Media Advisor of APHC 
(Mirwaiz Umar Farooq Faction) and he was one of its chief architects. Aftab Ahmad Shah@ Aftab Hilai Shah @ 
Shaid-ul-Islam along with other accused persons, played a key role in building the separatist/militant movement in J & 
K. It is stated that on 30.06.2017, several premises belonging to the separatists, were searched and during the search 
conducted in the house of Aftab Ahmad Shah @ Aftab Hilali Shah @ Shahid-ul-Islam certain incriminating 
documents were seized including the handwritten letters from LeT on the letter head title as “Lashkar-e-Taibah 
Jammu Kashmir head office Muzaffarabad” in Urdu language. Beside, documents viz. (a) Photograph of Aftab 
Ahmad Shah _ holding AK-47 with other cadres, (b) Photograph of Aftab Ahmand Shah with HM Chief Syed 
Salahuddin, (c) letter head in respect of APHC addressed to Dy. High Commissioner of Pakistan at New Delhi from 
Media Advisor, APHC, Advocate Aftab Ahmad Shah, (d) Application form for admission in the Institutions of 
Pakistan, (e) list of active militants (year 2016-17) of different outfits in the valley issued by J & K Police, (f) a 
handwritten letter in Urdu from the banned terrorist organization LeT letter head asking for financial assistance 
showing the unlawful and secessionist activities by AAC and APHC were seized and that the accused Aftab Ahmad 
Shah was arrested on 24.07.2017. 


141. It is further stated that the investigation established that Aftab Ahmad Shah was one of the main strategists 
and planners and publicity managers and propagandists for the Hurriyat Conference. He himself received training in 
handling weapons in the training camps in PoK and was member of Hizbullah. Aftab Ahmad Shah had nexus with 
Pakistan based HM Chief Syed Salahuddin and armed militants as photographs proving these facts had been seized 
during search at his house and the experts from forensic laboratory prove that the photographs are of Aftab Ahmad 
Shah. 


142. It is further stated that during investigation, the accused had disclosed that during 1986-87, he had joined 
active militancy and got trained for militancy in Pakistan and Muzaffarabad (PoK) and during 1997, he joined AAC 
and became legal head of Hurriyat and thereafter, after split in Hurriyat, he remained with Mirwaiz faction and looked 
after the charge of the Media Advisor and spokesperson of APHC (M). 


143. It is stated that the investigation of the retrieved data from the seized digital devise has established that the 
accused Aftab Ahmand Shah and the co-accused person charge-sheeted in the case viz. Altaf Ahmad Shah @ 
Fantoosh, Nayeem Ahmad Khan, Faroog Ahmad Dar @ Bitta Karate, Yasin Malik, Mohammad Akbar Khanday, Raja 
Mehrajuddin Kalwal, Bashir Ahmad Bhat @ Peer Saifullah, Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali and others are a part of a 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 29 


gang who with the help of Pakistan based accused persons collaborate and co-ordinate with each other to form 
strategies and action plan to launch massive vigilant protests, hartals, bandhs, strikes, processions, demonstrations 
during which stone pelting is organized on security forces and government establishments. These clearly indicate an 
action plan to instigate general public to observe strikes, hold anti-India protests through press releases, social media 
etc. Technical Analysis report in respect of accused Aftab Ahmand Shah establishes incriminating role of the said 
accused vis. Pakistan contacts including memberships of several Pakistani groups, several press releases on the letter 
heads of AAC and APHC related to unrest in Kashmir Valley, protests, oppression on Kashmiri people, incriminating 
pro-Pakistan and anti-India conversations with convicted co-accused Yasin Malik, issuance of Protests calendars, 
advocating for shutting down whole Kashmir and establishing Caliphate etc. The said accused had even shared his 
own resume on mail wherein he mentioned that he has working experience as —(a) Media Advisor/Spokesman of 
APHC since 1998 and (b) Executive Member of J & K AAC. The Facebook chat between accused Yasin Malik and 
Aftab Ahmand Shah retrieved from latter’s Facebook account also shows that the stone pelting incidents in Kashmir 
valley were orchestrated as a part of well-planned conspiracy hatched by the accused persons, and that they are in 
close contact with the Pakistani Embassy at New Delhi for achieving their designs. In a chat dated 05.08.2011, co- 
accused/convict Yasin Malik told accused Aftab Ahmand Shah, “today you manage stone-pelting in Jamia” and 
further said “You are a stone pelter from childhood.” And in chats Aftab Ahmand Shah admits himself to be a stone 
pelter. The above chats clearly show that Pakistan extends all kind of technical and logistical support for the 
secessionist and terrorist activities in J & K through organisations such as APHC & AAC. 


144. He deposed that during investigation, several witnesses were examined and their statements have been 
recorded under section 161 and 164 of the Cr.PC; a perusal of which would reveal that the members and leaders of 
APHC, with the support of agencies of Pakistan as also Pakistan based terrorist organisations and secessionist groups 
and their alliance partners, have entered into a criminal conspiracy and adopted the strategy of instigating the local 
public to resort to violence and to create a surcharged atmosphere, which is conducive for the propagation of their 
secessionist agenda. People were repeatedly asked to observe strikes on various imagined issues and then incited and 
instigated to be involved in unlawful activities such as stone pelting, attack on security forces, damaging public 
property, including burning of schools, arson, bank looting, organizing bandhs, forcible closure of roads and the 
government establishments etc. Members and leaders of APHC and its constituents, including AAC activist Aftab 
Ahmad Shah have been found to be involved in the abovementioned unlawful activities. Further PW-23 deposed on 
08.05.2025 in the Trial Court w.r.t. the seized Photograph of Aftab Ahmand Shah holding AK series assault rifle with 
other cadres. Statements of protected witnesses (i.e Alfa and Gama) in terms of Section 44 of the UAPA, have also 
been submitted in a sealed cover. He deposed that the statement of the said witnesses have been furnished in a sealed 
cover in view of the sensitive nature thereof and the necessity to preserve the confidentiality of the same. 


145. He stated that pursuant to the investigation carried out by the NIA, chargesheet dated 18.01.2018 was filed 
before the NIA Special Court, New Delhi in RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI against 12 accused persons, including two 
designated terrorists, based in Pakistan, namely, Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, who is the Head of banned terrorist 
organisation ‘LeT’, Mohd. Yusuf Shah @ Salahuddin, Head of banned terrorist organisation ‘HM’, as absconders. 
The said chargesheet also included other arrested accused persons, who are the leaders of APHC, viz., Aftab Ahmad 
Shah@ Aftab Hilai Shah @ Shahid-ul-Islam (Executive Member of AAC), Altaf Ahmad Shah @ Fantoosh, Nayeem 
Ahmad Khan, Farooq Ahmad Dar @ Bitta Karate, Mohammad Akbar Khanday, Raja Mehrajuddin Kalwal, Bashir 
Ahmad Bhat @ Peer Saifullah, Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, who were involved in providing funds for terrorists and 
secessionist activities and others involved in stone pelting in Kashmir Valley, under Sections 120B, 121, 121A & 
124A of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 & 40 of the UAPA.The case was further being 
investigated in terms of Section 173 (8) of Cr.PC. 


146. It is further stated that the charges were framed against 15 accused in different sections of law including 
accused Aftab Ahmad Shah for the offences under sections 120-B, 121, 121-A IPC, U/s 13 UAPA r/w Section 120-B 
IPC, Section 15 of UAPA r/w 120-B IPC and Sections 17r/w 120-B IPC, Sections 18, 20, 40 of UAPA on 16.03.2022. 


147. It is further stated in the affidavit that accused Yasin Malik, head of JKLF had pleaded guilty following 
which he was convicted of all the charges and has been sentenced for life and a fine of Rs.10 lakhs. 


148. It is stated that from the cogent and irrefutable evidence which has emerged till now it is manifest that 
themembersof AAC including Shahid-ul-Islam @ Aftab Hilali Shah @ Aftab Ahmand Shah have been actively and 
continuously encouraging a veiled armed insurgency and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring 
about a secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union; besides causing disaffection, disloyally and 
disharmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and its members are indulging 
and acting in a manner prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of India. As such, the decision of the 
Central Government to declare AAC as an unlawful association is just, proper and bona fide. 


149. He relied upon the true copies of FIR No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI registered under Sections 120B, 121 & 
121A of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 13, 16, 17 18, 20, 38, 39 and 40 of the UAPA; Seizure Memo of Shahid- 
Ul-Islam Dated 03.06.2017; seized documents of Shahid-Ul-Islam Dated 03.06.2017; Arrest Memo of Shahid-Ul- 
Islam; photo comparison by CFSL of Shahid-Ul-Islam; Disclosure Memo of Shahid-Ul-Islam; Technical Analysis 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Report of Shahid-Ul]-Islam; statements of the protected witnesses (in terms of Section 44 of UAPA) code named as 
Alfa and Gama and PW-23 (examined in the trial court); Charge-Sheet dated 18.01.2018; Charge order dated 
16.03.2022 passed by Ld. Special Judge, NIA, New Delhi and Yasin Malik’s Conviction Order, which have been 
exhibited as Ex. PW11/1 to Ex. PWI1/11. 


150. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
association. 


PW-12 


151. Rajeev Kumar (PW-12) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-12/A; he stated that he is presently posted as Joint 
Secretary in the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi and specially, in his capacity as Joint 
Secretary, Counter-Terrorism and Counter Radicalization Division (CTCR Division), he is well versed with the 
subject matter of the present proceedings in his official capacity and also have access to the relevant record being the 
official custodian of the record. He stated that the notification No. 8.0. 1115(E) dated 11.03.2025 issued by the 
Central Government is based on the information and material received from the Central Intelligence Agency with 
regard to the unlawful activities of the AAC and that based on this information, a note along with a draft notification 
was prepared and sent for the consideration of the Cabinet Committee on Security (CSS) which was approved on 
05.03.2025. 


152. He stated that in terms thereof and after careful consideration of the offending nature of the activities of the 
association, the decision to ban the concerned association was taken. Accordingly, the declaration was made and 
published vide notification dated 11.03.2025, bearing S.O. 1115(E), which is exhibited as Ex.PW-12/1. Accordingly, 
vide notification dated 03.04.2025 bearing S.O. 1579(E), this Tribunal was constituted. In terms of Rule 5 of the UAP 
Rules, vide letter dated 08.04.2025, a background note (Ex.PW-12/2) was submitted to the Tribunal based upon the 
material/information as contained in the concerned file(s). 


153. He further stated that various cases registered by the J& K Police and NIA throw light on the unlawful and 
subversive activities of the Chairman and members of AAC and that the concerned officers of UT of J&K and NIA 
have filed their affidavits before this Tribunal in respect of cases registered against the Chairman and Members of 
AAC under various provisions of law including the UAPA and that evidence so adduced clearly established that AAC 
is continuously indulging in unlawful activities. In addition to the adduced evidence, intelligence reports/inputs clearly 
bring out the unlawful activities of AAC. 


154. He stated that consideration of the relevant material including the intelligence report/ inputs will reveal the 
offending and unlawful nature of the activities of AAC. He further stated that as per the information received, 
declaring AAC as unlawful under UAPA is necessary in the interest of national security, sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of India as its members and activists have been indulging in radicalizing and brainwashing of the minds of 
the populace, and indoctrinating the youth through provocative speeches and canvassing for separation of Jammu and 
Kashmir from UOI. 


155. He also deposed that the original files (duly indexed) containing various central intelligence reports/inputs 
were being submitted in a sealed cover only for the perusal of this Tribunal which is exhibited as PW-12/3. The 
Central Government is seeking privilege/confidentiality for these original files and relies on Section 129 of the 
Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 r/w Rule 3(2) and proviso to Rule 5 of the UAP Rules. Relevant intelligence 
reports/ inputs have been submitted along with his affidavit under a sealed cover inasmuch as it is necessary to 
preserve the confidentiality of the same in view of the sensitive nature of the information contained therein. The 
confidentiality is being claimed since the contents of the same are privileged and confidential in nature and the same 
cannot be made available to the banned association or to any third party as the Government considers it against the 
public interest to disclose the same to either the banned association or to any third-party inter alia in terms of the 
provisions of Rule 5 of the UAP Rules. 


156. He further deposed that nature of the proceedings and the scope of inquiry before this Tribunal and the 
treatment which has to be given to the documents in respect of which privilege has been claimed by the Government 
or its nodal agency has been authoritatively laid down under para 20-22 by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jamaat-E- 
Islami (Supra). Further, the documents for which claim of privilege is being sought, by their very nature are 
confidential and sensitive in nature and therefore, cannot be supplied as a public document as dissemination of the 
same to public at large may impede/impeach the ongoing investigations against the AAC or its members. 


157. He also stated that he is submitting from the cogent and irrefutable evidence that AAC is openly advocating 
and inciting people to bring about a secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union. It is also established 
that the activities of AAC are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feeling of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government and the members of AAC are indulging and acting in a manner 
prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of India by inciting and orchestrating violence. He further 
deposed that if the AAC is not banned, the activists and sympathizers of AAC will continue to pose a serious threat to 
the sovereignty, communal harmony, internal security and integrity of the country. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 31 


158. 


3. 


He relied the following documents with his affidavit: 


Self attested copy of Notification dated 11.03.2025 declaring AAC as an Unlawful Association which is 
exhibited as Ex. PW12/1. 


Self attested copy of Background note dated 08.04.2025 submitted before the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Tribunal, which is exhibited as Ex.PW12/2. 


Sealed envelope submitted before the Tribunal during deposition, exhibited as Ex.PW12/3. 


Public Witnesses 


159. 


Apart from effecting service on the association and its office bearers in the manner aforesaid, this Tribunal 


even held public hearing/s in Srinagar to enable members of the concerned association and/ or member of the public, 
to participate in the proceedings of the Tribunal. In response thereto, eight (08) affidavits have been filed by the 
following public witnesses/deponents:- 


i. 


ii. 


160. 


Mr. Satish Mahaldar 

Mr. Bashir Muzafar Pandit 
Mr. Sheikh Yasir Rouf 

Mr. Rameez Raja 

Mr. Jagmohan Singh Raina 
Mr. Rouf Ahmed Punjabi 
Mr. Firdous Ahmed Bazaz 
Mr. Vikram Malhotra 


A perusal of the affidavits of the aforesaid deponents/public witnesses reveals that each affidavit is a two- 


page affidavit containing similar averments opposing the notification dated 11.03.2025, which are as under:- 


IX. 
161. 


“1. That Iam a law-abiding citizen of India and a resident of the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir. I 
am filing this affidavit in my personal capacity in opposition to the Notification issued by the Central 
Government banning the Awami Action Committee under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. 


2. That the Awami Action Committee (AAC), historically known and functioning as a sociopolitical 
platform in Jammu & Kashmir, has a long-standing record of peaceful political activism, public 
engagement and humanitarian outreach in the Kashmir Valley. 


3. That the said organisation has never been involved in any activities that could be classified as unlawful 
or prejudicial to the sovereignty, integrity or security of India. Rather, it has operated within the 
democratic and constitutional framework of India, advocating social justice, public welfare and political 
awareness. 


4. That the Awami Action Committee has consistently contributed to the upliftment of the underprivileged 
and marginalised sections of society. It has played an instrumental role in extending aid to victims of 
natural disasters such as floods and fires, providing relief and rehabilitation to affected families in various 
districts of Kashmir 


5. That the AAC has also worked extensively like a non-governmental organisation (NGO), especially in 
supporting education for economically weaker students through scholarship programs, organizing 
awareness campaigns on social evils including drug abuse and promoting peace, dialogue and communal 
harmony in the Valley. 


6. That banning ‘such an organisation not only undermines the legitimate democratic space for peaceful 
expression and political participation but also weakens civil society efforts in regions where such 
engagement is most essential. 

7. That I oppose the unjustified categorisation of the Awami Action Committee as an ‘unlawful association’ 
and urge this Hon’ble Tribunal to consider the bona fide social, educational and political work undertaken 
by the organisation over decades, 


8. That I humbly request this Hon'ble Tribunal to recommend revocation of the said Notification banning 
the Awami Action Committee, in the interest of justice, fairness and democratic values.” 


SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE UOI 
Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, Learned ASG of India, appearing on behalf of the Central Government, submitted, at 


the outset, that the ban imposed by the central government on the instant proscribed association, i.e., AAC is liable to 
be confirmed for the following reasons:- 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(i) The assertions and allegations made by the central government in the ‘Background Note’ submitted 
before this Tribunal; the material adduced in support of the said “Background Note” has remained 
uncontroverted; 


(ii) Instead of controverting and disproving the allegations mentioned in the background note, the 
proscribed association in its reply has expressly admitted that Awami Action Committee (AAC)- a 
socio-political organization was formed in 1964 by Late Mirwaiz Molvi Farooq. 


(iii) There is no specific denial to the assertion that in 1993 AAC joined All Party Hurriyat 
Conference (APHC) as a founder member and continued separatist activities. 


(iv) | The proscribed association in its response/reply to the express charge of indulging into secessionist 
activities has not made any positive assertion or statement and has not expressly declared that the 
proscribed association, i.e., AAC or its members and office bearers honour the Constitution of India, do 
not advocate separation of territory of Kashmir from the UOI or merger of territory of Kashmir with 
Pakistan or declaration of it as an Independent State; 


(v) | There was overwhelming evidence/material with the central government at the time of declaring AAC 
as proscribed association under the provisions of UAPA; 


(vi) The factum of existence and relevancy of the material on the basis of which central government had 
declared AAC as a proscribed association has not been disproved, repelled or controverted by the 
proscribed association; 


(vii) The afore-referred material which was available with the central government has been duly adduced 
before this Tribunal, on oath; 


(viii) The authenticity, veracity, existence and relevancy of the afore-referred material, which is in the nature 
of FIRs registered against the members and office bearers of the proscribed association for indulging in 
secessionist activities in the territory of Kashmir, has been duly testified on oath by the respective 
competent officers of the various investigating agencies; 


(ix) The proscribed association has not been able to disprove the authenticity, veracity, existence and 
relevancy of respective FIRs which has been relied upon by the Central Government to ban AAC under 
the provisions of UAPA; 


(x) | Ample and abundant opportunity was given by this Tribunal to the proscribed association to appear 
before the Tribunal to argue/ adduce evidence in its favour to prove that AAC has not been indulging 
into secessionist activities. However, the proscribed association has failed to avail the said opportunity; 


(xi) | No material or evidence has been adduced by the proscribed association before this Tribunal in support 
of non-confirmation of ban which can be said to outweigh the material/evidence adduced by the Central 
Government manifesting sufficient cause to declare AAC as an “Unlawful Association”; 


(xii) In fact, no cause has been shown by the proscribed association or its members or office bearers as per 
section 4(3) of UAPA which can be legally adjudicated to decide that there was no sufficient cause for 
declaring AAC as an unlawful association. 


(xiii) The only material adduced by the proscribed association in its favour is the reply which itself smacks of 
secessionist motives. 


162. Learned ASG, therefore, argued that for the aforesaid reasons and grounds, the ban imposed on the instant 
association i.e. AAC is liable to be confirmed. Besides above, she founded her arguments on the following points: - 

(i) Evidence adduced clearly demonstrates indulgence of AAC into secessionist activities 

163. It is stated that in order to substantiate the declaration made by the Central Government and to prove that 


there was not only sufficient but overwhelming cause for declaring AAC to be an ‘unlawful association’ which 
required confirmation of the notification dated 117 March, 2025, declaring the AAC as an ‘unlawful association’, the 
Central government has adduced evidence of the concerned officers who also deposed before this Tribunal. A list of 
the cases which were either registered against its Chairman Umar Farooq or his associates, as deposed before the 
Tribunal, is given which is as under: - 


A. Jammu And Kashmir. 


Sr. No. Prosecution Witnesses Details of FIRs Lodged 
1. PW-1 FIR No. 60/2010 dated 11.09.2010 u/s 13 of the Unlawful Activities 


Mr. Adil Rashid. Station (Prevention) Act and section 436, 153A, 109, 147, 336 RPC. 


House Officer (SHO), PS 
Kothibagh Srinagar 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 33 


FIR No. 46/2014 dated 19.06.2014 


u/s 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act and section 188, 124- 
A, 147 RPC 


2. PW-2 FIR No. 96/2008 dated 09.12.2008 
Mr. Azhar Rashid, Sub- | u/s 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act and section 153-A, 
Divisional Police officer | 120-B RPC. 
(SDPO), Khanyar, Srinagar 
3. PW-3 FIR No. 19/2015 dated 17.04.2015 u/s 13 of the Unlawful Activities 
May Naséor Alma’: कक्षा (Prevention) Act and section 147,148,149,341,336,353,307.427 of RPC 
House Officer (SHO), PS 
Nowhatta, Srinagar 
4. PW-4 FIR No. 83/2010 dated 11.09.2010 
DYSP (PROB.) Dr. Barleen | u/s 147,148, 436,427, 
Kour, 
. 153,153-A,121,121-A of RPC 
Station House Officer (SHO), 
PS Shergarhi, Kashmir 
5. PW 5 FIR No. 128/2010 dated 11.09.2010 
Mr Sheik Wakeel, Inspector | u/s 13 Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967. 
SHO PS Safakadal , Kashmir 
a PW 6 FIR No. 101/2010 dated 11.09.2010 
Mr Hilal Ahmad, Inspector | w/s 147,148, 336, 436,427, 
HO 
. ; 153,153-A,121,121-A of RPC 
PS Shaheed Gunj, Kashmir 
7. PW7 FIR No. 46/2010 dated 17.06.2010 
Mr Bashir Ahmad u/s 341 of RPC 
Sub inspector PS 
Kothibagh, Srinagar 
कै PW 8 FIR No. 394/2016 u/s 147/148/149/153/153A/336/307/427 RPC, u/s 3 
Mr Sarfaraz Bashir PPD and u/s 7/27/Arms Act . 
SDPO, Sopore, Kashmir 
FIR No 409/2016 u/s 147,148,149,427,307 Ranbir Penal Code. 
a PW 9 FIR No 56/2011 
Mr. Showkat Hussain, P.S. Nigeen, Srinagar u/s 13 of 
SHO PS Nigeen, Srinagar Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 
10. PW 10 PW-10 (Inspector Liyaqat Ali, CID J&K, Srinagar) is in-charge of the 
Mr. Liyagat Ali, Social Media Cell. 
Inspector, Crime | He downloaded videos of Mirwaiz Umar Faroog from: 
Investigation Department, 
J&K Police 


a. YouTube channel maintained under the name “Mirwaiz 
Manzil”. 


b. Verified Facebook account of Mirwaiz Umar Farooq. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


B. Criminal Case registered against the member of AAC by National Investigation Agency. 


164. Attention is invited to the order dated 30.05.2017 issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs vide 
No.11011/2017-IS-IV, in exercise of its powers conferred under section 6 (5) read with Section 8 of the NIA Act, 
2008, whereby the National Investigation Agency was directed to register a Regular Case and take up the 
investigation. Details of the case registered by the NIA are given in the table as under: 


Sr. FIR Details Brief incident Lodged In FIR 
No. 
1. RC 10/2017/NIA/DLI U/S 120B, 121 & | Upon receiving credible information that Hafiz Muhammad 
121A of the IPC and S. 13, 16, 17, 18, | Saeed, Amir of Jammat-ud-Dawah and the secessionist and 
20, 38, 39 & 40 of UAPA, 1967. separatist leaders, including the members/cadres of the Hurriyat 


Conference, have been acting in connivance with active militants 
of proscribed terrorist organizations viz. Hizb-ul- 
Mujahideen(hereinafter referred to as “HM”), Dukhtaran-e- 
Millat, Lashkar-e-Taiba (hereinafter referred to as “LeT”), and 
other terrorist organizations/associations/gangs for raising, 
receiving and collecting funds domestically and abroad through 
various illegal channels, including hawala, for funding separatist 
and terrorist activities in Jammu and Kashmir through the funds 
so collected and as such have entered into a larger criminal 
conspiracy for causing disruption in the Kashmir valley by way 
of pelting stones on the security forces, systematically burning of 
schools, causing damage to public property and waging war 
against India. 


ii. Full opportunity given by this Tribunal to AAC and its members to show cause why the association should 
not be declared unlawful: - 


165. Learned ASG stated that ample opportunity was given to the concerned Association to appear before this 
Tribunal to argue and to adduce evidence to prove that AAC has not been indulging into secessionist activities. 
However, the proscribed association has failed to avail the said opportunity. Attention is invited to the several orders 
of this Tribunal to substantiate the argument that the association was duly served with the notice and sufficient 
opportunity was given to the association. It is stated that though on 16.05.2025, an advocate had entered appearance 
on behalf of the association and filed reply on behalf of the association, however, thereafter there was no appearance 
on behalf of the association. 


166. Even hearings were fixed at Srinagar and a direction was given to issue public notice notifying the time, date, 
and venue of the sitting of the Tribunal calling upon all those persons interested/willing to participate in the inquiry. 
Despite that, there was no appearance. Opportunity was also given to cross-examine the witnesses produced by UOI, 
but none availed by the association. 


iii. The relevance of the public witnesses who are not part of the proscribed organisation. 


167. It is submitted that vide order dated 16.04.2025, this Tribunal, directed the issuance of a public notice calling 
upon persons interested / willing to participate in the inquiry, to file their affidavits with the Registrar of this Tribunal 
before the next date of hearing which was to be held in Srinagar on 01.08.2025 and 02.08.2025. The relevant portion 
of the said order is as under: 


८८ 


Let a public notice be issued notifying the dates, time and venue of the sitting of the Tribunal on the 
aforementioned dates at Srinagar, and calling upon all those persons interested / willing to participate in 
the inquiry, to file their affidavits with the Registrar of the Tribunal at least three days before the next date 
of hearing of the Tribunal in Srinagar.” 


168. It is submitted that the above direction called upon interested/ willing persons to participate in the inquiry 
being held by this Tribunal by way of the present reference under Section 4(1) of UAPA which reads as under: 


“4. Reference to Tribunal — (1) Where any association has been declared unlawful by a notification issued 
under sub-section (1) of section 3, the Central Government shall, within thirty days from the date of the 
publication of the notification under the said sub-section, refer the notification to the Tribunal for the 
purpose of adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” 


169. It is stated that thus, the scope of inquiry before this Tribunal under the above provision is only to adjudicate 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 35 


whether there is ‘sufficient cause’ for declaring AAC an unlawful association under Section 3 UAPA. 


170. In furtherance of order dated 16.04.2025, 08 individuals have filed affidavits in support of the association 
before this Tribunal. It is stated that none of these 08 individuals is a member of the association or has provided any 
other details of the association/ affiliation with AAC; that all 08 affidavits are almost identical in their content and 
appear to be planted testimonies which merely give vague statements in support of the association; further, the 
affidavits do not explain the locus of the individuals in filing affidavits in support of the association. 


iv. Rule of ex-parte proceedings before the tribunal following the civil procedure code, 1908 


171. Learned ASG stated that a reading of Order IX of Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (CPC) with the UAPA infers 
that the Tribunal may proceed with ex-parte proceedings if full and complete opportunity of hearing has been 
provided to both the parties. In the present case, the association in its written reply to the notification of the UOI filed 
before the Tribunal has given a sketchy written response but at the same time has also ‘refused its participation in the 
legal proceedings before this Tribunal’ as per its own will. Therefore, it is respectfully submitted that it would be fair 
and just to proceed ex-parte in the present matter keeping in view the acceptance and admission of the AAC in its 
reply for non-participation in the legal proceedings before this Tribunal. Attention is invited to Order IX and Order 
XVII of CPC which are as under: 


Order IX CPC 
“Appearance of parties and consequence of non-appearance 


1. Parties to appear on day fixed in summons for defendant to appear and answer.—On the day fixed in the 
summons for the defendant to appear and answer, the parties shall be in attendance at the Court-house in 
person or by their respective pleaders, and the suit shall then be heard unless the hearing is adjourned to a 
future day fixed by the Court. 


XXX XXX XXX 


6. Procedure when only plaintiff appears.—(1) Where the plaintiff appears and the defendant does not appear 
when the suit is called on for hearing, then 


[(a) When summons duly served.—if it is proved that the summons was duly served, the Court may make an 
order that the suit shall be heard ex parte; ] 


(b) When summons not duly served.—if it is not proved that the summons was duly served, the Court shall 
direct a second summons to be issued and served on the defendant; 


(c) When summons served but not in due time.—if it is proved that the summons was served on the defendant, 
but not in sufficient time to enable him to appear and answer on the day fixed in the summons, the Court shall 
postpone the hearing of the suit to a future day to be fixed by the Court, and shall direct notice of such day to 
be given to the defendant. 


(2) Where it is owing to the plaintiff's default that the summons was not duly served or was not served in 
sufficient time, the Court shall order the plaintiff to pay the costs occasioned by the postponement. 


12. Consequence of non-attendance, without sufficient cause shown, of party ordered to appear in person.— 
Where a plaintiff or defendant, who has been ordered to appear in person, does not appear in person, or show 
sufficient cause to the satisfaction of the court for failing so to appear, he shall be subject to all provisions of 
the foregoing rules applicable to plaintiffs and defendants, respectively who do not appear. 


13. Setting aside decree ex parte against defendant.—In any case in which a decree is passed ex parte against 
a defendant, he may apply to the Court by which the decree was passed for an order to set it aside; and if he 
satisfies the Court that the summons was not duly served, or that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from 
appearing when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make an order setting aside the decree as 
against him upon such terms as to costs, payment into Court or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a 
day for proceeding with the suit: 


Provided that where the decree is of such a nature that it cannot be set aside as against such defendant only it 
may be set aside as against all or any of the other defendants also: 


[Provided further than no Court shall set aside a decree passed ex parte merely on the ground that there has 
been an irregularity in the service of summons, if it is satisfied that the defendant had notice of the date of 
hearing and had sufficient time to appear and answer the plaintiff's claim. ] 


[Explanation.—Where there has been an appeal against a decree passed ex parte under this rule, and the 


36 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


appeal has been disposed of an any ground other than the ground that the appellant has withdrawn the appeal, 
no application shall lie under this rule for setting aside that ex parte decree.] 


Order XVII CPC 


172. 


“Adjournments 


1. Court may grant time and adjourn hearing.—[(1) The court may, if sufficient cause is shown, at any stage of 
the suit grant time to the parties or to any of them, and may from time to time adjourn the hearing of the suit 
for reasons to be recorded in writing: 


Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three time to a party during hearing of the 
suit. ] 


(2) Costs of adjournment.—In every such case the Court shall fix a day for the further hearing of the suit, and 
[shall make such orders as to costs occasioned by the adjournment or such higher costs as the court deems 


fit:] 
[Provided that,— 


(a) when the hearing of the suit has commenced, it shall be continued from day-to-day until all the witnesses in 
attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds that, for the exceptional reasons to be recorded by it, 
the adjournment of the hearing beyond the following day is necessary. 


(b) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where the circumstances are beyond the 
control of that party, 


(c) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shall not be a ground for adjournment, 


(d) where the illness of a pleader or his inability to conduct the case for any reason, other than his being 
engaged in another 


Court, is put forward as a ground for adjournment, the Court shall not grant the, adjournment unless it is 
satisfied that the party applying for adjournment could not have engaged another pleader in time, 


(e) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his pleader is not present or the party or his pleader, 
though present in Court, is not ready to examine or cross-examine the witness, the Court may, if it thinks fit, 
record the statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispensing with the examination-in- 
chief or cross-examination of the witness, as the case may be, by the party or his pleader not present or not 
ready as aforesaid.] 


2. Procedure if parties fail to appear on day fixed.—Where, on any day to which the hearing of the suit is 
adjourned, the parties or any of them fail to appear, the Court may proceed to dispose of the suit in one of the 
modes directed in that behalf by Order IX or make such other order as it thinks fit. 


[Explanation.—Where the evidence or a substantial portion of the evidence of any party has already been 
recorded and such party fails to appear on any day to which the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the Court 
may, in its discretion proceed with the case as if such party were present. | 


3. Court may proceed notwithstanding either party fails to produce evidence, etc.—Where any party to a suit 
to whom time has been granted fails to produce his evidence, or to cause the attendance of his witnesses, or to 
perform any other act necessary to the further progress of the suit, for which time has been allowed [the Court 
may, notwithstanding such default, 


(a) if the parties are present, proceed to decide the suit forthwith; or (b) if the parties are, or any of them is, 
absent, proceed under rule 2]. 


Reference was also made to Section 9 of UAPA and Rule 15 of UAP Rules, which are as under: 


“Section 9. Procedure to be followed in the disposal of applications under this Act.—Subject to any rules that 
may be made under this Act, the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding any inquiry under sub- 
section (3) of section 4 or by a Court of the District Judge in disposing of any application under sub-section 
(4) of section 7 or sub- section (8) of section 8 shall, so far as may be, be the procedure laid down in the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the investigation of claims and the decision of the Tribunal or the 
Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall be final.” 


“Rule 15. Other provisions of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908, to apply- the provisions of the Civil Procedure 
Code, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall , insofar as they relate to any other matter with regard to the service of summons, 
shall, as far as may be, apply to the service of summons issued by the Tribunal or District Judge under 
the Act.” 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 37 


173. Reference was also made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Vijay Singh 7. Shanti Devi and Another, 
2017 8 SCC 837 with regard to the validity of the ex-parte proceedings, relevant portion of which is as under: 


“12. We are only concerned with Clause (a), which provides that if summons are duly served and the 
Defendant does not put in appearance, the court may make an order that the suit would be heard ex parte. In 
this case, this was the procedure followed and an ex parte decree was passed. There is no manner of doubt 
that an ex parte decree is also a valid decree. It has the same force as a decree which is passed on contest. As 
long as the ex parte decree is not recalled or set aside, it is legal and binding upon the parties. 


Order IX Rule 13, Code of Civil Procedure reads as follows: 
“ORDER IX-APPEARANCE OF PARTIES AND CONSEQUENCE OF NON-APPEARANCE 
XXX XXX XXX 


13. Setting aside decree ex parte against Defendants-- In any case in which a decree is passed ex parte 
against a Defendant, he may apply to the Court by which the decree was passed for an order to set it aside; 
and if he satisfies the Court that the summons was not duly served, or that he was prevented by any sufficient 
cause from appearing when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make an order setting aside 
the decree as against him upon such terms as to costs, payment into Court or otherwise as it thinks fit, and 
shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit; 


Provided that where the decree is of such a nature that it cannot be set aside as against such Defendant only 
it may be set aside as against all or any of the other Defendants also: 


Provided further that no Court shall set aside a decree passed ex parte merely on the ground that there has 
been an irregularity in the service of summons, if it is satisfied that the Defendant had notice of the date of 
hearing and had sufficient time to appear and answer the Plaintiff's claim. 


Explanation.--Where there has been an appeal against a decree passed ex-parte under this rule, and the 
appeal has been disposed of on any ground other than the ground that the Appellant has withdrawn the 
appeal, no application shall lie under this Rule for setting aside the ex-parte decree. 


14, The aforesaid provision lays down the procedure for setting aside a decree passed ex-parte. The court 
can set aside an ex parte decree only on two grounds-firstly, that the summons was not duly served; and 
secondly, that the Defendant was prevented by sufficient cause from appearing when the suit was called out. 
Once an ex-parte decree is set aside, it basically means that the parties are relegated to the same position on 
which they stood before the passing of the ex-parte decree.” 


v. Summary of evidence/reply placed before the tribunal during the course of hearing 


174. It is stated that after detailed hearings, the Central Government has adduced the following evidence before 
this Tribunal as there is overwhelming evidence available against the proscribed organization which has not been 
disproved by it. A chart containing details of all the PWs who have deposed before the Tribunal against the proscribed 
organization is annexed with the written submission as Appendix A. 


175. A chart containing the FIRs/RPCs where secessionist speeches and slogans were raised by the office bearers 
and members of proscribed organization and recovery of incriminating material made in various FIRs registered is 
also annexed as Appendix B. 


176. It is stated that cogent and irrefutable evidences have been produced by national intelligence agency against 
the member of AAC being involved in secessionist and cessionist activities against the sovereignty and integrity of 
the country. Reference is made to the evidence of PW-11 and reliance is placed on the following portion of the 
evidence:- 


“PW-11 B.B Pathak, Deputy Superintendent of Police in the NIA, New Delhi has deposed about the factum 
of RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI registered on 30.05.2017. It was stated that investigation of the same revealed 
that various terrorist organizations such as JKLF, HM, LeT, in connivance with other secessionist groups 
including constituents of APHC/Hurriyat conference including APHC (Umar Faction) which are funded by 
Pakistan have entered into criminal conspiracy to wage war against Gol. The said organizations were 
following the ideology of ‘freedom’. It was stated that APHC is a conglomerate if 26 different political / 
social / religious organizations. Investigation revealed that APHC was instigating the general public of 
Kashmir for taking arms in hand and to take part in violent activities in the valley.” 


177. A chart showing the evidences found against the AAC member in RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI during the course of 
investigation and filed in chargesheet is annexed as Appendix C. 


178. It is stated that in the testimony of NIA witness and the exhibits marked therein, links of Shabir Ahmed Shah 
with other co-accused namely, Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali has irrefutably emerged. It is further stated that in this 
regard that so far as case of Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali is concerned, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its judgment 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


titled as NIA v. Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, (2019) 5 SCC 1 was pleased to cancel the bail granted to Zahoor 
Ahmad Shah Watali granted by the High Court. Relevant portion is as under: 


“34, After having analysed the documents and the statements forming part of the charge-sheet as well as 
the redacted statements now taken on record, we disagree with the conclusion recorded by the High Court. 
In our opinion, taking into account the totality of the report made under Section 173 of the Code and the 
accompanying documents and the evidence/naterial already presented to the Court, including the redacted 
statements of the protected witnesses recorded under Section 164 of the Code, there are reasonable 
grounds to believe that the accusations made against the respondent are prima facie true. Be it noted, 
further investigation is in progress.” 


(Emphasis Supplied) 


179. It is stated that the aforesaid judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court manifests that the accusation and the 
allegation against the other co-accused who have been named to have been involved in cross-border terror funding 
offence are prima facie true. The said finding is binding on this Tribunal and justifies the ban imposed on AAC. 


180. Furthermore, it is also stated that charges in the said case have already been framed and one of the co- 
accused i.e. Yaseen Malik has already pleaded guilty before the court. Thus, in this view of the matter and on the basis 
of testimony of the NIA witness, the ban on AAC warrants confirmation. 


vi. Reply filed by the Proscribed Organization before the Tribunal 


181. It is submitted that the Organization in their reply filed through its acting General Secretary, have not been 
able to refute any cogent reasons as to why AAC should not be banned by the Central Government. No evidence has 
been placed on record by the Organization to deny the contents of FIRs placed in the notification of the Central 
Government; moreover, the reasons for delay in filing of Chargesheet or non-arrest of the Chairman of AAC and its 
members have already been duly informed to the Tribunal by the Prosecution Witnesses in their respective 
depositions. The Reply of the Banned Organization only highlights the so called social work undertaken by AAC 
through its chairman but does not respond to the cogent material that has been adduced in evidence before the 
Tribunal via contents of Government notification banning the Organization. The said reply also does not deny to Altaf 
Ahmad Shah having been the member of AAC who is charged under NIA registered case with other proscribed 
terrorists for doing secessionist and anti-national activities in the valley of Kashmir. It is further submitted that the 
banned Organization has ‘chosen to’ stay away from participating in the proceedings before the Tribunal and therefore 
the reply filed by the Organisation does not serve any purpose in refuting the cogent grounds and reasons for banning 
AAC by the Central Government. 


182. It is further stated that out of 26 parties forming the conglomerate of APHC, 12 member organisations have 
been banned by the Central Government vide separate notifications under UAPA, 1967 which has already been upheld 
by the respective Tribunals notified from time to time. It is stated that the main objective of several member 
organisations joining APHC was to further the separatist approach and to fulfil the agenda of generating hatred and 
disaffection against India and to severe Jammu & Kashmir from the UOI. Therefore, it shall be correct to submit that 
AAC originated with the above said ideology and continued to hold the same till its ban on 11.03.2025 by the Central 
Government and should also be banned under UAPA for advocating cessionist and secessionist activities in the 
Kashmir Valley. 


vii. Other Anti National Activities 


183. It is stated that the Sealed Cover Documents produced as Exhibit PW-12/4 before the Tribunal establishes the 
fact that AAC through its Chairman and other members have been indulging in radicalizing and brainwashing the 
minds, indoctrinating the people of Jammu & Kashmir through provocative speeches for separation of Jammu and 
Kashmir from UOI. The inputs received from various intel reports will prove that the stand of AAC has always been 
secessionist since inception and continues to carry forward its anti-India ideology through its varied activities 
throughout all these years in the valley of Kashmir. The Intel report will further establish that AAC has always been 
advocating for the establishment of ‘Independent Kashmir” which has also been established through the deposition of 
other PWs before the Ld. Tribunal. 


184. It is also submitted that the witness of the Central Government authorized to depose on behalf of the Ministry 
of Home Affairs (PW-12) which has notified the banning of the said Organization is a competent officer who has been 
involved in the drafting of the said notification no. 8.0. 1115 E dated 11.03.2025 based on the various Intel inputs 
received to the Central Government from time to time and was personally involved in the making and movement of 
the draft notification and the background note for the Cabinet Security meeting on the said issue. 


185. It is submitted that AAC is continuously encouraging a veiled armed insurgency and is openly advocating for 
secession and, therefore banning of AAC is necessary in the interest of national security, sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of India. It is therefore submitted that all the aforesaid witnesses have deposed before this Tribunal in their 
respective testimonies that the ban imposed by the Central Government under the provisions of UAPA is justified and 
that not only from the official record but also on the basis of their personal experience gathered during the course of 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 39 


discharge of their duties as police officers posted in the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir, the concerned officer 
from J&K, the officer deposing from National Investigation Agency and Ministry of Home Affairs have deposed that 
Umar Farooq and members of AAC have been incessantly involved in secessionist and cessionist activities against 
the sovereignty and integrity of the country and have been vociferously advocating and assisting the claim of 
sovereignty of state and non-state actors of Pakistan and POK. 


viii. The Definition of Unlawful Activity Under UAPA 
186. It is stated that the objective behind the enactment of UAPA is as under: 


“An Act to provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and 
associations, [and for dealing with terrorist activities,] and for matters connected therewith.” 


187. It is submitted that the provisions of the aforesaid act came for consideration before the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court and the Hon’ble Supreme Court in judgment rendered in the case of Arup Bhuyan 7. State of Assam, (2023) 8 
SCC 745 has held as under: 


“86. Now let us consider the Preamble to the UAPA, 1967. As per Preamble, the UAPA has been enacted 
to provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and associations 
and dealing with terrorist activities and for matters connected therewith. Therefore the aim and object of 
enactment of the UAPA is also to provide for more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities. 
That is why and to achieve the said object and purpose of effective prevention of certain unlawful 
activities Parliament in its wisdom has provided that where an association is declared unlawful by a 
notification issued under Section 3, a person, who is and continues to be a member of such association 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 2 years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. Therefore, Parliament in its wisdom had thought it fit that once an association is declared unlawful 
after following due procedure as required under Section 3 and subject to the approval by the Tribunal still 
a person continues to be a member of such association is liable to be punished/penalise. ” 


(Emphasis supplied) 


188. It is submitted that the definitions contemplated under UAPA which are relevant for the purpose of present 
proceedings are as under:- 


“Definitions.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “association” means any combination or body of individuals; 


(b) “cession of a part of the territory of India” includes admission of the claim of any foreign country to 
any such part; 


“secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union” includes the assertion of any claim to 
determine whether such part will remain a part of the territory of India; 


XXX XXX XXX 


(०) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or association, means any action taken by such 
individual or association (whether by committing an act or by words, either spoken or written, or by signs 
or by visible representation or otherwise ),— 


(i) which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the cession 
of a part of the territory of India or the secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union, 
or which incites any individual or group of individuals to bring about such cession or secession; or 


(ii) which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of India; or 


(iti) which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India; 
(p) “unlawful association” means any association,— 


(i) which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any 
unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such activity; or 


(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable under section 153A (45 of 1860) 


or section 153B of the Indian Penal Code, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any such 
activity, or of which the members undertake any such activity: 


, 


Provided that nothing contained in sub-clause (ii) shall apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir;’ 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“3. Declaration of an association as unlawful. —(1) If the Central Government is of opinion that any 
association is, or has become, an unlawful association, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare such association to be unlawful. 


(2) Every such notification shall specify the grounds on which it is issued and such other particulars as the 
Central Government may consider necessary: Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall require the 
Central Government to disclose any fact which it considers to be against the public interest to disclose. 


(3) No such notification shall have effect until the Tribunal has, by an order made under section 4, 
confirmed the declaration made therein and the order is published in the Official Gazette: 


Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances exist which render it necessary 
for that Government to declare an association to be unlawful with immediate effect, it may, for reasons to 
be stated in writing, direct that the notification shall, subject to any order that may be made under section 
4, have effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette...... i 


189. It is further submitted that the Declaration of an association to be ‘unlawful’ by the Central Government 
under Section 3 of the said Act is after forming of the opinion that the said association is, or has become unlawful. 
Such a declaration can be issued in respect of an association which is already unlawful or in respect of an association 
which, initially being lawful, has become unlawful. 


190. It is stated that the definition of an ‘unlawful association’ in section 2(1)(p) of the UAPA is in two parts — 
viz. an association being involved in ‘unlawful activity’ and / or an association involved in activity / offences 
punishable under section 153A or section 153B of the IPC. It is submitted that either of the situations comprises of 
three categories i.e. 


i. where the association has for its object any such activities, 
ii. or the association encourages or aids persons to undertake any of such activities or 
iii. where the members of such association undertake such activities. 


Therefore, if the activities of any association fall in any of the aforesaid three categories, such an association will be 
liable to be declared as an unlawful association. 


191. It is submitted that there are substantial evidences on record as per the investigation carried out by different 
investigating agencies (NIA/JKP) to provide that the activities undertaken by AAC under the leadership of Umar 
Farooq “Mirwaiz” were secessionist and cessionist in nature and are accordingly covered under the definition of 
‘unlawful activity’ in Section 2(0) of UAPA. 


ix. Nature of proceedings and standard of proof before the UAPA Tribunal for declaring an association as 
unlawful 


192. In this regard, it is submitted that the standard of proof in civil and criminal proceedings is entirely different, 
i.e. of the preponderance of the probability and proof beyond reasonable doubt, respectively. Reference is made to the 
case of Iqbal Singh Marwah 7. Meenakshi Marwah, (2005) 4 SCC 370 wherein it was inter alia held as under: 


“32.Coming to the last contention that an effort should be made to avoid conflict of findings between the 
civil and criminal Courts, it is necessary to point out that the standard of proof required in the two 
proceedings are entirely different. Civil cases are decided on the basis of preponderance of evidence while in 
acriminal case the entire burden lies on the prosecution and proof beyond reasonable doubt has to be given. 
There is neither any statutory provision nor any legal principle that the findings recorded in one proceeding 
may be treated as final or binding in the other, as both the cases have to be decided on the basis of the 
evidence adduced therein.” 


193. It is submitted that the nature of the present proceedings and the scope of inquiry in the present proceedings 
have been laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jamaat-E-Islami Hind (Supra) in the specific context of the 
provisions of the UAPA. 


194. It is submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court emphasized that Section 4 (1) uses the expression 
“adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful”. Reference was made to 
Section 4 (2) which requires issue of notice in writing to show cause to the association and sub-section (3) which 
mandates inquiry in the manner specified in Section 9 after calling for such information as may be necessary from 
Central Government or from office bearers or members of the association. The Tribunal under Section 4(3) is required 
to adjudicate and make an order, as it may deem fit, either confirming the declaration made in the notification or 
cancelling the same. After interpreting the said provisions of the Act, it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Jamaat-E-Islami Hind (Supra):- 


[भाग I—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 41 


“11.... The entire procedure contemplates an objective determination made on the basis of material placed 
before the Hon’ble Tribunal by the two sides; and the inquiry is in the nature of adjudication of a lis 
between two parties, the outcome of which depends on the weight of the material produced by them. 
Credibility of the material should, ordinarily, be capable of objective assessment. The decision to be made 
by the Hon’ble Tribunal is “whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the Association 
unlawful”. Such a determination requires the Hon’ble Tribunal to reach the conclusion that the material to 
support the declaration outweighs the material against it and the additional weight to support the 
declaration is sufficient to sustain it. The test of greater probability appears to be the pragmatic test 
application in the context.” 


195. It is submitted that the aforesaid ratio was affirmed after making reference to Section 5, which stipulates that 
the Tribunal shall be headed by a Judge of the High Court and proceedings will be deemed to be judicial proceedings 
and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purpose specified. It was accordingly held that the opinion 
given by the Tribunal under Section 5 has binding effect and has been given a characteristic of judicial determination 
as distinguished from an opinion of an Advisory Board under the preventive detention laws. Section 4 of the Act 
requires issue of notice by giving opportunity to show cause to the association. Accordingly, the Supreme Court held 
that the objective findings by the Tribunal must be based upon materials required to support the judicial determination. 
It is submitted that while deciding the reference, the Tribunal does not act or exercise power of judicial review under 
Article 226 of the Constitution of India on whether or not declaration under Section 3(1) should have been made but 
goes into the factual existence of the grounds by objective determination of the lis between the Government and the 
association. 


196. It is stated that referring to the nature of evidence and the procedure which a Tribunal should adopt, it was 
held that the minimum requirements of natural justice must be satisfied to ensure that there is meaningful adjudication. 
However, the requirements of natural justice have to be tailored to safeguard public interest which must outweigh 
every lesser interest. In this connection, reference was made to Section 3 (2) of the Act and Rule 3 (2) and proviso to 
Rule 5 of Rules for withholding and non-disclosure of facts which the Central Government considers against public 
interest and disclosure and non-disclosure of confidential documents and information which the Government 
considers against public interest to disclose. 


197. On the question of nature and type of evidence, which can be relied upon by the Tribunal, the Supreme Court 
referred to Rule 3(1) which stipulates that the Tribunal subject to sub-rule (2) shall follow, as far as practicable, the 
rules of evidence laid down in Indian Evidence Act. Thus, the rules of evidence as far as possible as laid down in the 
Evidence Act, should be followed. In this regard, reference can be made to the following observations in Jamaat-E- 
Islami Hind (Supra):- 


“22....The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a procedure 
would ensure that the decision of the Hon’ble Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in 
controversy after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without abdicating its 
function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a course would satisfy the 
minimum requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, while protecting 
the rights of the association and its members, without jeopardizing the public interest. This would also 
ensure that the process of adjudication is not denuded to its content and the decision ultimately rendered 
by the Hon’ble Tribunal is reached by it on all points in controversy after adjudication and not by mere 
acceptance of the opinion already formed by the Central Government. 


23. In John J. Morrisey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer, the United States Supreme Court, in a 
case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum requirements to be followed, as under : Led pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They include (a) written notice 
of the claimed violations of parole ; (b) disclosure to the parolee of evidence against him; (c ) opportunity 
to be heard in person and to present witnesses and documentary evidence; (d) the right to confront and 
cross-examine adverse witnesses (Unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing 
confrontation); (e) a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a traditional parole board, members of 
which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement by the fact finders as to the 
evidence relied on and reasons for revoking parole. We emphasize there is no thought to equate this 
second stage of parole revocation to a criminal prosecution in any sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the 
process should be flexible enough to consider evidence including letters, affidavits, and other material that 
would not be admissible in n adversary criminal trial”. 


QAXXXXX 
2Q5XXXX 


26.....The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a show-cause notice of existence of 
sufficient cause to justify the declaration must necessarily imply and import into the inquiry, the minimum 
requirement of natural justice to ensure that the decision of the Hon’ble Tribunal is its own opinion, 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


formed on the entire available material, and not a mere imprimatur of the Hon’ble Tribunal affixed to the 
opinion of the Central Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a fair procedure to prevent the vitiating 
element of arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure in a given case, would depend on the materials 
constituting the factual foundation of the notification and the manner in which the Hon’ble Tribunal can 
assess its true worth.This has to be determined by the Hon’ble Tribunal keeping in view the nature of its 
scrutiny, the minimum requirement of natural justice, the fact that the materials in such matters are not 
confined to legal evidence in the strict, sense, and that the scrutiny is not a criminal trial. The Hon’ble 
Tribunal should form its opinion on all the points in controversy after assessing for itself the credibility of 
the material relating to it, even though it may not be disclosed to the association, if the public interest so 
requires. 


(Emphasis Supplied) 


198. It is submitted that a reading of Section 9 of the Act read with Section 3(1) of the UAPA makes it clear that 
the Tribunal shall follow the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure for investigations of the claims 
before it. The opinion formed by the Tribunal will be governed by the principles applicable to Civil Law and 
accordingly, the principles of preponderance of probabilities apply and not proof beyond reasonable doubt. In Jamaat- 
E-Islami Hind (Supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has also observed that the test of greater probability will apply to 


i) the proceedings before the Tribunal is in the nature of /is between two parties; 

ii) the proceedings are governed by the Code of Civil Procedure and the principles are applicable to civil in law. 
ili) the Tribunal is to adopt a procedure conforming to minimum requirement of natural justice. 

iv) the Tribunal shall follow as far as practicable the rules laid down in the Evidence Act. However, the material 


need not be confined to legal evidence in strict sense. 


199. It is submitted that the ingredients of ‘unlawful activity’ as defined under Section 2(0) of the said Act 
requires the objective consideration of the Tribunal to reach on the conclusion of declaring an association as 
“unlawful’ under the UAPA Act. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jamaat-E-Islami Hind (Supra) at page 441 has held 
as under: 


“9. Clauses (f) and (g) of Section 2 contain definitions of “unlawful activity” and “unlawful association” 
respectively. An “unlawful activity”, defined in clause (f), means “any action taken” of the kind specified 
therein and having the consequence mentioned. In other words, “any action taken” by such individual or 
association constituting an “unlawful activity” must have the potential specified in the definition. 
Determination of these facts constitutes the foundation for declaring an association to be unlawful under 
sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Act. Clause (g) defines “unlawful association” with reference to 
“unlawful activity” in sub-clause (i) thereof, and in sub-clause (ii) the reference is to the offences punishable 
under Section 153-A or Section 153-B of the Penal Code, 1860. In sub-clause (ii), the objective 
determination is with reference to the offences punishable under Section 153-A or Section 153-B of the IPC 
while in sub-clause (i) it is with reference to “unlawful activity” as defined in clause (f). These definitions 
make it clear that the determination of the question whether any association is, or has become, an 
unlawful association to justify such declaration under sub-section (1) of Section 3 must be based on an 
objective decision; and the determination should be that “any action taken” by such association 
constitutes an “unlawful activity” which is the object of the association or the object is any activity 
punishable under Section 153-A or Section 153-B IPC. It is only on the conclusion so reached in an 
objective determination that a declaration can be made by the Central Government under sub-section (1) 
of Section 3.” 


(Emphasis supplied) 


200. Accordingly, the decision of the Central Government to declare AAC as ‘unlawful association’ is entirely on 
the documentary evidences and testimonies of the witnesses/protected witnesses filed during the course of 
investigation by different Investigating Agencies as stated in the above paragraphs. 


x. Requisite evidence has come on record to confirm the notification declaring AAC as an unlawful association 
to justify ‘‘sufficient cause’’ under Section 4 of UAPA. 


201. It is submitted that as per the mandate of Section 4 of the UAPA, the jurisdiction of this Tribunal is to 
adjudicate whether or not there is “Sufficient Cause” available with the Central Government to ban the organization 
in question. It is submitted that this Tribunal cannot enter into the arena of the discussion that whether the documents 
produced can stand judicial scrutiny during the trial or not. Any procedural irregularities or defects in material 
adduced before this Tribunal are to be tested by the concerned learned Trial Court within the parameters of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 and other relevant laws. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 43 


202. It is submitted that the jurisdiction of this Tribunal is to satisfy itself whether these documents can be relied 
upon to ascertain “sufficiency of cause” and whether the agencies responsible for the enforcement of law and order 
could or could not have ignored the same for recommending suitable action under the UAPA. 


203. In the submission of the Central Government for the purpose of assessing the sufficiency of the cause, this 
Tribunal has to holistically look into the entire materials / incidents. If the material/incidents are relatable acts of 
commission of unlawful activity, secession or “cession of a part of the territory of India” on the anvil of 
preponderance of probability, then the ban is justified and is required to be confirmed. 


204. It is submitted that the Central Government has led sufficient and cogent material and evidences to 
demonstrate that there was sufficient material available with the central government to come to form an opinion that 
AAC and its associates were indulging in unlawful activities. It is submitted that the said material clearly satisfies the 
test of subjective satisfaction arrived on objective consideration of the material. 


205. It is further respectfully submitted that the law does not require that the cases which should form the basis of 
opinion formed by the central government should not be proximate to the date of the decision or there should be ‘X’ 
number of cases to prove and association to be an unlawful association. It is submitted that even one case may be 
sufficient. It is submitted that there have been large number of cases, as enumerated above, in which AAC and the 
other associations have been found indulging in unlawful activities which have been mentioned in the Background 
Note and evidence pertaining to the same has already been adduced before this Tribunal. 


206. In this view of the matter, it is the submission of the central government that more than sufficient 
material/cause has come on record for justifying confirmation of the ban. It is submitted that delay in the investigation, 
will have no bearing in the present proceedings as the degree of evidence required before this Tribunal and the 
adjudication thereon is to be based on the principles of preponderance of probabilities. 


207. Furthermore, it is also submitted that the evidence adduced by the Central Government has not been refuted 
on any ground whatsoever. As such, in view of non-rebuttal of the evidence adduced by the Central Government by 
any member/erstwhile member of AAC opposing the ban, the Notification No. $.0.1115(E) published in the Gazette 
of India, Extraordinary, dated 117 March, 2025, declaring the Awami Action Committee (AAC) as an ‘unlawful 
association’ under Sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the UAPA is liable to be confirmed. 


xi.Claim of privilege for producing documents in sealed cover 


208. The Central Government places its claim of privilege for the documents filed in sealed cover under Section 
123 of Evidence Act read with Section 3(2) of the UAP Rules, which are reproduced as under:- 
EVIDENCE ACT, 1872 


“$.123. Evidence as to affairs of State —No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from 
unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer at the 
head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks fit.” 


BHARTIYA SAKSHYA ADHINIYAM, 2023 


“Section 129. Evidence as to affairs of State. —No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived 
from unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer 
at the head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks fit. 


THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) RULES, 1968 


3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence .-(1) In holding an inquiry under sub-section (3) 
of section 4 or disposing of any application under sub-section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section 
5, the Tribunal or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), 
follow, as far as practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). 


[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), where any books of 
account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge by 
the Central Government and such books of account or other documents are claimed by that Government to 
be of a confidential nature then, the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall 
not,- 


(a) make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the proceedings before it; or 


(b) allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books of account or other 
documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings before it.]” 


XXX XXX XXX 


5. Documents which should accompany a reference to the Tribunal—Every reference made to the 
Tribunal under sub-section (1) of section 4 shall be accompanied by— 


44 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


209. 


210. 


(i) a copy of the notification mod e undr sub-section (1) of section 3, and 


(ii) all the facts on which the grounds specified in the said notification are based: Provided that 
nothing In this rue shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact to the Tribunal which 
that Government considers against the public interest to disclose.” 


(Emphasis Supplied) 
It is submitted that from a bare reading of the aforesaid provisions, the following propositions emerge: - 


(i) Rule 3(2) read with Rule 5 provides that the tribunal shall not make the documents etc. part of the 
proceedings or allow inspection if the said documents are claimed to be of confidential nature; this 
Tribunal being a creature of statute would therefore be bound by the mandate of Rule 3(2) which are 
expressly tailormade for the purpose of functioning of the Tribunal; 


(ii) Rule is silent as to in what manner and format or content, said claim of confidentiality is to be made; 


(iii) In absence of any format prescribed under the UAP Act and the Rules framed thereunder, reference 
will have to be made to the general civil law; 


(iv) Claim of privilege under the general civil law is provided under S. 123 of the Evidence Act. 


(५) S. 123 of the Evidence Act provides that claim of privilege i.r.o unpublished official records relating 
to any affairs of State has to be made with the permission of the officer at the head of the 
department concerned. 


(vi) Rule 3(1) provides that the tribunal shall follow the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 as far as practicable; 


(vii) Thus, the procedural vigour of form and content of Evidence Act will not be applicable in the 
proceedings before the tribunal — The principles analogous to the Evidence Act or for that matter 
CPC will be applicable; 


(viii) Analogical principle underlining section 123 of the Evidence Act is that the claim of privilege 
should be made with the permission of the head of the department. The head of the department 
should examine the document, apply his mind and then mark the documents disclosure of which 
would not be in public interest; 


(ix) Once the evidence comes on record that the head of the department has examined the document, 
applied his mind and then has marked the documents for claiming privilege, any direction issued by 
him to any officer subordinate to him to move the claim of privilege will be sufficient compliance of 
Section 123 r/w Rule 3 (1) & (2). 


Reliance in this regard is placed on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jamaat-E-Islami Hind 


(Supra) wherein it has been held as under: 


"21...the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Act itself permits the Central Government to withhold 
the disclosure off acts which it considers to be against the public interest to disclose. Similarly, Rule 3(2) 
and the proviso to Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 also permit nondisclosure of 
confidential documents and information which the Government considers against the public interest to 
disclose." [Para 19] " 


22. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine in nature 
and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued confidentiality in 
public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such information, and, may be, also full 
particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. The scheme of the Act and the procedure for 
inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder provide for maintenance of confidentiality, whenever 
required in public interest. However, the non-disclosure of sensitive information and evidence to the 
association and its office-bearers, whenever justified in public interest, does not necessarily imply its non- 
disclosure to the Tribunal as well. In such cases where the Tribunal is satisfied that non-disclosure of such 
information to the association or its office- bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non- disclosure to 
the association or its office-bearers, but in order to perform its task of adjudication as required by the Act, 
the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and 
satisfying itself that it can safely act on the same. In such a situation, the Tribunal can devise a suitable 
procedure whereby it can itself examine and test the credibility of such material before it decides to accept 
the same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. The 
materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a procedure would ensure 
that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in controversy after assessing the 
credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without abdicating its function by merely acting on the 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 45 


ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a course would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural 
justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, while protecting the rights of the association and its 
members, without jeopardising the public interest. This would also ensure that the process of adjudication 
is not denuded of its content and the decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by it on all 
points in controversy after adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion already formed by the 
Central Government. 


24. In Paul Ivan Birzonv.Edward S. King[469 F 2d 1241, 1244-45 (1972)] placing reliance on 
Morrissey [408 US 471 : 33 L Ed 2d 484 (1972)] , while dealing with a similar situation, when confidential 
information had to be acted on, it was indicated that the credibility issue could be resolved by the Board 
retaining confidentiality of the information but assessing the credibility itself, and a modified procedure 
was indicated as under: 


“|... the board was required to decide whether it would believe the informants or the parolee and his 
witnesses. The infirmity that we see in the hearing and determination by the parole board is that it 
resolved the credibility issue solely on the basis of the State report, without itself taking the 
statements from the informants. Thus the board had no way of knowing how reliable the informants 
were and had no real basis on which to resolve the credibility issue against the parolee... 


We do not mean to intimate that the board should have taken testimony from the informants at the 
hearing and given the parolee the opportunity to cross-examine. What we do mean is that the board 
should have received the information directly from the informants (although not necessarily in the 
presence of the parolee), instead of relying solely on the State report. The board could then have 
reached its own conclusions about the relative reliability of the informants’ statements and those of 
the parolee and his witnesses. 


Similarly, the board could then have made its own decision about how realistic were the claims of 
potential danger to the informants or to State parole officers if their identity was disclosed, instead 
of placing exclusive reliance on the State report. Thus, we hold that, in relying exclusively on the 
written synopsis in the State report, which was the only evidence of a parole violation, in the face of 
the parolee's denial and his presentation of the testimony of other witnesses, the revocation of Satz's 
parole was fundamentally unfair to him and was a denial of due process of law.” 


25. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its source, in 
public interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the confidential information 
for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the conflicting evidence of the other side. This 
modified procedure satisfies the minimum requirements of natural justice and also retains the basic 
element of an adjudicatory process which involves objective determination of the factual basis of the action 
taken." 


211. A bare perusal of the aforesaid judgment which has interpreted the provisions of UAPA manifests that there 
is neither any form nor content for claiming privilege. The said judgment instead provides for a modified procedure 
and holds that in cases of privilege the Tribunal has to itself look into the content and satisfy itself that that non- 
disclosure of such information to the association or its office-bearers is in public interest. The said judgment further 
mandates that for this purpose the “Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure whereby it can itself examine and test the 
credibility of such material before it decides to accept the same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for 
declaring the association to be unlawful.” 


212. Thus, it is the submission of the UOI as per the provisions of UAPA and the Rules framed thereunder, there 
is no set format in which claim of privilege is to made and further as per Jamaat-E-Islami Hind (Supra), this 
Tribunal can device its own procedure to look into the documents on which privilege is claimed and adjudicate 
whether it falls within a class of documents disclosure of which will not be in public interest. 


213. It is submitted that the claim of privilege by the UOI for the documents placed is made as the documents are 
also of such a nature that the non-disclosure of which are in public interest. In State of U.P. v. Raj Narain, (1975) 4 
SCC 428, the Constitutional Bench of the Hon’ble Supreme Court had upheld the claim of privilege by the 
Government while holding as under: 


“41, The several decisions to which reference has already been made establish that the foundation of the 
law behind Sections 123 and 162 of the Evidence Act is the same as in English law. It is that injury to 
public interest is the reason for the exclusion from disclosure of documents whose contents if disclosed 
would injure public and national interest. Public interest which demands that evidence be withheld is to be 
weighed against the public interest in the administration of justice that_courts should have the fullest 
possible access to all relevant materials. When public interest outweighs the latter, the evidence cannot be 
admitted. The Court will proprio_motu exclude evidence the production of which is contrary _to_ public 
interest. It is in public interest that confidentiality shall be safeguarded. The reason is that such documents 
become subject to privilege by reason of their contents. Confidentiality is not a head of privilege. It is a 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


consideration to bear in mind. It is not that the contents contain material which it would be damaging to 
the national interest to divulge but rather that the documents would be of class which demand protection. 
(See Rogers v. Home Secretary at p. 405). To illustrate the class of documents would embrace Cabinet 
papers, Foreign Office despatches, papers regarding the security of the State and high level inter- 
departmental minutes. In the ultimate analysis the contents of the document are so described that it could 
be seen at once that in the public interest the documents are to be withheld. (See Merricks v. Nott 


Bower [(1964) 1 AER 717]).” 


(Emphasis Supplied) 


214. It is stated that this concept of public interest is taken into account even in the criminal proceedings qua the 
accused, whereas in juxtaposition, the present matter stands at a much higher pedestal and involves the issue of 
sovereignty and integrity of the country. 


215. It is further stated, in the cases concerning national security, sovereignty and integrity, the tribunal has to 
interpret and analyze the material differently. It must also take into account the fact that the decisions taken by the 
Central Government in such manner are based on highly sensitive information and inputs. The effects of such 
decisions are not confined to the boundaries of the nation. In fact, in the present scenario when the terrorist activities 
and national insurgency is on rise, the global boundaries have become meaningless. The insurgency in a State or 
activities of any association which is suspected to be unlawful has bearing effect on the credibility of the nation itself. 
Referene is made to Raj Kumar Singh v. State of Bihar, (1986) 4 SCC 407 in a case of preventive detention, relevant 
portion is as under: 


“The executive authority is not the sole judge of what is required for national security or public order. But 
the court cannot substitute its decision if the executive authority or the appropriate authority acts on 
proper materials and reasonably and rationally comes to that conclusion even though a conclusion with 
which the court might not be in agreement. It is not for the court to put itself in the position of the detaining 
authority and to satisfy itself that untested facts reveal a path of crime provided these facts are relevant. 
See in this connection the observations of O. Chinnappa Reddy, J. in Vijay Narain Singh case [(1984) 3 
SCC 14 : 1984 SCC (Cri) 361 : AIR 1984 SC 1334 : (1984) 3 SCR 435] at p. 440 and 441. (SCC p. 19, 
para 1)\ 346. Similarly, in the case of Union of India vs. Rajasthan High Court, (2017) 2 SCC 599: 2016 
SCC Online 1468 —.... It was not for the Court in the exercise of its power of judicial review to suggest a 
policy which it considered fit. The formulation of suggestions by the High Court for framing a National 
Security Policy travelled far beyond the legitimate domain of judicial review. Formulation of such a policy 
is based on information and inputs which are not available to the court. The court is not an expert in such 
matters. Judicial review is concerned with the legality of executive action and the court can interfere only 
where there is a breach of law or a violation of the Constitution.” 


216. Reliance has also been placed upon Ex-Armymen's Protection Services (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (2014) 5 
SCC 409, wherein it has been inter alia held as under: 


“15. It is difficult to define in exact terms as to what is “national security”. However, the same would 
generally include socio-political stability, territorial integrity, economic solidarity and strength, ecological 
balance, cultural cohesiveness, external peace, etc. 16. What is in the interest of national security is not a 
question of law. It is a matter of policy. It is not for the court to decide whether something is in the interest 
of the State or not. It should be left to the executive. 


217. It is stated that the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Digi Cable Network (India) (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (2019) 
4 SCC 451 had also strongly relied upon Ex-Armymen’s (Supra), relevant portion is as under: 


“15. In somewhat similar circumstances, this Court while repelling this submission laid down the following 
principles of law in Ex-Armymen's Protection Services (P) Ltd. v. Union of India [Ex-Armymen's 
Protection Services (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (2014) 5 SCC 409] in paras 16 and 17 which read as under: 
(SCC p. 416) 


“16. What is in the interest of national security is not a question of law. It is a matter of policy. It is not for 
the court to decide whether something is in the interest of the State or not. It should be left to the executive. 
To quote Lord Hoffman in Secy. of State for Home Deptt. v. Rehman [Secy. of State for Home 
Deptt. v. Rehman, (2003) I AC 153 : (2001) 3 WLR 877 (HL)] : (AC p. 192C) 


30. ... [in the matter] of national security is not a question of law. It is a matter of judgment and policy. 
Under the Constitution of the United Kingdom and most other countries, decisions as to whether 
something is or is not in the interests of national security are not a matter for judicial decision. They are 
entrusted to the executive.’ 


17. Thus, in a situation of national security, a party cannot insist for the strict observance of the principles of 
natural justice. In such cases, it is the duty of the court to read into and provide for statutory exclusion, if not 
expressly provided in the rules governing the field. Depending on the facts of the particular case, it will 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 47 


however be open to the court to satisfy itself whether there were justifiable facts, and in that regard, the 
court is entitled to call for the files and see whether it is a case where the interest of national security is 
involved. Once the State is of the stand that the issue involves national security, the court shall not disclose 
the reasons to the affected party.” 


218. In the present case, it is respectfully submitted that the documents for which claim of privilege, by their very 
nature, are confidential and sensitive in nature and, therefore, cannot be supplied as a public document. 


219. It is submitted that the document forms part of the evidence collected by the intelligence agencies which 
pertains to secessionist and unlawful activities of the Banned Organizations and those associated with it. The said 
documents are confidential and secret in nature and the same can be verified by the Tribunal only. 


220. It is submitted that the rigors of Madhayamam Broadcasting Ltd. Union of India, 2023 SCC Online 366 
cannot be strictly applied in the present case as the facts and circumstances for the constitution of the present Tribunal 
is different from the issue that emerged in aforesaid cases; therefore the claim of privilege sought by the Union in the 
present case cannot be denied keeping in view the nature of sensitive information contained in the intel reports, the 
disclosure of which could affect the larger public interest of the nation by jeopardizing the safety and sovereignty of 
the country. 


221. Reliance is placed on para 84 of Madhayamam (Supra) to state that while balancing the right of the 
execution claiming privileged of sealed documents on one hand and the principle of natural justice on the other, the 
Supreme Court held as under: 


“ 84. The contention of the_respondent_that_the_ judgment of this Court _in Ex-Armymen's Protection 
Services (supra) held that the principles of natural justice shall be excluded when concerns of national 
security are involved is erroneous.The principle that was expounded in that case was that the principles of 
natural justice may be excluded when on the facts of the case, national security concerns outweigh the duty 
of fairness. Thus, national security is one of the few grounds on which the right to a reasonable procedural 
guarantee _may be restricted. The mere involvement of issues concerning national security would not 
preclude the state's duty to act fairly. If the State discards its duty to act fairly, then it must 
be justified before the court on the facts of the case. Firstly, the State must satisfy the Court that national 
security concerns are involved. Secondly, the State must satisfy the court that an abrogation of the 
principle(s) of natural justice is justified. These two standards that have emerged from the jurisprudence 
abroad resemble the proportionality standard. The first test resembles the legitimate aim prong, and the 
second test of justification resembles the necessity and the balancing prongs.” 


222. It is submitted that decision of the previous Tribunals constituted under section 4 of the UAPA in which the 
claim of privilege by the Central Govt had been allowed holding that the same satisfied the requirement of Section 
123 of the Evidence Act have persuasive precedential value before this Tribunal in view of the provisions of Section 
5(7) of the UAPA which provide that the proceedings before this Tribunal are judicial proceedings. The UOI therefore 
places reliance on the following:- 


1. Part-VIII of Judgment of Hon’ble Justice Mukta Gupta Para No. 8.1 to 8.12 (Internal Page Nos. 55 to 58) in 
SIMI MATTER. 

2. Paragraphs no. 326 to 330 of Judgment of Hon’ble Justice Dinesh Kumar Sharma in PFI MATTER. 

3. Paragraphs no. 325 of Judgment of in MLJK MATTER. 


xii. Hostile environment prevailing in territory of J & K creating hurdles in conclusion of cases against the 
separatist and militants 


223. It is submitted that as it has been stated in the testimonies of various witnesses, the delay which has occurred 
in investigation and trial of the offences, committed in the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir, due to extremely 
hostile environment which prevailed therein. It is submitted that it is matter of public knowledge that since last more 
than 3 decades, the erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir has been adversely affected by the acts and deeds of the 
Separatist groups and its leaders. 


224. It is submitted that from 1989 to 2016, the situation in the erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir remained 
volatile and disturbed due to the circumstances created by terrorist groups camouflaged as Separatist Groups/ Political 
Parties or self-styled political leaders who instigated and provoked the general public at large against the lawfully 
established governments with the help of foreign state and non-state actors having interests inimical to the interest of 
the country. 


225. It is submitted that such acts, at times, were direct acts of external aggression; and at times, were acts 
committed to create armed rebellion within the territory of erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir. 


226. It is submitted that all the aforesaid facts have been referred to in the concurring opinion of Hon'ble 
Mr. Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul in para 31 and the Epilogue recorded in para 113-135 in the judgment rendered by 
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in In Re: Article 370 of The Constitution, 2023 INSC 1058/2023 SCC OnLine SC 1647. 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


227. It is submitted that the Separatist leaders and their activists had created such terror in the minds of public that 
the general public, which even did not support their cause, feared to oppose them or to report to the police against 
various incidents. The general public even feared to depose or give evidence against the said separatist leaders and 
hence led to a non-cooperative atmosphere for the police investigating agencies in the cases registered against the said 
separatist organizations or its leaders. 


228. It is submitted that the situation was particularly bad from the Law-and-Order point of view in the years 
2008, 2009, 2010, 2016 during which years, the cross-border terrorist organisations in connivance with the separatist 
leaders and their activists instigated and led the general masses into mass rioting leading to un-favorable situations. 


229. It is submitted that for around a decade, due to some socio-political reasons which had larger implications, 
the investigation in the FIRs against the separatist organizations and its leaders could not proceed, moreover the 
witnesses deterred to deposed against the said leaders and organizations. 


230. It is submitted that post re-organization of the erstwhile J&K State, security restrictions had to be imposed for 
some duration to ensure peace and maintain public order and to restrict the adverse influence of these separatist 
leaders on the common masses, which also slowed down the pace of investigation of the cases registered against the 
separatists. 


231. It is submitted that the investigation was further slowed thereafter by the covid pandemic, which had brought 
to a standstill all the routine activities. A complete lockdown in the entire nation was imposed and hence the 
investigation in the cases registered against AAC with its chairman and members in the state of Jammu & Kashmir 
could not be processed in the pace, it should have been. 


232. It is submitted that the following timelines and the averments made will manifest the bonafide reasons for 
delay which have accrued till date in the ongoing cases registered against AAC and its leaders: 


233. It is submitted that the situation in territory of Jammu and Kashmir was so adverse, that from 1990, it led to 
loss of thousands of lives and injuries to several civilians and security forces personnel. As per MHA annual report of 
2016-17; around 13936 civilians and 5043 security forces personnel have lost their lives up to 31.12.2016. The 
following is a table of the said data: 


INCIDENTS OF CIVILIANS SECURITY TERRORISTS 
TERRORIST KILLED FORCES KILLED KILLED 
VIOLENCE 


It is submitted that this chart forms part of record in the NIA Chargesheet at para 17.2.1 @ Pg. 362. 


234. It is submitted that the NIA in its Chargesheet filed on 18.01.2018 in RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI vide paragraphs 
17.2-17.2.5 has highlighted the magnitude of Secessionist and Terrorist Activities in the Kashmir Valley and nexus of 
AAC members and cross border terrorist organization in the Kashmir Valley. The investigation carried out by NIA 
therefore corroborates the hostile environment in the State of Jammu and Kashmir for a long period of time which 
could not let the Investigating Agency to complete the investigations in respective FIRs. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 49 


235. It is stated that the above facts depict ground level situation along with the timeline (1990-2021), efforts 
taken by the govt. in the State of Jammu & Kashmir indicating that there has been continuous violence by the 
secessionists. The separatist leaders who had staunch support from cross border and some terrorist organizations had 
created such an adverse situation in the valley that despite efforts, investigation of the cases could not be concluded in 
a time bound manner. 


236. Moreover, PW-05 and PW-9 in the present proceedings before the Tribunal had clarified during their 
deposition that the reason Mirwaiz Umar Farooq was not arrested in connection with FIR No. 128/2010 and FIR No 
56/2011 respectively was on account of the fact that he resided in an area which was a stronghold of secessionist 
leaders and their sympathizers. Effecting arrest in such an area would have led to a law-and-order situation. Also, 
PW-08 asserted in his deposition that one of the wings of the association Awami Action Committee is Al -Umar 
Mujjahideen which is a notified terrorist organization under the UAPA. Some of its members are also notified as 
terrorists under Section 35(1) of the UAPA. 


237. It is submitted from a bare perusal of the facts stated in the NIA Chargesheet read with the facts stated in the 
judgment of the Hon'ble supreme court rendered in Re: Article 370 of The Constitution (Supra), it can be clearly 
inferred that prior to coming into force the Jammu and Kashmir Re-Organization Act, 2019, the various successive 
governments/authorities from 2004 -2019 for the reasons recorded in the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court did 
not take any stern actions against the separatist. The said authorities rather than concentrating on prosecuting the 
criminal acts of separatist and secessionist forces and indulged in dialogue. It is submitted that it appears that due to 
such non-conducive and hostile environment, the investigations/prosecutions could not reach to its logical 
conclusions, which are now taken up with a sense of urgency and seriousness post coming into force Jammu and 
Kashmir Re-Organization Act, 2019. 


238. It is therefore submitted that despite several FIRs being lodged against the chairman and other members of 
AAC, its members/activists/sympathizers are still active and are indulging in unlawful activities as defined in the 
UAPA. They are indulging in anti-national activities posing a serious threat to the sovereignty and integrity of India, 
peace, communal harmony, internal Security and maintenance of secular fabric of the Indian Society. If the AAC is 
not banned again, the activists and sympathizers of AAC will again pose a serious threat to the communal harmony, 
internal security & integrity of the country. 


239. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances it is submitted that the notification No. S.O. 1115 (E); dated 
March 11", 2025, issued by the Central Government declaring AAC as an unlawful association is liable to be 
confirmed as there is sufficient evidence on record justifying the ban on AAC. 


240. It is submitted that the assertions and averments of 08 pubic witnesses even otherwise specifically state that 
they are not and never had been members of the association. It is stated that in that view of the matter, their knowledge 
of the functioning and ideology of the association can at best be a truncated outside view bereft of any comprehensive 
knowledge and the affinity and motive of so-called public witnesses also has not been established before the Ld. 
tribunal and therefore, their affidavits have no relevance to the determination of sufficient cause as to the unlawful 
activity of the Organisation. 


X. DELIBERATION ON UOI’s CLAIM FOR PRIVILEGE 


241. On 11.08.2025, when Mr. Rajeev Kumar, Joint Secretary (Counter Terrorism and Counter Radicalization), 
MHA (PW-12) was examined on behalf of the UOI, the said witness produced original files containing the central 
intelligence reports/inputs pertaining to the concerned Association, in a sealed cover for the perusal of this Tribunal 
(Ex.PW-12/3). Learned counsel for the UOI, advanced arguments for claiming privilege in respect of the documents 
produced in sealed cover. 


242. The claim of privilege / confidentiality in respect of the documents disclosure whereof is injurious to public 
interest is specifically envisaged in the UAP Rules. Rule 3 of the said UAP Rules, is in the following terms:- 


“3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence —(1) In holding an enquiry under sub-section 
(3) of Section 4 or disposing of any application under sub-section (4) of Section 7 or sub-section (8) of 
Section 8, the Tribunal or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule 
(2), follow, as far as practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 
1872). 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), where any books of 
account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge by 
the Central Government and such books of account or other documents are claimed by that Government to 
be a confidential nature then, the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall not, 


(a) make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the proceedings before it; or 


(b) allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books of account 
or other documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings before it.”’ 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


243. It can be seen that the Rule 3 (2) starts with a non-obstante clause providing that notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, where any books of account or other documents are sought to be 
produced by the Central Government and these documents are claimed to be of a confidential nature, then the Tribunal 
shall not make such documents a part of the records of the proceedings before it or allow inspection of or grant a copy 
of the same to any person other than the parties to the proceedings before it. 


244. Rule 5 of the UAP Rules provides for the documents which should accompany a reference to the Tribunal 
viz. a copy of the notification and all facts on which grounds specified in the notification are based. It further provides 
that nothing in the said Rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact to the Tribunal which it 
considers against public interest to disclose. The said rule is in the following terms:- 


“5. Documents which should accompany a reference to the Tribunal. — Every reference made to 
the Tribunal under sub-section (1) of Section 4 shall be accompanied by — 


(i) a copy of the notification made under sub-section (1) of Section 3, and 
(ii) all the facts on which the grounds specified in the said notification are based: 


Provided that nothing in this rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact to 
the Tribunal which that Government considers against the public interest to disclose.” 


245. The aforementioned provisions and the requirement of maintaining confidentiality of certain documents 
specifically came to be considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra), wherein it was 
held as under:- 


“22. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an_association may quite often be clandestine in nature 
and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued confidentiality in 
public interest. In such 4 situation, disclosure of the source of such information, and, may be, also full 
particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. The scheme of the Act and the procedure for 
inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder provide for maintenance_of confidentiality, whenever 
required in public interest. However, the non-disclosure of sensitive information and evidence to the 
association and its office-bearers, whenever justified in public interest, does not necessarily imply its non- 
disclosure to the Tribunal as well. In such cases where the Tribunal is satisfied that non-disclosure of such 
information to the association or its office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non-disclosure to 
the association or its office-bearers, but in order to perform its task of adjudication as required by the Act, 
the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and 
satisfying itself that it can safely act on the same. In such_a situation, the Tribunal can devise a suitable 
procedure whereby it can itself examine and test the credibility of such material before it decides to accept 
the same for determining the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. The 
materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a procedure would ensure 
that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in controversy after assessing the 
credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without abdicating its function by merely acting on the 
ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a course would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural 
justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, while protecting the rights of the association and its 
members, without jeopardising the public interest. This would also ensure that the process of adjudication 
is not denuded of its content and the decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by it on all 
points in controversy after adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion already formed by the 
Central Government. 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer the United States Supreme Court, in a 
case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum requirements to be followed, as under: (L Ed pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They include (a) written 
notice of the claimed violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of evidence against him; (c) 
opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and documentary evidence; (d) the right 
to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses (unless the hearing officer specifically finds good 
cause for not allowing confrontation); (e) a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a 
traditional parole board, members of which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a 
written statement by the fact finders as to the evidence relied on and reasons for revoking parole. 
We emphasise there is no thought to equate this second stage of parole revocation to a criminal 
prosecution in any sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the process should be flexible enough to consider 
evidence including letters, affidavits, and other material that would not be admissible in an 
adversary criminal trial.” 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 51 


24. In Paul Ivan Barzun v. Edward S. King placing reliance on Morrissey, while dealing with a similar 
situation, when confidential information had to be acted on, it was indicated that the credibility issue could 
be resolved by the Board retaining confidentiality of the information but assessing the credibility itself, and 
a modified procedure was indicated as under: 


“... the board was required to decide whether it would believe the informants or the parolee and his 
witnesses. The infirmity that we see in the hearing and determination by the parole board is that it 
resolved the credibility issue solely on the basis of the State report, without itself taking the 
statements from the informants. Thus the board had no way of knowing how reliable the informants 
were and had no real basis on which to resolve the credibility issue against the parolee.... 


We do not mean to intimate that the board should have taken testimony from the informants at the 
hearing and given the parolee the opportunity to cross-examine. What we do mean is that the board 
should have received the information directly from the informants (although not necessarily in the 
presence of the parolee), instead of relying solely on the State report. The board could then have 
reached its own conclusions about the relative reliability of the informants’ statements and those of 
the parolee and his witnesses. 


Similarly, the board could then have made its own decision about how realistic were the claims of 
potential danger to the informants or to State parole officers if their identity was disclosed, instead 
of placing exclusive reliance on the State report. Thus, we hold that, in relying exclusively on the 
written synopsis in the State report, which was the only evidence of a parole violation, in the face of 
the parolee's denial and his presentation of the testimony of other witnesses, the revocation of 
Satz ’s parole was fundamentally unfair to him and was a denial of due process of law.”’ 


25. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its source, in public 
interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the confidential information for the 
purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the conflicting evidence of the other side. This 
modified procedure satisfies the minimum requirements of natural justice and also retains the basic 
element of an adjudicatory process which involves objective determination of the factual basis of the action 
taken. 


26. An authorised restriction saved by Article 19(4) on the freedom conferred by Article 19(1)(c) of 
the Constitution has to be reasonable. In this statute, provision is made for the notification to become 
effective on its confirmation by a Tribunal constituted by a sitting High Court Judge, on adjudication, after 
a show-cause notice to the association, that sufficient cause exists for declaring it to be unlawful. The 
provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a show-cause notice, of existence of sufficient cause to 
justify the declaration must necessarily imply and import into the inquiry, the minimum requirement of 
natural justice to ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is its own opinion, formed on the entire available 
material, and not a mere imprimatur of the Tribunal affixed to the opinion of the Central Government. 
Judicial scrutiny implies a fair procedure to prevent the vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the fair 
procedure in a given case, would depend on the materials constituting the factual foundation of the 
notification and the manner in which the Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to be determined by 
the Tribunal keeping in view the nature of its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of natural justice, the fact 
that the materials in such matters are not confined to legal evidence in the strict sense, and that the 
scrutiny is not a criminal trial. The Tribunal should form its opinion on all the points in controversy after 
assessing for itself the credibility of the material relating to it, even though it may not be disclosed to the 
association, if the public interest so requires. 


27. It follows that, ordinarily, the material on which the Tribunal can place reliance for deciding the 
existence of sufficient cause to support the declaration, must be of the kind which is capable of judicial 
scrutiny. In this context, the claim of privilege on the ground of public interest by the Central Government 
would be permissible and the Tribunal is empowered to devise a procedure by which it can satisfy itself of 
the credibility of the material without disclosing the same to the association, when public interest so 
requires. The requirements of natural justice can be suitably modified by the Tribunal to examine the 
material itself in the manner it considers appropriate, to assess its credibility without disclosing the same 
to the association. This modified procedure would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice and 
judicial scrutiny. The decision would then be that of the Tribunal itself.” 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


246. The High Court of Andhra Pradesh in Deendar Anjuman vs. Government of India, 2001 SCC OnLine AP 
663 after applying the test laid down in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra) held that the entire material available on 
record itself need not be published or made available to the aggrieved person but what is required is disclosure of 
reasons and the grounds. Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under:- 


“19. The expression “for reasons to be stated in writing” did not necessarily mean that the entire 
material available on record itself is to be published or made available to the aggrieved person. What is 
required is disclosure of reasons. The grounds must be disclosed. The notification issued under sub-section 
(1) of Section 3 alone is required to be referred to the Tribunal “for the purpose of adjudicating whether or 
not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” The Tribunal after such reference is 
required to issue notice to the affected association to show cause, why the association should not be 
declared unlawful. The Tribunal is required to hold an enquiry in the manner specified in Section 9 and 
after calling for such further information as it may consider necessary from the Central Government or 
from the association and then decide whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association 
to be unlawful. The Tribunal is require “to adjudicate whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring 
the association unlawful.” As held by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind v. Union of India* the 
Tribunal is required to weigh the material on which the notification under sub-section (1) of Sec. 3 is 
issued by the Central Government after taking into account the cause shown by the Association in reply to 
the notice issued to it and by taking into consideration such further information which it may call for, to 
decide the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the action to be unlawful. The Tribunal is required to 
objectively determine the points in controversy. The Supreme Court further held that subject to non- 
disclosure of information which the Central Government considers to be against the public interest to 
disclose, all information and evidence relied on by the Central Government to support the declaration 
made by it of an association to be unlawful, has to be disclosed to the association to enable it to show 
cause against the same. The Tribunal is entitled to ascertain the credibility of conflicting evidence relating 
to the points in controversy. It is observed by the Supreme Court: 


“To satisfy the minimum requirements of a proper adjudication, it is necessary that the Tribunal 
Should have the means to ascertain the credibility of conflicting evidence relating to the points in 
controversy. Unless such a means is available to the Tribunal to determine the credibility of the 
material before it, it cannot choose between conflicting material and decide which one to prefer and 
accept. In such a situation, the only option to it would be to accept the opinion of the Central 
Government, without any means to test the credibility of the material on which it is based. The 
adjudication made would cease to be an objective determination and be meaningless, equating the 
process with mere acceptance of the ipse dixit of the Central Government. The requirement of 
adjudication by the Tribunal contemplated under the Act does not permit abdication of its function 
by the Tribunal to the Central Government providing merely its stamp of approval to the opinion of 
the Central Government. The procedure to be followed by the Tribunal must, therefore, be such 
which enables the Tribunal to itself assess the credibility of conflicting material on any point in 
controversy and evolve a process by which it can decide whether to accept the version of the 
Central Government or to reject it in the light of the other view asserted by the association. The 
difficulty in this sphere is likely to arise in relation to the evidence of material in respect of which 
the Central Government claims nondisclosure on the ground of public interest.” 


20. It is, therefore, evident that disclosure of all the facts and material available on record subject to the 
claim_of any privilege in_this regard by the Central_Government is only after _the reference of the 
notification issued _under_ sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal for the purpose of 
adjudication whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful. The material 
available on record may have to be revealed to the association or its members. In_a case wherever any 
privilege is claimed, the Tribunal has to examine the material itself in the manner it considers appropriate, 
to_assess its credibility without disclosing the same to the association. Therefore, there is no requirement to 
disclose the material itself and publish the same in the notification or provide to the association along with 
the notification issued in exercise of the power under proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 3 declaring the 
association to be unlawful with immediate effect. The requirement is disclosure of additional reasons and 
grounds and not the material. The notification issued in exercise of the power under proviso to sub-sec. (3) 
of Section 3 cannot be set aside on the ground that the material relied upon for stating the reasons is not 
communicated to the association concerned declaring it to be an unlawful association with immediate 
effect. Such notification would become vulnerable only when the reasons are not notified: The record 
should contain the reasons in writing and the same is required to be revealed and published in the 
notification or communicated to the association concerned. Such reasons are required to be distinct and 
different and cannot be the same for imposing ban under Section 3 of the Act. The reasons are required to 
be communicated but not the entire material. Disclosure of the material is only after reference of the 
notification issued under Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal.” 


(Emphasis supplied) 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 53 


247. The legal position, that emerges, can be succinctly put in the following terms:- 


i. The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder contemplates 
maintaining confidentiality whenever required in public interest; 


ii. The Tribunal can look into the confidential material without the same being disclosed to the Association or 
its office-bearers, for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and satisfying itself that the 
same is reliable; 

iii. The Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure for itself for examining and testing the credibility of such 
material 

iv.The requirement of natural justice can be suitably modified by the Tribunal in the manner it considers 
appropriate for the purpose of assessing/examining the confidential material/documents, and arriving at a 
conclusion based on a perusal thereof. 

248. Further, the rigors prescribed by the Supreme Court in the case of S.P. Gupta vs. UOI And Anr., 1981 SCC 
OnLine SC 494, have to be read in the context of the provisions of the UAPA and the Rules framed thereunder. In 
particular, it needs to be borne in mind that Rule 3(1) of the UAP Rules expressly provides that in holding any inquiry 
under Sub-Section (3) of Section 4 of the UAPA, the Tribunal shall follow “as far as practicable”, the rules of 
evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act. Thus, the rigors that have been contemplated in the context of Section 
129 of the Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 20237 (which is pari materia to the erstwhile Section 123 of the Indian 
Evidence Act), cannot ipso-facto be made applicable to these proceedings. The legislative intent in making the 
provisions of the Evidence Act applicable only “as far as practicable” is evident from the nature of these proceedings. 
The proceedings before this Tribunal do not contemplate a full-fledged trial; rather the proceedings are in the nature of 
an “inquiry” as referred to in Section 4(3). 
249. Considering the dicta laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra), an 
appropriate procedure has to be devised/tailored by this Tribunal for the purpose of its inquiry in consonance with the 
principles of natural justice. The Tribunal would be mandated to grant privilege from disclosure where it finds that the 
disclosure would be against/injurious to public interest, given the nature of the documents. Thus, the nature of the 
concerned documents has to be assessed by the Tribunal to see whether it contains any sensitive information, 
disclosure of which would be against public interest. 
250. On perusal of the documents submitted by the Central Government in a sealed cover, it is found that the same 
contains intelligence reports, secret information collected by the investigating and intelligence agencies, notes/memos 
prepared by the investigating and intelligence agencies, information revealed on investigation including information as 
to the clandestine nature of the activities of the concerned association and its office-bearers and linkage of the 
association and its office-bearers with organisations and individuals outside of India. 
251. This Tribunal finds from the perusal of these documents that the disclosure of these documents would be 
detrimental to the larger public interest and security of the State. One of the documents which is contained in the 
sealed cover, is a note prepared for consideration of the cabinet committee on security, which contains sensitive 
information about activities of the Association and its inimical impact on national security. Clearly, the nature of these 
documents is such that it would be in public interest and in the interest of the security of the State to maintain 
confidentiality as regard thereto. 
252. The above is also applicable to the testimony of protected witnesses Alfa and Gama in NIA Case No. RC- 
10/2017/NIA/DLI. The deposition of the said protected witnesses is confidential and sensitive, and it would be against 
public interest to disclose the same. 
253. It is also to be noted that the claim for privilege has been expressly stated by the concerned witness from the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (PW-12) to be based on a specific approval/direction of the Union Home Secretary (The 
head of the Department). The said position is also borne out from the relevant official/noting files shared with this 
Tribunal. 
254. In these circumstances, this Tribunal allows the claim for privilege in respect of the documents submitted in a 
sealed cover by the concerned witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs (PW-12). The identity of the protected 
witnesses referred to by the concerned witness from the NIA (PW-11), and their deposition/s must also be necessarily 
withheld for the aforesaid reasons. Consequently, the Tribunal has proceeded to peruse the said documents, as 
contemplated in the Judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra) and to assess the credibility 
thereof and the implications flowing therefrom for the purpose of the present inquiry. 

XI. FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION 
255. At the outset, it is noticed that in the cover letter accompanying the reply filed on behalf of the association, it 
has been categorically stated that AAC would not contest the ban in a formal manner before this Tribunal as the ban 
was allegedly ‘politically motivated’ and that the accompanying reply may be treated as defense to the ban imposed 
on the association. This itself, prima facie, betrays scant regard for the due process established under the law, to 


2 A reference to the Evidence Act in the UAPA must be necessarily construed as a reference to the Bhartiya Sakshya 
Adhiniyam, 2023 as well. 


54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


contest the ban. Be that as it may, this Tribunal is still duty bound to ascertain from the material available on record as 
to whether there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful or otherwise. The same has to be done as per 
guiding principles already delineated in the foregoing paras. 


256. It has also been averred in the reply of the association as under: 


“Tt is stated that in the first FIR (RC 10/2017), one individual who is purportedly the media advisor of the 
AAC is an accused. It is stated that it is not sufficient to ban the association as the individuals associated 
with an organisation have personal, professional and other involvements which are not necessarily that of 
the organisation. 


With regard to other FIRs, it is stated that all pertain to delivery of speeches and shouting slogans which 
cannot be the basis for holding the organisation unlawful. It is further stated that these FIRs are from 
between 2008 and 2011 and in none of these cases, proceedings have gone beyond registration of the FIR 
and no member of the association has ever been interrogated. It is stated the cases are so flimsy that for 
over fifteen years, they have not even reached the stage of chargesheet. As such the allegations leveled in 
these FIRs are baseless, manipulated, concocted and frivolous” 


257. Thus, apart from alluding to its alleged religious and philanthropic activities, the limited case of the 
association discernible from the reply is that: 


(i) the association cannot be held responsible for the actions of the accused named in the NIA case who is 
purportedly the media advisor of AAC (the association has noticeably refrained away from categorically 
denying this fact); 


(ii) as per the association, the other FIRs pertain to delivery of speeches and shouting slogans which, according 
to the association, cannot be the basis for holding the organisation unlawful. It is stated that these FIRs are 
from between 2008 and 2011 and in none of these cases, proceedings have gone beyond registration of the FIR 
and no member of the association has ever been interrogated. It is stated the cases are so flimsy that for over 
fifteen years, they have not even reached the stage of chargesheet. 


(iii) Lastly, it is stated that the allegations leveled in these FIRs are baseless, manipulated, concocted and 
frivolous. 


258. A perusal of the statutory definition of the “unlawful association” under Section 2(p) of UAPA reveals that it 
includes any association which (i) has for its object any “unlawful activity” or which encourages or aids person to 
undertake “unlawful activity”, or of which the members undertake such activities. 


259. “Unlawful activity”, as statutorily defined under Section 2(0) refers to any action: (i) which is intended, or 
supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India or the 
secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union, or which incites any individual or group of individuals to 
bring about such cession or secession; (ii) which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty 
and territorial integrity of India; or (iii) which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India. 


260. It can be seen that by statutory definition itself any action by any association, which questions/disrupts or is 
intending to disrupt the sovereignty and integrity of India, amounts to an “unlawful activity”. Any association which 
has for its object any unlawful activity is an unlawful association under Section 2(p) of the UAPA. 


i. Speeches against sovereignty and Integrity of India and FIRs as the basis for the Ban 


261. The attempt on the part of the Association to trivialize speeches which contain anti-national content and 
which exhort the people of Jammu & Kashmir to strive for “azadi”, cannot be countenanced. In this regard, it is 
notable that the UAPA was enacted pursuant to the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 which itself was 
enacted to impose, by law, reasonable restrictions on the rights mention in clauses (2), (3) and (4) of Article 19 of the 
Constitution of India, in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India. It was noticed by Delhi High Court in Union 
of India vs. Satnam Singh, AIR 2018 Del 72 that the said Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act was brought 
about in order to combat secessionist agitations by organizations with the purpose to guard against the freedom of 
speech and expression being used to assail the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union. Thus, sloganeering 
and giving speeches purportedly advocating ‘azadi’ for an integral part of India squarely falls under the definition of 
‘unlawful activity’ within the meaning of Section 2(0) of the UAPA and any material which seeks to prove occurrence 
of such speeches or sloganeering becomes relevant to decide whether the association whose members are stated to 
have committed such unlawful activities ought to be declared an unlawful association. 


262. The Introduction and the Statement of Objects and Reasons of UAPA specifically states as under:- 
“Introduction: 


The National Integration Council appointed a Committee on National Integration and Regionalisation to look 
into, inter alia, the aspect of putting reasonable restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 55 


India. Pursuant to the acceptance of recommendations of the Committee the Constitution (Sixteenth 
Amendment) Act, 1963 was enacted to impose, by law, reasonable restrictions in the interests of the 
sovereignty and integrity of India. In order to implement the provisions of 1963 Act the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Bill was introduced in the Parliament. 


Statement of Objects and Reasons.—Pursuant to the acceptance by Government of a unanimous 
recommendation of the Committee on National Integration and Regionalism appointed by the National 
Integration Council, the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1963, was enacted empowering Parliament to 
impose, by law, reasonable restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, on the— 


(i) freedom of speech and expression; 
(ii) right to assemble peaceably and without arms; and 


(iii) right to form associations or unions. 


2. The object of this Bill is to make powers available for dealing with activities directed against the 
integrity and sovereignty of India.” 


263. In Satnam Singh (Supra), it has been observed as under:- 


“14. It thus becomes crucial to determine the meaning of the phrase ‘prejudicial to the sovereignty and 
integrity of India’ used in the Act. Apart from the Act, the phrase finds mention in clauses (2), (3), and (4) of 
Article 19 of the Constitution of India, where it was added as a ground for restriction on the freedom of 
expression. This was inserted by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, in order to combat 
secessionist agitation and conduct from organizations such as DMK in the South and Plebiscite Front in 
Kashmir, and activities in pursuance thereof which might not possibly be brought within the purview of the 
expression ‘security of the State’. It was made to guard the freedom of speech and expression being used to 
assail the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union. 


15. It was pointed out that any legislation that is undertaken in this behalf, ought to be comprehensive and 
effective enough to check indirect devices to carry on such movements, such as the burning of the Constitution 
of India or the refusal to take the oath of allegiance, or the raising of flags in any way simulating the flag of a 
foreign State with a view to encouraging feelings of allegiance to such State and gathering people having such 
allegiance. [Vide Question in Parliament re. hoisting of the Plebiscite Front Flag in Kashmir (Statements, 
11.12.64)]. It is to curb the same menace that the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 was subsequently 
enacted which under Section 2(0) provides as follows: 


“(o) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or association, means any action taken by such 
individual or association (whether by committing an act or by words, either spoken or written, or by 
signs or by visible representation or otherwise),— 


(i) which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the cession of a 
part of the territory of India or the secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union, or which 
incites any individual or group of individuals to bring about such cession or secession; or 


(ii) which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity 
of India; or 


2999 


(iii) which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India; 


264. Each and every case involving a situation where public speech/es are given, which undermine the territorial 
integrity of India and which seek to glorify the so called idea of “azadi’”, is an attack on the sovereignty of India and 
such conduct clearly falls within the scope of unlawful activity as defined in the UAPA. There is no gainsaying that 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of India is sacrosanct and even the slightest insinuation against it ought to be 
viewed seriously. 


265. It has been judicially recognized that the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of India is inviolable and 
is a basic feature of Indian Constitution. In the celebrated judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kesavananda 
Bharati vs. State of Kerala, (1973) 4 SCC 225 it has been expressly recognized in one of the majority judgments, 
rendered by J.M. Shelat and A.N. Grover, JJ., that “the unity and the integrity of the nation” (which includes territorial 
integrity) is a basic feature of the Indian constitution. The relevant extracts from the said judgment are as under:- 


“582. The basic structure of the Constitution is not a vague concept and the apprehensions expressed on 
behalf of the respondents that neither the citizen nor the Parliament would be able to understand it are 


56 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


266. 


unfounded. If the historical background, the preamble, the entire scheme of the Constitution, relevant 
provisions thereof including Article 368 are kept in mind there can be no difficulty in discerning that the 
following can be regarded as the basic elements of the constitutional structure. (These cannot be catalogued 
but can only be illustrated): 


(1) The supremacy of the Constitution. 

(2) Republican and Democratic form of government and sovereignty of the country. 
(3) Secular and federal character of the Constitution. 

(4) Demarcation of power between the Legislature, the executive and the judiciary. 


(5) The dignity of the individual secured by the various freedoms and basic rights in Part IIIT and 
the mandate to build a welfare State contained in Part IV. 


, 


(6) The unity and the integrity of the Nation.’ 
In Arup Bhuyan vs. State of Assam, (2023) 8 SCC 745, the Supreme Court has also taken note of the fact 


that the UAPA was enacted pursuant to the amendment brought about in Articles 19(2), (3) and (4) vide the 
Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. It has been noticed therein that the main objective of UAPA is to 
make powers available for dealing with activities directed against the integrity and sovereignty of India. The relevant 
observations in the said judgment are as under:- 


“80. Thus, the rights guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) (right to freedom of speech and expression) and under 
Article 19(1)(c) (Right to form association or unions) are not absolute rights, but are subject to reasonable 
restrictions as per Articles 19(2) and 19(4) of the Constitution of India. Articles 19(2), (3) and (4) have been 
amended vide the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 and the words “sovereignty and integrity of 
India” have been inserted. 


61. Therefore, as per Articles 19(2), (3) and (4) nothing in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (1) of Article 
19 shall affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the State from making any law insofar as such law 
imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercises of the right conferred by the said sub-clauses in the interests 
of sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of State ... . As per Article 19(4) nothing in sub-clause (2) 
(Right to form Associations or Unions) shall affect the operation of any existing law insofar as it imposes, or 
prevents the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of sovereignty and integrity of India or 
public order or morality, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause. 


82. At this stage the Statement of Objects and Reasons for amending Articles 19(2), (3) and (4) are required to 
be referred to and considered. 


83. The Statements of Objects and Reasons appended to the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Bill, 1963 
which was enacted as the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 reads as under: 


“Statement of Objects and Reasons 


The Committee on National Integration and Regionalism appointed by the National Integration Council 
recommended that Article 19 of the Constitution be so amended that adequate powers become available 
for the preservation and maintenance of the integrity, and sovereignty of the Union. The Committee 
were further of the view that every candidate for the membership of a State Legislature or Parliament, 
and every aspirant to, and incumbent of, public office should pledge himself to uphold the Constitution 
and to preserve the integrity and sovereignty of the Union and that forms of oath in the Third Schedule 
to the Constitution should be suitably amended for the purpose. It is proposed to give effect to these 
recommendations by amending clauses (2), (3) and (4) of Article 19 for enabling the State to make any 
law imposing reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the rights conferred by sub-clauses (a), (b) and 
(c) of clause (1) of that article in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India.” 


84. The UAPA, 1967 has been enacted in exercise of powers conferred under Articles 19(2) and (4) of 
the Constitution of India. At this stage, it is required to be noted that exceptions to the freedom to form 
associations under Article 19(1) was inserted in the form of sovereignty and integrity of India under Article 
19(4), after the National Integration Council (“NIC”) appointed a Committee on National Integration and 
Regionalisation. The said Committee was to look into the aspect of putting reasonable restrictions in the 
interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. Pursuant to the acceptance of the recommendations of the 
said Committee, the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 came to be enacted to impose by law, 
reasonable restrictions in the interests of sovereignty and integrity of India. In order to implement the 
provisions of the 1963 Act, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill was introduced in Parliament. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 57 


85. The main objective of the UAPA is to make powers available for dealing with activities directed against the 
integrity and sovereignty of India. It is also required to be noted that pursuant to the recommendation of the 
Committee on National Integration and Regionalisation appointed by the National Integration Council Act on 
whose recommendation the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 was enacted, UAPA has been 
enacted. It appears that the National Integration Council appointed a Committee on National Integration and 
Regionalisation to look into, inter alia, the aspect of putting reasonable restrictions in the interests of 
sovereignty and integrity of India and thereafter the UAPA has been enacted. Therefore, the UAPA has been 
enacted to make powers available for dealing with the activities directed against integrity and sovereignty of 
India.” 


267. In Re: Article 370 of the Constitution, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1647, it has been specifically noted that on 26 
January 1950, when the Constitution was adopted, the State of J & K became an integral part of the territory of India. 
The said judgment also clearly noted that any modification in the relationship of the State of J & K with the UOI 
would have to be brought about within the framework of the Constitution of India and that Constitution alone. It has 
been noted as under:- 


“164. This is a reiteration of the understanding of the members of the Constituent Assembly of Jammu and 
Kashmir that accession to India was complete and that sovereignty was surrendered. 


XXX XXX XXX 


172. These provisions are significant. The power of amending the State Constitution which was entrusted to 
the Legislative Assembly (subject to the assent of the Governor) had thus three major qualifications : firstly, 
the position that the State of Jammu and Kashmir is and shall be an integral part of the Union of India was 
unamendable; secondly, the executive and legislative domain of the State which depended upon the domain 
entrusted to Parliament under the provisions of the Constitution of India over which it would make laws for the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir was unamendable by the State Legislative Assembly; and thirdly, the provisions 
of the Constitution of India as applicable in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir were unamendable by 
the State Legislative Assembly. These_restraints which _were imposed 9 the amending power of the State 
Legislative Assembly made it abundantly clear that Jammu and Kashmir being an integral part of the Union of 
India was a matter of permanence and unalterable. Moreover, any modification in the relationship of the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir with the Union of India would have to be brought about within the framework of 
the Constitution of India and that Constitution alone. 


XXX XXX XXX 


339. On 26 January 1950, when the Constitution was adopted, the State of Jammu_and Kashmir became an 
integral part of the territory of India. The mandate of Article 1 is that “India that is Bharat shall be a Union of 
States”. The States and their territories would be those specified in Parts A, B and C of the First Schedule. The 
State of Jammu_and Kashmir was a Part B State on the date of the adoption of the Constitution. With the 
adoption of the Seventh Amendment to the Constitution which obliterated the distinction between Parts A, B 
and C States, Jammu_and Kashmir became 4 State in the Union of States. In_other words, Article 370 of 
the Constitution read together with Article 1 leaves no_ manner of doubt that the integration of Jammu_and 
Kashmir as a part of the nation, which in itself was a Union of States was complete. Any interpretation of 
Article 370 cannot postulate that the integration of Jammu and Kashmir with India was temporary. 


268. The tacit support of the Organisation to those who have “taken up arms” (as is evident from the certain 
averment/s in the reply filed on behalf of the association*) and to those who indulge in sloganeering/giving of 
speeches which undermines the sovereignty and integrity of India, lends credence to the assertion of the Central 
Government that the association has been acting in a manner which falls within the sweep of ‘unlawful activities’. 
This is also evident from the nature of propaganda/slogans indulged in by members of the association; the same is also 
evident from the incidents of inciting violence against security forces, who are operating in J & K in extremely trying 
and challenging circumstances as detailed in the background note. 


ii. Material in the form of evidence led by UOI regarding cases registered by the J & K Police 


269. Voluminous evidence has been adduced by the Central Government to demonstrate the nature of the 
activities of the association. Evidence has been adduced to place on record the said activities which are subject matter 
of the following FIRs registered against proscribed association registered by the J&K Police as mentioned in the 
background note 


2 “Mirwaiz Farooq was opposed to all forms of violence and that is the reason that he strongly advocated to ex. Prime 
Minister V.P. Singh’s government in power in New Delhi at that time to talk to the ‘young men in Kashmir who had 
taken up arms’ and addres their aspirations right then”. 


58 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


SL PW Case Name of Allegations in Brief Documents Filed 161/164 
No. Particulars accused in FIR (Exhibits) Cr.P.C 
Statements 
1. Inspector FIR No. | (i) Umar | Registered for shouting | PW-1/1 to PW1/7A | Both 
Adil Rashid, 60/2010 PS | Farooq slogans against the | — 
Kothi Bagh u/s integrity of India and for 161 and 164 
8 ws grity Cc F 
(PW-1) 436, 153A, 109, (i) Mushtag- delivering 4. speech opy of FIRs, and statements. 
SHO, Police | 147 and 336 of ul-Islam stating that they would | 7९९९३ of 
Station Ranbir Penal J (iii) Nisar | struggle till J & K is not | statements of 
Kothibagh, Code and u/s 13 | Ahmad Rather | separated from UOL and | witnesses recorded 
Kashmir of the Unlawful | . . for also pelting stones ws 161/164Cr.P.C, 
Activities (iv) Nisar Copy of — seizure 
(Prevention) Ahmad Bhat memo filed in FIR 
Act, 1967 and 60/2010 
ws 3 of Jammu 
and =Kashmir 
Public Property 
(Prevention of 
Damage) Act 
2: FIR No. (i) Umar Registered on Both 
46/2014 PS Farooq 19.06.2014 as on the 
Kothi Bagh said date at Residency 161 and 164 
Road, Activists of AAC, statements. 
ws 13 of the (ii) Hilal headed by the leader of 
8 Ahmad War | AAC, Mirwaiz Molvi 
section 188, Cinar Furoo: 
q 
bee 100 longwithothers held a 
Ranbir Penal ites F 
Code (iii) Shahid ud vehicular procession 
Islam from S.K Park to Lal 
Chowk, Srinagar and 
raised anti-national 
slogans like “Hum_kya 
Chaihtai Azadi 
etc” violating section 
144 Cr. P.C. imposed in 
the valley and were 
marching towards Lal 
Chowk का shape of 
unruly mob 
3. Mr. Azhar | FIR No. | Umar Farooq Registered for delivering | PW-2/1 to PW2/3A | 161 statement 
Rashid, 96/2008 PS a speech against the | — 
Nowhatta/s Government of India and ८ F 
(PW-2), 120B and 153A for stressing upon the ०03 of FIR, and 
SDPO, of Ranbir Penal people for elections copies of 
Khanyar, Code’, u/s 13 of boycott etc. statements of 
Srinagar the Unlawful witnesses recorded 
Activities u/s 161Cr.P.C. 
(Prevention) 
Act, 1967 
4 Inspector FIR No. | Umar Farooq Registered against Umar | PW-3/1 to PW3/3A | 161 statement 
Naseer 19/2015 PS Farooq who was heading | — 
Ahmad, ae ; ie a group which pelted Copy -of FIR, and 
; -_ ४ stones upon deployed 
(PW-3) 336, 353, 332, troops and raised anti- copies of 
SHO, PS | 427 & 307 of national slogans etc. statements of 
Nowhatta, Ranbir _ Penal witnesses recorded 
Srinagar Code and u/s u/s 161Cr.P.C. 
13 of the 
Unlawful 
Activities 
(Prevention) 


‘The Ranbir Penal Code (RPC) was the primary criminal law of the erstwhile Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir. It was introduced in 1932 during 
the reign of Maharaja Ranbir Singh. In 2019, with the abrogation of Article 370 and the passage of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, the 
RPC was repealed and replaced by the Indian Penal Code. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


59 


Act, 1967 
DYSP FIR No.83/2010 | Umar Farooq Registered against Umar | PW-4/1 to PW4/5A | 161 statement 
(PROB.) Dr. | PS Shergarhi Farooq, on whose | — 

Barleen u/s 147, 148, , directions a group of Cc p . 
Kour, 427, 436, 153, miscreants cae eee opy of FIR, copies 
153-A, 121 & national slogans pelted of 
(Pw-4) 121-A of Ranbir stones upon Govt. | statements of 
SHO, PS | Penal Code Vehicles/buildings, etc. | witnesses recorded 
Shergarhi, and set ablaze the Crime | u/s 161Cr.P.C. and 
Kashmir Office, Chief Engineer | Copy of Seizure 

PDD Office and shops | Memo of 
Headquarter and nearby | decomposed 
shops as well as Police | charcoal & wood 
/Traffic Booths and 
caused heavy damage to 
Government property 
Inspector FIR No. | Umar Farooq Registered against Umar | PW-5/1 to PW5/3A | 161 statement 
Shiekh 128/2010 PS Farooq and others for | — 
Wakeel, Safakadal u/s 13 delivering a lecture and C p 
of the Unlawful provoking the people OPy of FIR, and 
(PW-5) Activities against the Government copies of 
SHO, PS | (Prevention) and for raising anti- | statements of 
Safakadal, Act, 1967 national slogans; witnesses recorded 
Kashmir u/s 161Cr.P.C. 
Inspector FIR No. | Umar Farooq Registered against Umar | PW-6/1 to PW6/4A | 162 statement 
Hilal Ahmad, | 101/2010 75 Farooq who headed a | — 
Shaheed Gunj rally which raised anti- Cc E ४ 
(PW-6) ws 121, 121A, national slogans against opy of FIR, copies 
SHO, PS | 153, 153A, 147, the integrity of India and of 
Shaheed Gunj, | 148, 336, 436 & the protesters damaged | statements of 
Kashmir 427 of Ranbir Govt. property and some | witnesses recorded 
Penal Code vehicles. ws 162Cr.P.C. and 
Copy of Seizure 
Memo of _ stones, 
mirror, iron window 
and iron door of 
police banker at 
Jahangir Chowk 
SI Bashir | FIR No. | 0) Aga Syed | Registered as accused | PW-7/1 to PW7/3A | 161 statement 
Ahmad, 46/2010 PS | Hassan persons had _— stopped | — 
Kothi Bagh u/s | Budgami police vehicles at R.K. Cc F 
(PW-7) 341 of Ranbir | ... Crossing and sat down Opy of FIR, “and 
PS Kothibagh, | Penal Code ee d Professor on the street and blocked | 7९९४ of 
हे ul Gani : 
Srinagar. Bhat and disrupted the statements of 
vehicular movement in | witnesses recorded 
(iii) | Nayeem | the said area u/s 161Cr.P.C. 
Ahmad Khan 
(iv) Bilal Gani 
Lone 
(v) Zaffar 
Akhtar Bhat 
(vi) | Masroor 
Abbas Ansari 
(vii) Umar 
Farooq 
Mr. Sarfaraz | FIR No. | 0) Abdul Gani | Registered against Gh. | PW-8/1 to | 161 statement 
Bashir, 394/2016 PS | Bhat @ Gani | Nabi Zaki, General | PW8/10A - 
Sopore, u/s 147, | Guroo, (ii) | Secretary, AAC for anti- ८ F 
(PW-8) 148, 149, 336, | Manzoor national slogans/speech opy of FIR No. 
307 427 & | Ahmad Kaloo | during which militants 


60 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


SDPO, 153A of Ranbir | @ Mam Kul | fired upon police and | 394/2016, copies of 
Sopore, Penal Code, u/s | (iii) mob pelted stones upon 
Kashmir. 3 PPD Act and | Mohammad security forces etc 33 कर of 
ws 7/27 of | Ashraf Malik, Wamiesses tre coneed 
Arms Act (iv) Ghulam u/s 161Cr-P.C., 
Mukammad Copy of Seizure 
Khan @ Khan ENO ee 
Sopore, (v) stones/bricks and 
Muhammad Copy of 
Shaban Khan Chargesheet 
(vi) Yadullah 
Mir (vii) 
Ghulam Nabi Copy of FIR No. 
Zaki 409/2016, copies of 
10. FIR No. | (i) Abdul Gani | Registered against Gh. statements of 161 statement 
409/2016 PS | Bhat @ Gani | Nabi Zaki, General | Witnesses recorded 
Sopore, u/s 147, | Guroo, (ii) | Secretary, AAC for u/s 161Cr.P.C. 
148, 149, 336, | Muhammad pelting stone upon the | Copy of Seizure 
427, 34, 153-A | Shaban Khan | Police/CRPF deployed at | Memo of _ stones/ 
& 307 of Ranbir | (iii) New Colony wi th | broken vehicle glass 
Penal Code Mohammad intention to kill them and | 494 copy of 
Ashraf Beigh, | disrupt the peace and | Chargesheet 
(v) (iv) Ghulam | public order. 
Nabi Zaki 
(५) Ghulam 
Nabi Khan 
11. | Inspector FIR No. | Umar Farooq Registered for | PW-9/1 to PW9/7A | 161 statement 
Showkat 56/2011 PS supporting the Hartal | — 
Hussain, Kothi Bagh u/s call given by Syed Ali ८ ए हि 
13... 1 the Shah Geelani for 03 | COPY of FIR, copies 
(9-9) Unlawful August, 2011 and for of 
SHO, PS | Activities instigating the general | statements of 
Nigeen, (Prevention) people and the youth of | witnesses recorded 
Srinagar. Act, 1967 valley for waging war | u/s 161Cr.P.C. and 
against the sovereignty | Copy of Seizure 
of India. Memo of news 
paper 


270. 


It can be seen that Umar Farooq, the chief protagonist of the association in question, is accused in most of 


these FIRs and in some FIRs there are other accused as well, including Gh. Nabi Zaki, the General Secretary of the 
Association. Gist of the slogans/speeches which are subject matter of some of the FIRs is as under:- 


S. No. FIR SLOGANS/SPEECHES Evidence of 
PW 
1. FIR NO. 60/2010 dated | “Hum ka Chahatay Azadi” PW-1 
pure “Go India Go Back” 
2. FIR NO. 46/2014 dated | “Hum ka Chahatay Azadi” PW-1 
19.06.2014 
3. FIR NO. 19/2015 “Hum Kya Chahtehai, Azaadi” PW-3 
dated 17.04.2015 “Kashmir Banega Pakistan” 
“Hindustan Murdabad” 
4. FIR NO. "Ilhagi Hind Tasleem Nai" ("We do not accept accession to | PW-5 
128/2010 sie 
"Go India Go Back" 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 61 


dated 11.09.2010 


39% FIR ‘Hum Kya Chahtay Azadi’ PW-6 
NO. 101/2010 
dated 11.09.2010 


271. From the various FIRs and the charge-sheets which have been filed therein, it is evident that the concerned 
association, through its chief protagonist has been propagating secessionism/disaffection against the Indian State. 


iii. Attribution to the association of acts of its members 


272. It is undisputed that Umar Farooq is the chief protagonist of the concerned association and is authorized to 
act on behalf of the association and Gh. Nabi Zaki is the General Secretary of the Association. 


273. While in the reply filed through Gh. Nabi Zaki, the association has tried to distance itself from the activities 
of individual members, it is quite evident from the material on record that Umar Farooq is but an alter ego of the 
association, and Gh. Nabi Zaki is the General Secretary of the association whose cover letter accompanies the reply. 


274. Section 2(p)(i) of the UAPA enlarges the scope of the definition of ‘unlawful association’ to specifically 
include an association which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake 
any unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such activity. Thus, the law, as it stands, provides for 
declaration of an association as unlawful if its members are indulging in unlawful activities. Hence, the acts of 
Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, the Chairperson of the association, Gh. Nabi Zaki, the General Secretary of the Association 
and Aftab Ahmad Shah @ Shahid-ul-Islam, the spokesperson (as elaborated hereinbelow) can be squarely attributed 
to the association and such activities have to be considered to ascertain if there is sufficient cause to declare it 
unlawful. 


iv. Public Witnesses 


275. Vide order dated 21.07.2025, e-mail and postal address at which any interested party could contact the 
Tribunal, was directed to be published. Pursuant thereto, total five (05) emails were received i.e. three (03) emails 
dated 28.07.2025 from email IDs <mgmt@jkpeaceforum.in> (containing 1 affidavit), <yasirrouf@gmail.com> 
(containing 2 affidavits), <mohammedtamim2202@gmail.com> (containing 1 affidavit); one (01) email dated 
29.07.2025 from email ID <yasirrouf@gmail.com> (containing 4 affidavits) and one (01) email dated 29.07.2025 of 
Mr. Sandeep Pandey from email ID <socialistpartyindia@ gmail.com>. Total eight (08) affidavits were filed. Details 
of the deponents are as follows:- 


(i) Mr. Satish Mahaldar 

(ii) Mr. Bashir Muzafar Pandit 
(iii) Mr. Sheikh Yasir Rouf 

(iv) Mr. Rameez Raja 

(५) Mr. Jagmohan Singh Raina 
(vi) Mr. Rouf Ahmed Punjabi 
(शा) Mr. Firdous Ahmed Bazaz 


(viii) Mr. Vikram Malhotra 


276. Mr. Sandeep Pandey did not file any affidavit. However, vide his email, he stated that the ban on the 
association must be lifted. 


277, A perusal of the affidavits of the aforesaid deponents/public witnesses reveals that each affidavit is a two- 
page affidavit containing similar averments opposing the notification dated 11.03.2025. 


278. The following deponents / public witnesses were present before this Tribunal on 01.08.2025:- 
(i) Mr. Bashir Muzafar Pandit 
(ii) Mr. Sheikh Yasir Rouf 
(iii) Mr. Rameez Raja 
(iv) Mr. Firdous Ahmed Bazaz 


279. The aforesaid four deponents stated that they have not been the members of the association. Three of them 


62 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


i.e., Mr. Bashir Muzafar Pandit, Mr. Rameez Raja, Mr. Firdous Ahmed Bazaz stated that their affidavits had been 
prepared by Mr. Sheikh Yasir Rouf and they signed on the same. Remaining deponents / public witnesses were 
directed to remain present during the proceedings on 02.08.2025. The Registrar of this Tribunal was directed to send a 
reply to the aforesaid emails of the public witnesses conveying these directions. 


280. Pursuant thereto, an email dated 01.08.2025 was received from one of the public witnesses, namely, Mr. 
Sandeep Pandey (who has not filed any affidavit) explaining that he had been unable to appear before this Tribunal. 


281. The following deponents were present before this Tribunal on 02.08.2025:- 


(i) Mr. Jagmohan Singh Raina 
(ii) Mr. Rouf Ahmed Punjabi 
(iii) Mr. Vikram Malhotra 
282. It was stated by the aforesaid public witnesses that they were neither the members of the Association nor had 


been involved in the activities of the Association. However, they were deposing in their capacity as “public-spirited” 
citizen. 


283. On perusal of the affidavits of the said public witnesses, it also transpires that the affidavits are identical in 
nature. Moreover, as per thereown statement, all the affidavits have been drafted by the same person i.e. Mr. Sheikh 
Yasir Rouf (who was personally present before the Tribunal on 02.08.2025) who is an advocate by profession. 


284. The said public witnesses, admittedly, have no direct connection with the association, much less do they have 
any knowledge about the inner workings / activities of the association. As such, no inference can be derived from 
these affidavit/s of “public witnesses”, for the purpose of these proceedings. 


१. Credibility of material produced before the Tribunal 


285. The material produced by the Central Government to seek to justify the ban comprises (i) FIRs registered in 
Jammu & Kashmir, including between the period 2014 - 2015, (ii) the material in the form of intelligence 
inputs/report of intelligence agencies — both Central and State, (11) material in the form of investigation conducted by 
NIA in RC No. 10/2017, and (iv) “unlawful activities of the association” as evident from the social media 
accounts/posts of the association and/or its members. A conjoint consideration of the entire material lends credence to 
the case made out by the Central Government. 


286. The attempt on the part of the association to seek to decry the relevance of the various FIRs registered 
between 2008 - 2011, does not appeal to this Tribunal. If the said FIRs reveal a systematic pattern of conduct on the 
part of the association in seeking to forment antagonistic sentiments towards the Indian states and attacking the 
sovereignty/territorial integrity of India, the same certainly bears relevance. The fact that some of these FIRs may 
have not reached the stage of filing of charge sheets despite passage of a sufficient period of time does not, by itself, 
undermine the pattern of conduct. Moreover, the peculiar reasons as to the slow progress of these cases have been 
explained by the officers/witnesses from the State of Jammu & Kashmir. As such, this tribunal is not inclined to 
accept that these FIRs are altoghether irrelevant. 


287. The evidence that is required to be adduced by the Central Government in these proceedings is not intended 
to establish the guilt or otherwise of the accused in the various FIRs which have been referred to in the affidavits filed 
on behalf of the Central Government. The limited purpose is to place on record the documents/material which is 
relevant for the purpose of considering whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association to be 
unlawful as defined in the Section 2(p) of the UAPA. 


288. In these proceedings, the entire record pertaining to the relevant FIRs have been considered not in insolation 
but in juxtaposition with other material/evidence placed on record by the Central Government. It has also been 
vehemently contended on behalf of the Central Government that the purport of the depositions of the various police 
officers is to place on record the relevant material to enable the proscribed association to cross-examine the concerned 
witnesses who have deposed with regard thereto, and to enable the concerned association to refute the relevancy of the 
material sought to be relied upon for the purpose of these proceedings. The association has chosen not to avail this 
opportunity by dismissing the ban as being ‘politically motivated’. While perusing the relevant material, this Tribunal 
is also conscious of the fact that these proceedings are not akin to conducting a mini-trial as regards the sufficiency of 
the material/evidence for the purpose of establishing the guilt or otherwise of the accused in the concerned FIRs. In 
this backdrop, any alleged or perceived infirmities/shortcomings in the case as set up by the prosecution in those FIRs 
cannot be dealt with or pronounced upon in these proceedings. The same would necessarily be gone into by the 
concermed Trial Court. Suffice it to say, the purport of placing on record the aforesaid FIRs is to show, for the purpose 
of these proceedings, the nature of the activities of the association. 


289. In the above conspectus and keeping in mind the nature of the present proceedings, I am unable to accept the 
contention of the association in its reply, that the allegations made in the FIRs relied upon by the government are 
concocted or irrelevant. I have already observed above that the strict rules of evidence do not apply to the proceedings 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 63 


before this Tribunal. Furthermore, the scope of scrutiny of the material relied upon by the Central Government is not 
akin to a criminal trial as held in para 26 of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra). For the purpose of these proceedings, 
even statements recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C is in the nature of relevant material and liable to be considered, in 
terms of the dicta laid down by the Supreme Court in Khatri (Supra), Vinay D. Nagar (Supra) and Jamaat-e-Islami 
Hind (Supra). 


290. In the totatlity of circumstances, I find that the evidence adduced by the various officers of J & K is relevant 
for the purpose of these proceedings; the same clearly brings out the nature of the activities of the concerned 
association. The various FIRs and the chargesheets filed therein bring out that the association in question, through its 
chief protagonist, Umar Farooq and other office bearers, have been indulging in secessionist activities, preaching 
disaffection against the Indian state, openly organising protest/s, raising slogans in which the status of J & K as 
integral part of India is disputed. The incidents with regard to which voluminous evidence have been adduced, inter 
alia involves:- 


1. Raising Anti-India and Pro-Pakistan slogans (evidences of PW- 1, PW-3, Pw-4, PW-5, PW- 6); 


ii. Delivering of provocative speeches to general public instigating the public to stand against the 
sovereignty of India and preaching disaffection against India (evidences of PW- 1, PW-2, PW-3, 
PW-4, PW-5, PW-6, PW-8, PW-10); 


ili. Delivering of provocative speeches to general public to wage war against India and to cede J & K 
from India (evidence of PW-5); 


iv. Attacking police personnel / security forces and instigating the general public to pelt stones on the 
police personnel / security forces (evidences of PW-1, PW-3, PW-4, PW-6, PW-8,); 
V. Damaging public property (evidences of PW-1, PW-4, PW-6, PW-8 


vi. Agitating against the Govt./Blocking streets (Evidences of PW-7, PW-9 


Vii. Encouraging boycott of elections (evidences of PW- 2). 


vi. Material in the form of investigation conducted by NIA and subsequent developments 


291. Quite independent of the above, the nature of the activities of the concerned association also becomes clear 
from the details brought out in the investigation conducted by NIA in NIA Case no. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI. As per 
Exhibit PW 11/9 i.e. the Chargesheet filed in the matter, this case pertains to the terrorist and secessionist activities 
that have plagued J & K since late 1980’s and early 1990’s. The same brings out the spate of violence unleashed in the 
valley involving attack on civilians and security forces alike since the last many decades, with the Inter-Services 
Intelligence (ISI) of Pakistan actively supporting numerous terrorist organisations such as Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT), 
Hizub-ul-Mujahideen (HM), Jammu & Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF), Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami, Jaish-e- 
Mohammad (JeM) etc. which are involved in conducting the same. Pakistan has not only been training the terror 
groups but also supporting them financially and diplomatically. Amidst the violent activities of the terrorists and mass 
exodus of the minority community from J & K, the All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC) was formed as a 
conglomerate of 26 political/social/religious organisations in the year 1993 which gave a political front to the 
secessionist activities. 


292. The investigation in the NIA case uncovered a conspiracy involving various terrorist organisations, such as 
JKLF, HM, and LeT, in collusion with secessionist groups comprising the APHC, funded by Pakistan and its 
agencies. The aim was to wage war against the Indian Government and advocating for the secession of J & K from 
India. APHC, initially formed as a political front, was found to be actively involved in inciting violence and unrest in 
Kashmir to further their secessionist agenda. Pursuant to the investigation, a chargesheet dated 18.01.2018 was filed 
before the NIA Special Court, New Delhi - against 12 accused persons), including two designated terrorists, based in 
Pakistan, as absconders. Out of these 12, Accused no. 3 to Accused No. 10 were found to be associated with APHC 
either as a member, office bearer or by way of being an active participant/ worker. Notably, Accused no. 3 Aftab 
Ahmad Shah @ Shahid-ul-Islam is referred to as Spokesman and Media Advisor of the APHC (Mirwaiz Umar 
Farooq Faction) in the Chargesheet and as a Spokesperson of the AAC in the Background Note. This fact has 
not been denied by the association in its reply. Excerpts of the aforesaid Chargesheet detail the split of the APHC into 
factions and how these factions have connived with terrorist organizations to espouse their separatist agendas. The 
relevant excerpts are reproduced below: 


“17.2.5In the year 2008, the APHC split into three factions. One faction was headed by Mirwaiz and is 
called APH (M), the other is led by Syed Ali Shah Geelani and is called APHC (G) and the third faction is 
led by Yasin Malik and is called. JKLF. Accused A-3 is associated with APHC (M) whereas accused A-4 to 
A.-9 are associated with APHC (G). Accused A-4 to A-9 are a part of Syed Ali Shah Getlani’s Tehreeke 
Hurriyat. Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Mirwaiz Umer Farooq and Yasin Malik together form the Joint Resistance 
Leadership which espouses the cause of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India” 


64 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


293. 


“17.3 Hurriyat conspiracy and secessionist agenda. 


17.3.1 During the course of investigation, it has come on record that the secessionists including the All 
Parties Hurrivat Conference has entered into a criminal conspiracy and adopted the strategy of instigating 
the general public to resort to violence and to create a surcharged atmosphere which is conducive for the 
propagation of their secessionist agenda. People are repeatedly asked to observe strikes on various 
nonexistent issues and then incited and instigated to get involved in unlawful activities especially stone- 
pelting, which throws the normal life out of gear. The disturbances caused by the frequent strikes and the 
stone-pelting incidents are to be understood in 4 broader perspective which is to create such circumstances 
which will lead to the secession of the State of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India, an ideology 
which the APHC and other secessionists staunchly uphold.” 


Fad 


“17.5 Hurriyat-Terror Nexus 


The investigation has established that the separatist leaders are the political face of the terrorist activities in 
the State of Jammu & Kashmir. There is an ample evidence pointing to the nexus between the terrorists and 
the separatist leaders led by the All Parties Hurviyat Conference, who share the common ideology of 
secession and have jointly devised strategies as & part of their larger plot to break Jammu & Kashmir away 
from India, The investigation has revealed many videos in the open source which establish a close Hurriyat - 
Terror link and that they are a “gang of conspirators” waging a war against the Government of India to 
achieve their ultimate objective i.¢. secession of the State of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India” 


The Role of Accused no. 3 in the NIA Case Aftab Ahmad Shah @Shahid-ul-Islam is also clearly culled out in 


the chargesheet. The relevant excerpts are reproduced below: 


294. 


“17.5.4 The Hurriyat leaders viz. accused A-3Shahid-ul-Islam, accused A-6 Farooq Ahmad Dar @ Bitta 
Karate, accused A-8 Raja Mehrajuddin Kalwal and accused A-9 Bashir Ahmad Bhat @ Peer Saifulla were 
themselves members of various terrorist/militant organizations and had also received training in handling 
weapons in the training camps in Pok.Accused A-3 Shahid-ul-Islam was a member of Muslim Janbaaz 
Force and also Hizbullah, A-6 Faroog Ahmad Dar @ Bitta Karate was a member of Jammu Kashmir 
Liberation Front (JKLF), A-8 Raja Mehrajuddin Kalwal was a member of Jamaat-e-Islami and A-9 Bashir 
Ahmad Bhat @ Peer Saifulla was a member of Hizb-Ul-Mujahideen (HM).” 


(Emphasis supplied) 


17.5.5 Another testimony of the close relations between the Hurriyat leaders and the terrorist 
organisationsis the photograph of accused (A-3) Shahid-ul-Islam with (A-2) Syed Slahuddin, 
Commander of Hizb-Ul-Mujahideen; another photograph of him holding AK-47 assault weapon 
along with other armed associates; a list of active militants of different terrorist organisations issued 
by J&K Police; a handwritten letter in Urdu from the banned terrorist organization Lashker-e-Toiba 


on LeT letter-head asking for financial assistance, all seized from the house of accused A-3 Shahid- 


ul-Islam.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
Charges have been framed against Shahid-UI]- Islam for the offences under sections 120B IPC, 121 IPC, 


121A IPC, 13 UAPA 1/ए 1208 IPC, 15 UAPA r/w 1208 IPC, 17 UAPA 1/w 120B IPC, sections 18, & 40 of UAPA 
on 16.03.2022. The relevant extracts from the order dated 16.03.2022 passed by Special Judge (NIA), Addl. Sessions 
Judge, Patiala House Courts, New Delhi whereby charges have been framed, are as under:- 


“6. 10 In the present case, there appears to be a third kind of conspiracy which has emerged and I call it the 
orchestra conspiracy. As in an orchestra, each player has its own instrument to play but sharing the same 
stage, every player or member of the orchestra knows the other player and the role the other person has to 
play. It is the conductor of the orchestra holding the baton in his hand who with the raising of bis baton 
directs which player has to play when and what part. In this conspiracy, the baton was held by conductor 
sitting across the border in the form of Pakistani agencies such as ISI etc. and each of the conspirators 
knowing every other conspirator was playing his own role as per the directions of the conductor in order to 
create a symphony of bloodshed, violence, mayhem and destruction with the ultimate object of secession of 
J&K from UOI. Thus, at this stage, the argument that each of these conspirators were acting independently 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 65 


towards the object of secession of J&K cannot be accepted. 


6.11 Thus prima facie a grave suspicion arises of the accused no. I to 10, 13 to 16 and accused no. 18 
entering into a criminal conspiracy as punishable under Section 120B IPC. 


6.12 As discussed above the object of conspiracy fall within the definition of unlawful activity as defined 
under UAPA. Therefore, I find that prima fade there is sufficient evidence against accused no. 1 to 10, 
accused no. 13 to 16 and accused no.18 to frame a charge U/s 13 UAPA read with section 120B of IPC. 


XXX XXX XXX 


7.22 As already discussed, the intent of these acts was the same as required u/s 15(1) UAPA. Prima facie 
they were committed to overawe the police and security forces especially the security forces when they 
were committed during ongoing encounters in order to dissuade the security forces from continuing with 
their operations or in order to facilitate the escape of the terrorists. While committing these acts, criminal 
force as defined u/s 350 IPC by way of stone pelting was used and illustration (e.) to section 3 50 IPC 
clearly covers the acts of stone pelting within the definition of criminal force. Thus, these acts were also 
terrorist acts within the definition of section 15 (1)(b) of UAPA. 


7 .23 However, no evidence against any of the accused, except accused I] and 12, has been presented to 
reflect the accused had personally indulged in these activities. With regard to accused no I1 and 12, I have 
already found that evidence pressed in service is not sufficient to raise a grave suspicion. As already 
discussed, accused no 17 has not been found to be a part of this conspiracy. There is however evidence 
which raises a grave suspicion that accused no. | to 10, 13 to 16 and 18 had entered in to a conspiracy to 
commit these acts. Thus, I find that accused no, I to 10, B to 16 and accused no. 18 are liable to be 
charged for the offence U/s 15 UAPA read with and Sec.120B IPC. 


8.0 As it has already been found that a criminal conspiracy was hatched with a final object of secession of 
State of J&K from UOI and within that conspiracy, a conspiracy was hatched for committing certain acts to 
achieve the object of original conspiracy and those acts, as discussed above, have been found to be terrorist 
acts. I therefore find that there is evidence to prima facie establish that accused no. 1 to 10, 13 to 16 and 
accused no. 18 had conspired for the commission of terrorist acts and thus had committed offence 
punishable u/s 18 UAPA. 


8.1 At this juncture it has been prima facie found that there existed a criminal conspiracy pursuant to 
which large scale protests; resulting in violence and arson at massive scale, were orchestrated: The object, 
as discussed earlier, was secession of J&K from the Union by overawing the government. It has been 
argued these were intended to be peaceful non-violent protests following the Gandhian path. However, the 
evidence prima facie speaks otherwise. Not only were the protests violent, they were intended to be violent. 


ay 


The object was to overawe the government by the sheer scale of violence and was nothing less than a plan 
for insurrection. Thus, I find that prima fade there is sufficient evidence that this was also a conspiracy as 
is punishable u/s 121A IPC. I accordingly find that accused no. 1 to 10, 14 to 16 and accused no. 18 are 
liable to be charged for the offence u/s 121A IPC. 


XXX XXX XXX 


9. 7 As already discussed, the protests which were planned and executed by enforcing the protest calendars 
were with the intent to raise insurrection against the government of India and the large scale violence 
which erupted, considering its severity, geographical extent and the fact that it was directed against 
government forces and properties, is an evidence that it was an attempt to raise insurrection. Such an 
attempt in itself is an offence of waging war against the government of India. Therefore, when the accused 
conspired to raise insurrection, took steps to bring it afoot, aided it by funding monetary and logistic 
support, they had abetted the waging of war against government of India. Hence, only on this account, I find 
that prima facie there is sufficient evidence to charge accused no. I to 10, accused no. 14 to 16 and 
accused no. 18 for offence 11/s 121 IPC. 


XXX XXX XXX 


13.6 With regard to accused Aftab Ahmad Shah (A-3), evidence which has been pressed into service in 
order to prima facie show that this accused had committed offences u/s 39 and 40 UAPA, are certain 
documents recovered from the house of this accused have been relied upon to establish this offence. 


13.6.1 D-173 which is the confessional statement of accused. 


13.6.2 At the outset, | have to observe that D-173 which is a disclosure statement of A-3 has to be 
disregarded as inadmissible, it being a confession made to the police. 


66 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


13.6.3 Documents D-9/8, D-919 and D-9G: D-9/9 is a part of seizure memo where at sl. no. 25 is reflected a 
document titled "List of active militants of different outfits operating in valley". This document is D-9G. 
On being inquired, it was submitted that this list was prepared by the government and there is no 
explanation why the accused was in possession of this list of active militants of LeT and HM. As there is no 
explanation for the _possession of this document, it has to be taken that this document was obtained in order 
to further the activities of terrorist organizations. 


13.6.4 Then comes the letter of LeT which is D-9a: It is on the letterhead of LeT and the writer of the letter 
stated that he had tried many times to contact the addressee but could not contact him and therefore, he was 
forced to \write this letter. It is further stated that a friend of the writer is ill and desperately needs 
Rs.5,000/- and if the recipient is not able to do so as an assistance, then he may give it as a loan. It is signed 
as Gaznavi and the phone number of the said person is available at the end of the letter. 


13.6.5 Then there are two photographs D-9b and D-9c: In one of the photograph, A-3 is being seen with 


accused Syed Salahuddin and in another, he is being seen holding AK-47 rifle. As per the report of the 
FSL, these photographs are neither doctored nor morphed. 


13.6.6 Then there is an e-mail D-180/2: However, a plain reading of this mail shows that it does not pertain 
to this accused and itis neither CC or BCC to this accused. 


XXX XXX XXX 


13.7.9 Similarly, photographs D-9b and D-9c can show his association with designated terrorist A-1 or 
that he was engaged in terrorist activities but by virtue of these photographs, it cannot be said that he had 
invited support for any terrorist organization. Furthermore, it is the case of the prosecution itself that this 
accused is an ex-terrorist. Therefore, it was imperative for the prosecution to also bring before the court the 
period during which these photographs were taken. If these photographs were taken during the period when 
the accused was an active terrorist then for the purposes of the present case, they cannot be used as an 
evidence even for showing him to be a member of the terrorist organization. 


13.7.10 Reference was also made to D-75/5 which is a dossier prepared by J&K Police. It has contended 
that this dossier shows that A-3 was involved in furthering the activities of HM and LeT. However, I find that 
a dossier is only a compilation of alleged previous activities and at the most can be of corroborative value 
but it cannot be used as a stand alone evidence to prima facie establish charges u/s 39 UAPA. 


13.8 Then there is charge of section 40 UAPA which is based on document D-9a, contents of which have 
been reproduced above. 


13.8.1 This D-9a was recovered from the possession of this accused and through this letter; financial help 
has been sought by a terrorist of LeT, which is a banned terrorist organization. A question may be raised 
that mere receipt of the letter may not prove that he had financially helped pursuant to this letter. However, 
this letter- was recovered from the possession of this accused and the explanation of the same is to come 
up during the course of trial and it has to be within the knowledge of the accused only. 


13.8.2 I accordingly find that prima facie the prosecution has failed to establish that accused no. 3 had 
committed offence u/s 39 UAPA. However, there is prima facie evidence for framing of charge u/s 40 
UAPA against this accused.” 


(Emphasis supplied) 


295. Reference to these excerpts from the Trial Court order shows that there is sufficient material to, prima facie, 
establish that Shahid-Ul-Islam is involved in activities which can be termed as ‘unlawful’ within the ambit of UAPA. 
Obviously, the Trial Court discarded the disclosure statement of Shahid-Ul-Islam. However, the same is of some 
relevance for the purpose of these proceedings. The said disclosure memo Ex PW 11/6 contains a specific averment 
that the concerned person had joined the AAC (a fact which the association has not denied) and is closely associated 
with separatist leaders. 


296. Likewise, the photograph of Shahid-U]-Islam holding a Rifle has been discarded by the Trial Court from 
consideration for framing charges specifically under Section 39 UAPA but not on account of any doubt regarding its 
veracity. However, the same is of relevance for the purpose of these proceedings as the said photograph (which has 
neither tampered nor morphed as per the concerned FSL report Ex.11/5) serves as a glaring example of the “unlawful 
activities” of Shahid-Ul-Islam, who is a media advisor and spokesperson for the APHC (Mirwaiz), and an active 
participant and proponent of the activities of AAC (headed by Mirwaiz Umar Farooq). Notably, the statement of PW- 
23 examined as a witness in Court in the NIA Case and is annexed as part of Ex. PW11/8 shows that the weapon in 
the photograph is an AK 47 Rifle with an underbarrel grenade launcher. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 67 


297. Moreover, apart from Shaid-Ul]-Islam, though not being chargesheeted by the NIA, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq 
who heads the AAC is also extensively referred to in both the Chargesheets and the order on Charge passed by the 
Trial Court while adverting to activities of separatist organizations. 


298. PW 11 has also relied upon testimony of protected witnesses ‘Alfa and ‘Gama’. The Trial Court while 
framing charges in the NIA case has also relied upon these testimonies. 


299. The testimony of Alfa states that he had been associated with APHC. He names leaders of Hurriyat 
Conference. Amongst them he names Yasin Malik, Umar Farooq, Nayeem Khan, Aiaz Akbar, Peer Saifullah, 
Mehrajuddin and Bitta Karate. This witness had attended 40-50 meetings of Hurriyat conference which were held at 
the house of SAS Geelani. In these meetings, directions were given to organize rallies, anti India demonstrations and it 
was instructed in those meetings that anti India and anti national speeches should be made and slogans should be 
raised. He revealed the real nature of those protest calendars when he stated that they were peaceful only on papers but 
in speeches, exhortation were made to break India, wage war against India in the name of freedom. This witness has 
himself heard said speeches of Yasin Malik, Nayeem Khan, Aiaz Akbar Khandey. This witness states about how 
funds would also be obtained from LOC trade, from Pakistan embassy and ISI and by facilitating admissions for 
professional courses in Pakistan which were given at the recommendations of Hurriyat leaders and that these funds 
were used for organizing stone pelting, for school burning and other anti national activities. He himself has heard the 
names of some Pakistani operatives and officers who were helping the Hurriyat. He himself has met some of them. He 
has named some. Amongst them are Muddasir Cheema of ISI and Javed Mir Rathor of ISI. The association of hurriyat 
with stone pelters and property burners is further stated by this witness when he states that there was a Whatsapp 
group where stone pelters and photos of injured would be shared through electronic media and thereafter, directions 
were issued to provide funds for them. Notably, he has named Mirwaiz Umar Farooq as one of the Hurriyat leaders 
who was involved in the above mentioned activities. 


300. Witness Gamma had deposed that he was involved with Hurriyat leaders such as Shahid-Ul]-Islam and used 
to devise plans to protest against security forces, pelt stones against encounters and indulge in other activities for 
separation of J & K from the UOI. He joined Hurriyat and was a part of many anti India protests and demonstrations 
alongwith various leaders of Hurriyat including Yaseen Malik, Peer Saifulla, Mehrazuddin, Bitta Karate, Aiaz Akbar 
Khandey. He states that he has many photographs with these people in those protests. He stated that leaders of 
Hurriyat namely SAS Geelani, Nayeem Khan, Peer Saifulla, Yasin Malik etc. would instigate them to organize 
protests and demonstrations against India as well as security forces and ask them to instigate people to burn 
government properties and damage properties and during encounters, encouraged people to pelt stones upon the 
security forces to help the terrorists and directions were issued about how these acts were to be done. This witness 
further states that after the killing of terrorist Burhan Wani in the year 2016, this leadership of Hurriyat / JRL had 
asked for protests in entire Kashmir, for arson, for targeting security forces and for pelting stones. The execution of 
this scheme was assigned to Mehrazuddin (Kalwal). He states that he is an eye witness to it. This witness further states 
that funds were collected by Hurriyat and JRL and these funds were used to organize stone pelting, to damage 
property, to organize assaults on security forces and for funding families of slain terrorists. He also refers to Umar 
Farooq as being involved in these activities with SAS Geelani and Yasin Malik. 


301. Also, notably, the Accused Yaseen Malik in NIA Case No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI stands convicted vide 
judgment dated 19.05.2022 passed by the Special Judge, NIA and sentenced vide order dated 25.05.2022. The order 
on sentence has been filed as Ex.PW 11/11 in these proceedings. The conviction of one of the co-accused adds weight 
to the version of the government. 


vii. Social Media activities of the Association 


302. Apart from the evidence led with regard to cases registered by the J & K Police and the NIA, the government 
has also produced evidence regarding the social media activities of the association and videos of speeches delivered 
by its leaders. PW-10 Inspector Liyaqat Ali, who is the Incharge of the social media cell at CID Headquarters has 
specifically been examined in this regard. The witness deposed that AAC has supported terrorist organisations like 
Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) which have played a prominent role in causing violent disturbance in the erstwhile State of J & 
K and has also openly paid tributes to the terrorists killed by the Security Forces. It is also stated that AAC and its 
leaders had also paid tributes to Afzal Guru and Maqbool Bhat and called for shutdowns in protest on their death 
anniversary. It is further stated that one of the wings of AAC is 'Al Umar Mujahideen’ which is a listed terrorist 
organisation in the UAPA and some of its erstwhile members are also listed terrorists which leaves no doubt about the 
objects and intents of the proclaimed organisation. 


303. It is stated that Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, Chairman, AAC has delivered various secessionist speeches for 
Kashmir at various national and international forums which were uploaded on YouTube Channel maintained in the 
name of ‘Mirwaiz Manzil’ and from a verified page of Mirwaiz Umar Farooq on Facebook and as were obtained by 
CID, Kashmir from the said Facebook page and YouTube Channel which are preserved in a Compact Disk (CD) and 
were provided to Central Government before preparing of the brief note. Details of the links of the abovesaid 
provocative speeches delivered by Mirwaiz Umar Farooq have been given in the affidavit. It is stated that the videos 
were obtained electronically and requisite certificate u/s 63(4) of the Bhartiya Sakhshiya Adhiniyam, 2023 has also 


68 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


been filed alongwith the affidavit which is marked as Ex. PW-10/3. 


304. It is stated that from the investigations and input received by him and his team and with his personal 
experience gained during the course of his service, he can state that it is manifest that AAC and its leaders have been 
actively and continuously but covertly and discreetly working for secession of J & K from the UOI and Cession of the 
territory of J & K to Pakistan which is apparent from the speeches filed along with the affidavit and are obviously 
against the national interest and integrity of the nation and have promoted feelings of enmity and hatred in the masses 
against the Government of India and hence, are acting in a manner prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
sovereignty of the UOI. Hence, the ban imposed upon the organisation is necessary and correct. 


305. PW-10 relied upon a Compact Disc (CD) and a pen drive containing Nine (9) videos of Mirwaiz Umer 
Farooq containing secessionist speeches; true transcripts of the speeches of Mirwaiz Umer Farooq which have been 
exhibited as Ex.PW10/1 to PW10/2. 


306. During the course of deposition, the witness categorically stated that the said videos are already uploaded on 
various social media channels/platforms and there are various anti-national elements who keep proliferating/ sending 
these videos so as to increase their circulation and accessibility. This is done to create an inimical atmosphere. He 
also stated that the videos which have been referred to in paragraph 6 & 7 of his affidavit are of the period 2011-2019. 


307. The nature of the activities of the concerned association becomes clear from the perusal of the said speeches. 
The relevant extracts/abstracts of the videos, which are also pointed out by PW-10, are as under:- 


Ss. Name_of document & Particulars Period 
No. | Original Exhibit No. 


Video Description | Transcripts (Translated to English when 


required) 

1. One CD and Pendrive | 1_Mirwaiz Umar “Dear friends I would like to thank Havard | Between 
containing 9 videos | Farooq advocating | Pakistan forum for giving me_ the | 2011 to 
downloaded from social | for plebiscite/ self | opportunity to speak to you. I would have | 2019 as 
media including Facebook | determination in very much like to be amongst you to | deposed by 
and YouTube channels of | Kashmir interact and share my views and concern. | the witness 
the AAC called ‘Mirwaiz As I speak to you, I have once again been 
Manzil’. placed under house arrest for the past one 


month. Arbitrary curbs and restrictions are 
regular feature of state against me. During 
the past 27 years at whim and will of the 
State.... in defiance of all international laws 
and violation of basic human rights. I am 
repeatedly arrested and detained and even 
prevented from offering Friday prayers. 
For the past 6 years I have not been 
allowed to offer Eid prayers. My passport 
stands impounded for many years now to 
prevent me for reaching out to the world 
community. Same treatment is meted out to 
all leadership and political activists in 
Kashmir by the Indian state who challenges 
the status quo on Kashmir and strive for 
the resolution of this long-standing dispute 
of Kashmir in UNSC in accordance with 
the promise made by council that of giving 
the people of Kashmir basic right, the 
right to self-determination to decide their 
destiny. 


eer 


The best way to address our political 
aspirations is that the UN be pro-active 
and honour its commitments made to the 
people of J&K through various resolutions 
of holding the referendum of self- 
determination or to get the issue on the 
table for imaginative solutions. Among the 
three stakeholders namely India, Pakistan 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


69 


and the representative of people of J&K.” 


On removal of 
Article 370 (in 
Kashmiri 
language) 


“\..Whether we talk about Article 370 or 
Section 35A the issue and aim are that the 
government wants to transform 
demography of the state, which the Indian 
government is trying to dilute and scrap 
away since 1947. The government is 
denying the reality that it is the foundation 
of Kashmir's association with India. It is 
the duty and_ responsibility of the 
leadership who have accorded with the 
India to protect the demography and the 
constitutional rights of the state. This is the 
article of the faith for such leaders, 
insinuating towards mainstream leaders. 
He in his speech has said that a number of 
writ petitions have been put before the 
Supreme Court of India and it is the duty 
and responsibility of the mainstream 
leaders to defend tooth and nail to protect 
the existing stand. Our stance is clear 
whatever steps India takes, military or 
otherwise won't affect disputed nature of 
Kashmir as recognized by the world... 


Mourning terrorists 


“\..Kashmiris are being  brutallykilled, 
youth are being massacred. and the entire 
community is being held hostage by might 
of state forces. Its shameful that the 
government and the army are dubbing them 
as terrorists, OGWs or sympathizers of 
terrorists. [Amid the speech, the public 
were shouting slogans that state-sponsored 
terrorism be stopped, be stopped, this is not 
acceptable. Mazloom ka qatil-aam band 
karo (stop innocent killings; Shuhda ke 
waris zinda hai (the heirs of martyrs are 
alive); Hum kya chahta Azaadi (We want 
freedom; Allah-u-Akbar (Allah is great) 
and stop genocide of Kashmiris; killing of 
vouth Ya tamasha nahi hai ya matam sahi 
hai (this is not drama this mourning is 


Jjustified)]...””. 


Call for strike. 


“...the leadership is extremely concerned 
about the prevailing scenario in valley and 
we are hear (sic) to apprise the general 
public that our freedom struggle will 
continue and we have given a call to 
observe strike (Band call) for tomorrow 
and the ensuing July 13th 


anniversary day of 1931 martyrs...” 


Freedom Struggle 
(Flanked by Yasin 
Malik). 


BG 


He said they are not scared of jail/arrests 
and under no duress can be suppressed 
from their goal of resolution of Kashmir 
issue. They claim the Kashmiri movement 
indigenous and not sponsored, driven by 
the people's desire for justice and 


70 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : 


EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


resolution to the Kashmir dispute. They 
reject the idea that they're fighting for 
money, pointing to the sacrifices made by 
Kashmiris, including those jailed, injured, 
or killed. They said that we are determined 
to continue our freedom struggle. 


Call to intensify 
anti-national 
activities. 


“We Are witnessing how in Kashmir, 
bullets are being fired on unarmed 
civilians, tear gas and pellets are being 
used. That's why we've given a call for a 
program that will continue until the 
oppression and atrocities stop, until the 
rights of Kashmiris are addressed, and 
until the Kashmir issue is resolved 
according to the will and consent of the 
local people. The struggle of the people of 
Jammu Kashmir will not only continue 
but will intensify. We also appeal to the 
public.” 


Announcing Rally 
in support of self- 
determination 
(partially in 
Kashmiri 
language) 


Kounayakounayasherayasheraya (who has 
come, the lion has come), Pakistan se 
rishta kia Lai-ilahi-illa-la(what relations 
we owe to Pakistan, is religious as we 
supplicate to one God) Amid the slogans, 
Mirwaiz Umar Farooq _ highlighted 
sacrifices and the struggles of the Kashmiri 
people and_ their desire for  self- 
determination. He said after Eid, AAC is 
going to organize a big rally in support of 
our birth right ie right to self- 
determination. He said and requested all 
the people to participate and support the 
movement. He in his speech said that their 
freedom struggle is a pious mission and 
their end goal is nothing less than Azadi. 
He hailed and prayed for the sacrifices 
rendered by the people (Jawans) and the 
repressions and suppressions endured by 
the public. He underscored the mission and 
asked the people to remain stead-fast with 
unflinching determination in their freedom 
struggle. He said how innocent people are 
being killed in South Kashmir and 
reminded them that this movement has been 
nurtured with the blood of these innocent 
people.” 


Spreading 
disaffection against 
India 


Amid un-deciphered slogans, Mirwaiz 
Umar Farooq in the vicinity of Jamia 
Masjid Srinagar during a gathering said, 
the state has orchestrated a_ strategic 
crackdown against students irrespective of 
gender or age. In a state sponsored 
terrorism, teargas shells, bullets are 
pierced to unarmed and innocent people. 
The cities, towns and villages have been 
cracked-down and not scores but thousands 
of forces and police have been deployed. 
The state has been transferred into police 
state and all rights whether religious, 
political or human rights have been 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 71 


subjugated. Le also said that the Jamia 
Masjid Srinagar has been continuously put 
under siege and I have been house arrested 
and released just 15 minutes before the 
prayer time. All roads leading to Jamia 
Masjid have been blocked. 


ad 


ह Glorifying slain 
terrorists as | /....] 


Martyrs Today 4th generation of the Kashmir is on 


streets and government is thinking that by 
force they can suppress the aspirations of 
the people. Government is completely 
responsible for these killings as they are 
compelling youth to take the path of armed 
resistance. By citing the example of 
Shaheed Burhan Muzaffar Wani (killed 
terrorist) Mirwaiz Umar Frooq said that 
you can see the individuals who have 
joined armed resistance were subjected to 
police/army atrocities which compelled 
them to join the armed struggle. 


pad 


(Emphasis supplied) 
308. The aforesaid videos recovered by Social Media cell of the CID, were also submitted to this Tribunal in a CD 
and a pen drive alongwith transcripts. The speeches of Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, the chief protagonist of the proscribed 
association, vociferously advocates and endorses the separation of J & K from territory of India and its secession from 
the UOI, and further instigate/provoke youth and groups to take actions towards this object. In the said speeches the 
sovereignty and territorial unity of India has been sought to be seriously undermined, feelings of 
discontent/disaffection towards India have been sought to be provoked. 


viii. Authenticity of Electronic Evidence 
309. The videos on the social media handles of the association/ its leader are quite relevant as they give an insight 
into the activities of the association. 


310. The Union Witness, PW 10 has filed his own affidavit under Section 63 of the Bhartiya Sakshya 
Adhiniyam, 2023. Even otherwise, this Tribunal has already opined based on the judgment of the Supreme Court in 
Jamaat-e-Islami (supra) that the rigours of the Evidence Act, and by necessary implication, the Adhiniyam of 2023 
cannot apply in toto to these proceedings and the provisions have to be taken recourse to only as far as practicable. 


311. Also, during the course of arguments, the videos were played before this Tribunal from their original 
URLs/links on the World Wide Web (internet) and the contents of the same were displayed / viewed first hand by the 
Tribunal from the social media handles attributed to the association/ its leader, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq on YouTube 
and Facebook. It is noted that the said Facebook page operated in the name of Mirwaiz Ummar Farooq, is a verified 
page with more than 1.4 lakh followers. As such, the ‘primary evidence’ has been perused by this Tribunal. 


312. In this regard, it is noteworthy that Section 57° of the Adhiniyam provides for what is ‘Primary Evidence’. 
313. Section 63 (1) of the Adhiniyam which is substantially in pari materia in principle with Section 65B of the 


7 Primary evidence. 

Primary evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection of the Court. 

[....J 

Explanation 4.--Where an electronic or digital record is created or stored, and such storage occurs 
simultaneously or sequentially in multiple files, each such file is primary evidence. 

Explanation 5.--Where an electronic or digital record is produced from proper custody, such 
electronic and digital record is primary evidence unless it is disputed. 

Explanation 6.--Where a video recording is simultaneously stored in electronic form and transmitted 
or broadcast or transferred to another, each of the stored recordings is primary evidence. 


Explanation 7.--Where an electronic or digital record is stored in multiple storage spaces in a computer resource, 
each such automated storage, including temporary files, is primary evidence. 


72 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Indian Evidence Act (though providing for additional requirements) provides that: 


“notwithstanding anything contained in this Adhiniyam, any information contained in an electronic record 
which is printed on paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or magnetic media or semiconductor 
memory which is produced by a computer or any communication device or otherwise stored, recorded or 
copied in any electronic form (hereinafter referred to as the computer output) shall be deemed to be also a 
document, if the conditions mentioned in this section are satisfied in relation to the information and 
computer in question and shall be admissible in any proceedings, without further proof or production of the 
original, as evidence or any contents of the original or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence 
would be admissible.” 


314. This is an enabling provision rather than a restrictive one. It allows for admissibility in evidence of any 
information which may have been stored in a computer or other device but is produced before a Court in electronic 
media such as a CD or Pen Drive for the sheer convenience in production of such media and sheer inconvenience in 
production of the actual computer or device. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Arjun Panditrao Khotkar v. Kailash 
Kushanrao Gorantyal, (2020) 7 SCC 1 has held as under: 


“73.2. The clarification referred to above is that the required certificate under Section 65-B(4) is 
unnecessary if the original document itself is produced. This can be done by the owner of a laptop 
computer, computer tablet or even a mobile phone, by stepping into the witness box and proving that the 
device concerned, on which the original information is first stored, is owned and/or operated by him. In 
cases where the “computer” happens to be a part of a “computer system” or “computer network” and it 
becomes impossible to physically bring such system or network to the court, then the only means of providing 
information contained in such electronic record can be in accordance with Section 65-B(1), together with the 
requisite certificate under Section 65-B(4).” 


315. The existence of the speeches/videos (as referred to in the deposition of PW-10, and as perused by this 
Tribunal), have not been controverted or denied by the association. The implications flowing therefrom as regards the 
activities of the association, have been rightly set out in the deposition of PW-10. 


ix. Foreign funding 


316. As per the background note, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq has received significant fund from Pakistan for increasing 
activities of secessionist groups and also for distribution of relief among family members of terrorists. This allegation 
has not been denied by the association in its reply. The first chargesheet filed in NIA No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI also 
mentions that Hurriyat Conference, have been acting in connivance with the active militants of proscribed terrorist 
organisations, viz. Hizb-ul-Mujahideen (HM), Dukhtaran-e-Millat, Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and other terrorist 
organisations/ associates/ gangs for raising, receiving and collecting funds domestically and abroad through various 
illegal channels, including hawala, for funding separatist and terrorist activities in J & K through the funds so 
collected and as such have entered into a larger criminal conspiracy for causing disruption in the Kashmir Valley by 
way of pelting stones on the security forces, systematically burning of schools, damage to public property and waging 
war against India. Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, the head of AAC is the leader of one of the constituents of the APHC. 
Shahid-Ul-Islam, who is involved in the activities of AAC has been chargesheeted in the aforesaid case and charges 
have also been framed against him. The above given facts give an insight as to the activities of AAC/ its members, the 
nexus thereof with nefarious elements from across the border, and substantiates the conclusions drawn in the 
notification dated 11.03.2025 issued under Section 3(1) of the UAPA. 


317. This Tribunal is conscious that the veracity of the contents of the aforesaid chargesheet/s filed by NIA and J 
& K Police, is required to be established at trial in the said cases. However, for the purpose of these proceedings, 
the said evidence is in the nature of relevant material and liable to be considered, in terms of the dicta laid down by the 
Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra). 


318. As mandated in terms of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (Supra), this tribunal 
has examined the material cited by the Central Government for the purpose of making an “objective assessment” for 
the purpose of these proceedings and to assess whether the same supports the declaration made under Section 3(1) of 
UAPA vide the notification dated 11.03.2025. 


x. Intelligence reports as regards activities of the Association 


319. Further, I have also perused the intelligence/confidential reports which are part of the sealed envelope 
submitted by PW-12 alongwith his evidence. As noted aforesaid, the disclosure thereof would be detrimental to the 
larger public interest and security of the State. In the circumstances, this Tribunal has allowed submitting of the said 
documents in a sealed cover. These documents give comprehensive insights and details as to the unlawful activities 
and separatist endeavours of AAC, carried out in intimate collaboration with anti-India factions in Pakistan. The 
efforts to foster the separation of J & K from India, to subvert the sovereignty of India, to inflame local sentiments, 
and to propagate violence are elucidated in the said materials/documents. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 73 


320. Thus, the Central Government has been able to make out a cogent case in support of impugned notification 
dated 11.03.2025 for declaring the association i.e. AAC, as a banned association. As noted hereinabove, the evidence 
adduced by the Central Government inter alia comprises (i) evidence of 10 officers from the Police Department of the 
UT of J&K, who have deposed in respect of 11 FIRs against the chief protagonist of the association and other 
members, on account of his various incidents/actions as referred to hereinabove; (ii) evidence in the form of 
investigation conducted in NIA No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI which has been set out in the detailed chargesheet filed by 
the NIA. Charges have also been framed by the concerned NIA Court pursuant to the said chargesheet vide order 
dated 16.03.2022; (111) evidence in the form of affidavit filed on behalf of the NIA in support of the documents and 
photographs seized from Shahid-Ul-Islam; (iv) evidence in the form of videos containing speeches rendered by 
Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, the chief protagonist of the association which brings out the secessionist agenda of the 
association and the fact that the association has sought to seriously undermine the sovereignty and integrity of India. 
(v) Evidence in the form of intelligence reports/memo furnished by the security agencies regarding the activities of the 
association, with precise details as to the inimical and unlawful activities. 


321. As opposed to this, the association has miserably failed to adduce any evidence to rebut the voluminous 
evidence/material placed on record by the Central Government despite elaborate opportunities afforded to it. I have 
already noted the relevant factual background regarding the failure on the part of the association to adduce any 
material to show cause against the declaration, and instead consciously refrain from participating in these proceedings. 


322. The alleged religious and philanthropic activities of the Association (which have not been proved in these 
proceedings) would not undermine or condone/cancel the highly objectionable “unlawful activities of the 
Association”. As noticed in Jamat-E-Islami Hind (supra), in the very nature of things, such “unlawful activities” are 
carried out in a clandestine manner and very often under the camouflage of the so called religious and philanthropic 
endeavours. As such, the reference in the reply filed on behalf of the Association to such activities, has no bearing on 
the finding rendered hereinabove, especially, since the Association has chosen not to appear/participate in these 
proceedings despite having entered appearance initially and filing its reply. The evidence adduced by the Central 
Government overwhelmingly corroborates/justifies the basis and rationale of the action taken against the Association. 


323. So far as the ‘public wtinesses’ who have submitted their affidavits in favour of the association are 
concermed, none of these individuals has provided any details of their association with AAC and no material has been 
placed by these individuals to counter the voluminous evidence produced on behalf of the Union of India regarding 
the “unlawful activities” being carried out by the members of the association. In these circumstances, the affidavits, 
being identically worded, do not deserve any consideration by this Tribunal and ought to be disregarded. 


CONCLUSION 


324. From the elaborate material/evidence placed on record in these proceedings, this Tribunal finds that there is 
ample justification to declare AAC as an unlawful association under the UAPA. Moreover, given the nature of 
activities of the association, the Central Government was justified in taking recourse to the proviso to Section 3 (3) of 
the UAPA. 


325. Thus, this Tribunal having followed the procedure laid down in the UAPA and its Rules and having 
independently and objectively appreciated and evaluated the material and evidence on record, is of the firm and 
considered view that there is sufficient cause for declaring AAC as an unlawful association under Section 3(1) of the 
UAPA, vide the notification dated 11.03.2025. Thus, an order is passed under Section 4 (3) of the UAPA confirming 
the declaration made in the notification bearing no. S.O. 1115(E) published in the official gazette on 11.03.2025 
issued under Section 3(1) of the UAPA, 1967. 


(JUSTICE SACHIN DATTA) 
UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL 
SEPTEMBER 03, 2025 ” 
[F. No. 14017/13/2025-NI-MFO] 
RAJEEV KUMAR, Jt. Secy. 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. sasvesk kuma 


SRIVASTAVA 


