रजिस्ट्री de Fe Wete—(T7)04/0007/2003—24 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—24 


The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-01082024-255990 
CG-DL-E-01082024-255990 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग तर -- खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 13] नई दिल्‍ली, बृहस्पतिवार, अगस्त 1, 2024/ श्रावण 10, 1946 (शक) 
No. 13]. | NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, AUGUST 1, 2024/SRAVANA 10, 1946 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके | 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on Ist August, 2024:— 
Bill No. 98 of 2024 
A Bill to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2024. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


Amendment of 2. In section 2 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to 53 of 2005. 
१७००६ as the principal Act),— 


(i) in clause (d), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘Explanation —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified 
that the expression “man made causes” does not include any law and 
order related matter or situation, or any situation arising from a law and 
order related matter or situation;’; 


(ii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(da) “disaster database” means a database which includes disaster 
assessment, fund allocation detail, expenditure, preparedness and 
mitigation plan, risk register according to type and severity of risk and 
such other relevant matters, in accordance with such policy, as may be 
determined by the Central Government;’; 


(iii) in clause (e),— 


(a) in sub-clause (viii), for the words “rehabilitation and 
reconstruction”, the words “rehabilitation, recovery and reconstruction” 
shall be substituted; 


(b) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely: — 


‘Explanation—For the purposes of this clause, the 
expression “disaster management” is inclusive of “disaster risk 
reduction”, that is, the practice of reducing disaster risk through 
systematic effort to analyse and manage the causal facts of disaster 
through— 


(i) reduced exposure to hazard; 


(ii) reduced vulnerability of people, property, infrastructure, 
economic activity, environmental and natural resource; and 


(iii) improved preparedness, resilience and capacity to 
manage and respond to adverse event;’; 


(iv) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(ea) “disaster risk” means the potential loss of life, injury, 
destroyed or damaged property, infrastructure and assets, economic and 
social disruption and environmental degradation, which could occur to 
a system, society or a community ina specific period of time, determined 
probabilistically as a function of hazard, exposure, vulnerability and 
capacity. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this Act, the expression 
“infrastructure” refers to physical structures, facilities, networks, 
systems and assets, which provide services that are essential to the 
social, ecological and economic functioning of a community or 
society;’; 


(v) after clause (g), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(ga) “evacuation” means moving people or assets temporarily to 
safer places before, during or after the occurrence of a hazardous event; 


(gb) “exposure” means the situation of people, buildings, 
infrastructure, production capacities and other tangible human assets, 
the environment and natural resources located in hazard-prone areas. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this clause, the expression 
“hazard-prone areas” means those locations where different hazards are 
known to have occurred or likely to occur; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(gc) “hazard” means a process or phenomenon relating to a disaster 
that may cause— 


(a) loss of life; 

(5) injury or other health impacts; 

(c) damage to property, buildings and infrastructure; 
(d) social and economic disruption; or 

(e) environmental degradation; 


(gd) “High Level Committee” means the Committee constituted 
under section 8B;’; 


(vi) in clause (h), after the words “Zila Parishad”, the words “or 
Autonomous District Council” shall be inserted; 


(vii) in clause (7), after the word “situation”, the words “including the 
provisioning of disaster-resilient infrastructure” shall be inserted; 


(viii) after clause (/), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘Ga) “National Crisis Management Committee” means the 
Committee constituted under section 8A;’; 


(ix) after clause (/), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(/a) “National Policy” means a statement of guiding principles, 
and broad course of actions adopted by the Government at the national 
and state level in pursuit of,— 


(a) national objectives of reducing disaster risk and loss; 
(6) improving preparedness; and 
(c) ensuring resilient recovery from disaster;’; 

(x) for clause (m), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(m) “preparedness” means the knowledge and capacity of 
Government, response and recovery organisation, community and 
individual to anticipate, respond to and recover from threatening disaster 
situation or disaster;’; 


(xi) after clause (४), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(na) “prevention” means activity and measure to avoid potential 
. . P 
adverse impact of disaster;’; 


(xii) for clause (०), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(o) “reconstruction” means rebuilding and restoration of 
infrastructure, service, building and facility required for the functioning 
of a community affected by a disaster; 


(oa) “recovery” means the restoration or improvement of 
economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets, system 
and activity, of a disaster-affected community; 


(ob) “rehabilitation” means the restoration of basic service, facility 
and capacity for the functioning of a disaster-affected community; 


(oc) “resilience” means the ability of a system, community or 
society exposed to hazards to resist, absorb, respond to and recover from 
the effects of a hazard in a timely and efficient manner and the 
expression “resilient” shall be construed accordingly;’; 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 5. 


Appointment of 
officers and 
other employees 
of National 
Authority. 


Amendment of 
section 6. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(xiii) after clause (9), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(pa) “response” means the action taken directly before, during or 
after a disaster in order to save lives, reduce injury and health impact, 
ensure public safety and meet the basic subsistence needs of the people 
affected;’; 


(xiv) after clause (1), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: — 


‘(u) “Urban Authority” means the Urban Disaster Management 
Authority constituted under sub-section (/) of section 41A; 


(v) “Urban Plan” means the plan for disaster management, 
prepared by the Urban Authority under sub-section (4) of section 41A; 


(w) “vulnerability” means the conditions determined by physical, 
social, economic and environmental factor or process which increase the 
susceptibility of an individual, a community, asset, infrastructure or 
system to the impact of hazard.’. 


3. In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“ (34) The day-to-day functions of the National Authority shall be 
performed by the Vice-Chairperson and in the absence of the Vice-Chairperson, 
by a member designated by the Chairperson or, as the case may be, the 
Vice-Chairperson, of the National Authority.”. 


4. For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


“5. (1) The National Authority may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, specify the number, nature and category of officers and 
other employees, as is necessary to carry out its functions. 


(2) The National Authority may also appoint experts and consultants as 
necessary to perform its functions. 


(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service of officers, other employees, experts and consultants of 
the National Authority, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.”’. 


5. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) for clause (0), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(b) coordinate the preparation and approval of the National 
Plan;”; 


(ii) in clause (i), after the words “take such other measures”, the words 
“which includes providing technical guidance to State Governments and State 
Authorities” shall be inserted; 


(iii) after clause (7), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(k) coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National 
Policy; 


(J) lay down guidelines for preparing disaster management plan by 
different Ministries or Departments of the Central Government and the 
State Authorities; 


(m) provide necessary technical guidance to the State Governments 
and the State Authorities for preparing their disaster management plans in 
accordance with the guidelines laid down by it; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(n) provide necessary advice and technical guidance to different 
Ministries or Departments and agencies of the Government of India, and 
the State Governments regarding mitigation, preparedness, and recovery 
and reconstruction measures; 


(०) take stock of the entire range of disaster risks in the country 
periodically, including emerging disaster risks, and issue updated 
guidance for their mitigation. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby clarified 
that the expression “emerging disaster risks” refer to risks of those 
disasters that may not have taken place, but may occur in future due to 
extreme climate events and other factors as may be determined by the 
National Authority; 


(p) plan and co-ordinate specialised training programmes for 
disaster management for different levels of officers, employees and 
voluntary rescue workers; 


(4) provide necessary technical guidance or give advice to the State 
Authorities, District Authorities and Urban Authorities for carrying out 
their functions under this Act; 


(r) promote general education and awareness in relation to disaster 
management; 


(s) monitor the implementation of the guidelines laid down by the 
National Authority for integrating disaster prevention and mitigation 
measures in the development plans and projects of Ministries or 
Departments of the Government of India; 


(t) undertake disaster preparedness assessment of each State 
periodically, in line with the National Plan and the guidelines laid down 
by it; 


(u) undertake in the aftermath of severe disaster in any State, post 
disaster audit of preparedness and response activities of the State; 


(v) create a national disaster database in accordance with such 
policy as may be determined by the Central Government; 


(w) recommend guidelines for the minimum standards of relief to 
be provided to persons affected by disaster, which may include,— 


(7) the minimum requirements to be provided in the relief 
camps in relation to shelter, food, drinking water, medical cover 
and sanitation; 


(ii) the special provision to be made for widows and orphans; 


(iii) ex gratia assistance on account of loss of life as also 
assistance on account of damage to houses and for restoration of 
means of livelihood; and 


(iv) such other reliefs as the National Authority may deem 
appropriate. ’. 


6. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“8A. (1) The National Crisis Management Committee constituted by the 
Government of India prior to the commencement of the Disaster Management 
(Amendment) Act, 2024, shall be the National Crisis Management Committee 
for the purposes of this Act and act as the nodal body to deal with the major 
disasters which have serious or national ramifications. 


Insertion of new 
sections 8A and 
8B. 


National Crisis 


Management 
Committee. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(2) The National Crisis Management Committee referred to in 
sub-section (/) shall consist of the Cabinet Secretary as Chairperson and such 
other members as may be notified by the Central Government. 


(3) The Chairperson of the National Crisis Management Committee may 
invite any other officer of the Central Government or a State Government for 
taking part in any meeting of such Committee and shall exercise such powers 
and perform such functions as the Central Government may determine. 


(4) The procedure to be followed by the National Crisis Management 
Committee, in exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions, shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


High Level 8B. (/) The High Level Committee constituted by the Government of 

Committee. India prior to the commencement of the Disaster Management (Amendment) 
Act, 2024, shall be the High Level Committee for the purposes of this Act 
which shall provide the financial assistance as envisaged under section 46 to 
the State Governments in the event of a disaster and approve the financial 
assistance for mitigation needs under section 47. 


(2) The High Level Committee referred to in sub-section (/) shall consist 
of the Minister in-charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government having administrative control over the disaster management as 
the Chairperson and such other members as may be notified by the Central 


Government.”. 
Amendment of 7. In section 10 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following 
section 10. sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in 
sub-section (/), the National Executive Committee may,— 


(a) act as the coordinating body for disaster management; 


(6) monitor the implementation of the National Plan and the plans 
prepared by the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India; 


(c) monitor, coordinate and give directions regarding the 
mitigation and preparedness measures to be taken by different 
Ministries or Departments and agencies of the Government of India; 


(d) evaluate the preparedness at all governmental levels for the 
purpose of responding to any threatening disaster situation or disaster 
and provide necessary advice, where necessary, for enhancing such 
preparedness; 


(e) coordinate response in the event of any threatening disaster 
situation or disaster; 


(f) lay down guidelines, or give directions to, Ministries or 
Departments of the Government of India, the State Governments and the 
State Authorities concerned regarding measures to be taken by them in 
response to any threatening disaster situation or disaster; 


(g) require any Ministry or Department or agency of the 
Government to make available to the Central Government or State 
Government such men or material resources as are available with it for 
the purposes of emergency response, rescue and relief; 


(h) advise, assist and co-ordinate the activities of the Ministries or 
Departments of the Government of India, State Governments, statutory 
bodies, other governmental or non-governmental organisations and 
others engaged in disaster management; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(i) in the event of a disaster or a threatening disaster situation 
affecting more than one State, issue directions for:— 


(i) coordination between the States concerned; 
(ii) containment measures as deemed necessary; 


(iii) monitoring and forecasting the effects of the disaster 
across multiple States; 


(iv) deployment of specialised teams, material resources and 
equipment; 


(v) requisitioning of necessary resources and _ technical 
capacities from public and private entities and their 
deployment towards reducing the impact of the disaster; 


(vi) adequate public awareness measures; and 


(vii) coordination of support to individuals and communities 
affected by containment measures; and 


(7) perform such other functions as it may deem appropriate. 


Explanation —F or the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified that 
the expression “containment measures” means the actions and strategies 
adopted at the individual, community, district, State, multi-State or national 
levels aimed at controlling or slowing the spread of a disaster from its initial 
focal area.’. 


8. In section 11 of the principal Act,— Amendment of 
section 11. 


(i) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) The National Authority shall coordinate, in consultation with 
the Central Government and the State Governments and other 
stakeholders in the field of disaster management, for preparation and 
approval of the National Plan having regard to the National Policy.”; 


(ii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(4) The National Authority shall review the National Plan once in 
every three years and update at least once in every five years.” 


9. Sections 12 and 13 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission of 
sections 12 and 13. 

10. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— Amendment of 
section 18. 


(i) for clause (0), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(b) co-ordinate the preparation, and approve the State Plan in 
accordance with the guidelines laid down by the National Authority;”; 


(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ca) approve the District Plan and Urban Plan, prepared by the 
District Authorities and Urban Authorities respectively, in accordance 
with the National Plan and State Plan;”; 


(iii) after clause (h), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(Z) take stock of the entire range of disaster risks in the State, 
periodically including emerging disaster risks, and take necessary 
measures for their mitigation; 


(j) coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National 
Policy, the National Plan and the State Plan; 


Omission of 
section 19. 
Amendment of 
section 20. 


Amendment of 
section 22. 


Amendment of 
section 23. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(k) lay down guidelines for preparation of disaster management 
plan by the Departments of the Government of the State, the District 
Authorities and the Urban Authorities; 


(/) promote general education, awareness and community training 
in regard to the forms of disasters to which different parts of the State 
are vulnerable and the measures that may be taken by such community 
to prevent the disaster, mitigate and respond to such disaster; 


(m) provide necessary technical assistance or give advice to the 
District Authorities, local authorities and Urban Authorities for 
carrying out their functions effectively; 


(n) provide information to the National Authority relating to 
different aspects of disaster management; 


(०) lay down guidelines for standards of relief to persons affected 
by disasters in the State: 


Provided that such standards shall in no case be less than the 
minimum standards in the guidelines laid down by the National 
Authority in this regard; 


(p) maintain the State disaster database and provide inputs to the 
National disaster database.”’. 


11. Section 19 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
12. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the 


following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(c) the Director General of Police of the State shall be member of the 
State Executive Committee, ex officio.”’. 


13. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) clauses (a) and (c) shall be omitted; 


(ii) in clause (d), for the words “and District Authorities”, the words 
“the District Authorities and the Urban Authorities” shall be substituted; 


(iii) clause (i) shall be omitted; 


(iv) in clause (j), after the words “District Authorities”, the words 
“Urban Authorities,” shall be inserted; 


(v) clause (k) shall be omitted; 


(vi) in clause (m), for the words “District Authority or the local 
authority”, the words “District Authority, Urban Authority or the local 
authority” shall be substituted; 


(vii) clause (n) shall be omitted. 
14. In section 23 of the principal Act,— 


(i) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) The State Authority shall coordinate the preparation of the 
State Plan having regard to the National Plan and guidelines laid down 
by the National Authority, and in consultation with local authorities, 
District Authorities, Urban Authorities and the people’s representatives 
as the State Authority may deem fit.”; 


(ii) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The State Plan shall be approved by the State Authority.”; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(iii) in sub-section (4), for clause (a), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“(a) the exposure of different parts of the State to different 
hazards and vulnerability of its people, assets, infrastructure, livelihood 
and economic activity to those hazards;”; 


(iv) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(5) The State Authority shall review the State Plan once in every 
three years and update atleast once in every five years.”. 


15. In section 24 of the principal Act, in clause (e), after the words “any Amendment 
District Authority”, the words “, any Urban Authority” shall be inserted. 22 2000 

16. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (7), the Amendment 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:— section 25. 


“(f) not exceeding two other Members to be appointed by the State 
Government who may be taken from other district level officers, disaster 
management experts and civil society organisation.”. 


17. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the word Amendment 
“annually”, the words “at least once in every two years or earlier as necessary” section 31. 
shall be substituted. 

18. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— es 

section i 


(i) in clause (a), for the words “coordination of actions”, the words 
“coordinate and monitor actions” shall be substituted; 


(ii) clauses (b) and (d) shall be omitted; 
(iii) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ha) notify the Ministries or Departments of the Government of 
India which shall have the responsibility for monitoring, early warning, 
prevention, mitigation, preparedness and capacity building with regard 
to disasters arising from various hazards;”. 
19. In section 36 of the principal Act,— Amendment 


section 36. 
(i) for clause (7), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(f) provide assistance to the National Authority and State 
Government for drawing up mitigation, preparedness and response 
plans, capacity building, data collection and identification and training 
of personnel in relation to disaster management;”; 


(ii) in clause (g), after sub-clause (v), the following sub-clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(vi) carrying out rescue and relief operations in the affected area; 
(vii) assessing the damage from any disaster; and 
(viii) carrying out the rehabilitation and re-construction;”. 
20. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— Amendment 
(i) in clause (a),— al 


(a) after the words “District Authorities”, the words “, Urban 
Authorities” shall be inserted; 


(b) for the words “local authority”, the words “local authorities” 
shall be substituted; 


of 


of 


of 


of 


of 


Amendment of 
section 39. 


Amendment of 
section 41. 


Insertion of new 
section 41A. 


Urban Disaster 
Management 
Authority. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(ii) in clause (6), for the words “and the District Authorities”, the 
words “the District Authorities and the Urban Authorities” shall be 
substituted; 


(iii) in clause (d), for the words “and the District Plans”, the words “, 
the District Plans and the Urban Plans” shall be substituted; 


(iv) in clause (7), for the words “and the District Authorities”, the words 
“the District Authorities and the Urban Authorities” shall be substituted; 


(v) after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ia) notify State-specific hazard-wise nodal Departments, which 
shall have the responsibility for monitoring, early warning, prevention, 
mitigation, preparedness and capacity building with regard to disasters 
arising from those State-specific hazards;”; 


(vi) in clause (7), for the words “or the District Authorities”, the words 
“the District Authorities or the Urban Authorities” shall be substituted; 


(vii) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(k) provide recovery and reconstruction assistance to the victims 
of any disaster; and”. 
f any disaster; and” 


21. In section 39 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in clause (7), for the words “and District Authorities”, the words 
“District Authorities and Urban Authorities” shall be substituted; 


(8) in clause (2), after the words “authorities at the district level”, the 
words “and the Urban Plan by the Urban Authorities” shall be inserted; 


(c) in clause (A), after the words “District Authorities”, the words “or 
the Urban Authorities” shall be inserted. 


22. In section 41 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after clause (d), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(e) prepare a disaster management plan as referred to in section 32.”. 


23. After section 41 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


‘41A. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a separate Urban Disaster Management Authority for 
their State capitals and all cities having a Municipal Corporation, except for 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi and Union territory of Chandigarh. 


(2) The Urban Authority constituted under sub-section (/) shall consist 
of the following, namely:— 


(7) the Municipal Commissioner—Chairperson, ex officio; 


(ii) the District Collector of the District concerned—Vice 
Chairperson, ex officio; and 

(iii) such other members, with such pay and allowances as may 
be determined by the State Government—members. 


(3) The Urban Authority may have a separate Secretariat at such place 
in the district as may be determined by the State Government. 


(4) The Urban Authority shall be responsible for preparation of Urban 
Plan, which shall be approved by the State Authority. 


(5) The Urban Authority shall be responsible for coordinating the 
implementation of the Urban Plan. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(6) The other functions and powers and such other matters relating to 
the Urban Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by the State 
Government. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the expression 
“Municipal Corporation” means a Municipal Corporation as referred to in 
clause (c) of article 243Q of the Constitution. ’. 


24. For section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“43. (1) The Central Government shall provide the National Institute of 
Disaster Management with such officers, other employees and consultants, 
as it considers necessary, for carrying out its functions. 


(2) The National Institute may recruit experts as per norms approved 
by the Central Government to perform such functions as provided in 
sub-section (9) of section 42. 


(3) The salaries, allowances payable to officers and employees and the 
other terms and conditions of their service shall be such as may be 
prescribed.”. 


25. In Chapter VIII of the principal Act, for the heading, the heading 
“DISASTER RESPONSE FORCE” shall be substituted. 


26. After section 44 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“44A. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a State Disaster Response Force for the purpose of 
specialist response to a threatening disaster situation or disaster. 


(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the State Disaster Response 
Force shall be constituted in such manner, with such functions and the terms 
and conditions of service of the members of such Force shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the State Government concerned.”. 


27. In section 46 of the principal Act,— 


(i) in sub-section (/), for the words “for meeting any threatening 
disaster situation or disaster”, the words “for meeting different aspects of 
disaster management” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) The Fund constituted under sub-section (/), shall be applied 
in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Central 
Government in consultation with the National Authority.”. 


28. In section 47 of the principal Act,— 


(7) in sub-section (/), for the words “for projects exclusively for the 
purpose of mitigation”, the words “for meeting disaster mitigation needs” 
shall be substituted; 


(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) The Fund constituted under sub-section (/), shall be applied 
in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Central 
Government in consultation with the National Authority.”. 


29. In section 48 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


11 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 43. 
Officers, 
employees, 
experts and 
consultants of 
National 
Institute. 


Amendment of 
Chapter VIII. 


Insertion of new 
section 44A. 


State Disaster 
Response Force. 


Amendment of 
section 46. 


Amendment of 
section 47. 


Amendment of 
section 48. 


Amendment of 
section 50. 


Amendment of 
section 51. 


Amendment of 
section 52. 


Amendment of 
section 56. 


Amendment of 
section 59. 


Amendment of 
section 60. 


Insertion of new 
section 60A. 


Power of Central 
Government or 
State 
Government to 
take action in 
relation to nature 
of hazard and 
punishment for 
its 
contravention. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


“(2) The State Government shall ensure that the funds established— 


(i) under clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (/) are available to the 
State Executive Committee and the State Authority respectively and 
are applied as per the guidelines issued by the Central Government in 
consultation with the National Authority; 


(ii) under clauses (b) and (d) of sub-section (/) are available to 
the District Authority.”. 


30. In section 50 of the principal Act,— 


(7) in the opening portion, after the words “or the District Authority”, 
the words “or the Urban Authority” shall be inserted; 


(ii) in clause (0), after the words “or District Authority”, the words “or 
Urban Authority” shall be inserted. 


31. In section 51 of the principal Act,— 


(i) in clause (a), after the words “or District Authority”, the words “or 
Urban Authority” shall be inserted; 


(ii) in clause (6), after the words “or the District Authority”, the words 
“or the Urban Authority” shall be inserted. 


32. In section 52 of the principal Act, for the words “or the District 
Authority”, the words “, the District Authority or the Urban Authority” shall be 
substituted. 


33. Section 56 of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section (/) 
thereof, and after sub-section (/) as so numbered, the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“(2) Notwithstanding any action under sub-section (/), it shall be 
lawful for the State Government on its own or on the directions given by the 
Central Government to take such disciplinary action under the relevant rules, 
against any officer who ceases or refuses to perform or withdraws himself 
from the duties of his office or on grounds of insubordination or dereliction 
of duty during a disaster: 


Provided that the action taken by the State Government shall not be 
inconsistent with the directions given by the Central Government.”. 


34. In section 59 of the principal Act, for the word and figures “and 56”, the 
words, brackets and figures “and sub-section (/) of section 56” shall be 
substituted. 


35. In section 60 of the principal Act, in clause (a) and clause (5), after the 
words “the District Authority”, the words “, the Urban Authority” shall be 
inserted. 


36. After section 60 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“60A.(/) The Central Government or the State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, require any person to take any action or 
refrain from taking any action, in relation to the nature of the hazard, which 
in the opinion of the Central Government or the State Government, as the 
case may be, is required for reducing the impact of a disaster. 


[Part पी 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) Any notification issued under this section shall be valid for a period 
specified therein or six months, whichever is earlier. 


(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this section shall be liable 
to pay a penalty as specified in the notification of the Central Government or 
the State Government, as the case may be: 


Provided that the penalty referred to in this sub-section shall not 
exceed ten thousand rupees.”. 


37. In section 61 of the principal Act, the words “compensation and” shall be 
omitted. 


38. In section 63 of the principal Act, after the words “or District Authority”, 
the words “or Urban Authority” shall be inserted. 


39. In section 64 of the principal Act, after the words “or the District 
Authority”, the words “or the Urban Authority” shall be inserted. 


40. In section 65 of the principal Act,— 


(i) in sub-section (/), in the opening portion, after the words “or 
District Authority”, the words “or Urban Authority” shall be inserted; 


(ii) in sub-section (3), for clause (a), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“(a) “resources” includes human and material resources, and 
equipment;”. 
41. In section 67 of the principal Act, for the words “or a District Authority’, 
the words “, a District Authority or an Urban Authority” shall be substituted. 


42. In section 68 of the principal Act, for the words “or the District 
Authority” occurring at both the places, the words “, a District Authority or an 
Urban Authority” shall be substituted. 


43. In section 69 of the principal Act, after the words “State Executive 
Committee”, the words “National Authority, State Authority, District Authority or 
Urban Authority” shall be inserted. 


44. In section 71 of the principal Act, for the words “or District Authority”, 
the words “, District Authority or Urban Authority” shall be substituted. 


45. In section 73 of the principal Act, after the words “the District Authority” 
occurring at both the places, the words “or the Urban Authority” shall be inserted. 


46. In section 74 of the principal Act, for the words “or District Authority”, 
the words “, District Authority or Urban Authority” shall be substituted. 


47. In section 75 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(aa) the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of 
service of officers, other employees, experts and consultants of the 
National Authority under sub-section (3) of section 5;”; 


(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ca) the procedure to be followed by the National Crisis 
Management Committee in exercise of its powers and discharging of 
its functions under sub-section (4) of section 8A;”; 


(iii) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(ea) the salaries, allowances and the other terms and conditions 
of service of officers and other employees of the National Institute 
under sub-section (3) of section 43;”. 


Amendment 
section 61. 


Amendment 
section 63. 


Amendment 
section 64. 


Amendment 
section 65. 


Amendment 
section 67. 


Amendment 
section 68. 


Amendment 
section 69. 


Amendment 
section 71. 


Amendment 
section 73. 


Amendment 
section 74. 


Amendment 
section 75. 


of 


of 


of 


of 


of 


of 


of 


of 


of 


of 


of 


Insertion of new 
section 76A. 


Power of 
National 
Authority to 
make 
regulations. 


Amendment of 
section 77. 


Amendment of 
section 78. 


Amendment of 
section 79. 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


48. After section 76 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“76A. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 76, the National 
Authority, with the previous approval of the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations, other than regulations 
made under section 76, consistent with the provisions of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.”. 


49. In section 77 of the principal Act, after the words “National Institute of 
Disaster Management”, the words “and the National Authority” shall be inserted. 


50. In section 78 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (f), the 
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(fa) the powers, functions and other matters relating to Urban 
Authority under sub-section (6) of section 41A; 


(fb) the manner of constitution of State Disaster Response Force, its 
functions and the terms and conditions of service of members of such Force 
under sub-section (2) of section 44A;”. 


51. In section 79 of the principal Act, after sub-section (/) and the proviso 
thereunder, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), if any 
difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act as amended by 
the Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2024, the Central Government 
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this sub-section after 
the expiry of a period of three years from the date of commencement of the 
Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2024.”. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 (the Act) was enacted to provide for the 


effective management of disasters and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


2. The main purpose of the Act was to put in place necessary institutional 
mechanisms for drawing up and monitoring the implementation of disaster 
management plans, ensuring measures by various wings of Government for 
prevention of and mitigating the effects of disasters and for undertaking a holistic, 
coordinated and prompt response to any disaster or threatening disaster situation. 


3. For achieving the said purpose, certain Authorities and Committees were 
established at the national level, state level and District level. In addition, the Act 
enumerated the measures to be taken up by the Ministries and Departments of the 
Government of India and mandated that every Ministry or Department would carry 
out the nodal responsibilities in respect of disaster management. 


4. Due to the constant endeavour of the Central Government for 
mainstreaming the Disaster Management in the development plans, aligning with 
the recommendations of the Fifteenth Finance Commission, learnings from past 
disasters, and experience gained during the implementation of the Act, the Disaster 
Management Act, 2005 has been reviewed in consultation with all stakeholders 
including State Governments. 


5. In view of above, it has become necessary to amend certain provisions of 
the Act in the form of a Bill, namely, the Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill, 
2024 which, inter alia, provides for the following, namely:— 


(i) to bring more clarity and convergence in the roles of Authorities and 
Committees working in the field of disaster management; 


(ii) to provide statutory status to certain pre-Act organisations like the 
National Crisis Management Committee and the High Level Committee; 


(iii) to strengthen the efficient working of the National Disaster 
Management Authority and the State Disaster Management Authorities; 


(iv) to empower the National Disaster Management Authority and the 
State Disaster Management Authorities to prepare the disaster plan at 
national level and state level instead of the National Executive Committee 
and the State Executive Committee; 


(v) to provide for creation of disaster database at national and state 
level; 


(vi) to make provision for constitution of “Urban Disaster Management 
Authority” for State Capital and large cities having Municipal Corporation; 
and 


(vii) to make provision for constitution of “State Disaster Response 
Force” by the State Government. 


6. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in 
the Bill. 


7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The 30th July, 2024. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


Notes on Clauses 


Clause | of the Bill seeks to provide for short title and commencement of the 
proposed legislation. 


Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to modify and substitute some definitions and 
incorporate new definitions in section 2, such as disaster risk, evacuation, Exposure, 
recovery, rehabilitation, resilience, Urban Authority, etc. 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (3A) in section 3 to 
authorise the Vice-Chairperson or any Member of the National Authority to perform 
the day-to-day functions of the Authority. 


Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 5 related to appointment of 
officers, other employees, consultants and experts and to empower the Central 
Government to make rules with respect to their terms and conditions of service. 


Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to substitute clause (b) in sub-section (2) of 
section 6 for assigning the function of coordination of preparation of National Plan 
to the National Authority; to modify clause (7) in sub-section (2) of section 6 to bring 
more clarity on the type of measures to be taken by the National Authority under 
this clause; and to insert new clauses from (4) to (w) in sub-section (2) in section 6 
to bring more clarity on roles of National Authority, by assigning policy, plans and 
guidelines related functions of National Executive Committee and to assign new 
functions to the National Authority. 


Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 8A in section 8, to bring the 
existing National Crisis Management Committee, a nodal body to deal with major 
disasters, under the Act and to insert a new section 8B, to bring the existing 
High Level Committee under the Act, for approval of financial assistance. 


Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (2) in section 10, to bring 
more clarity on roles of National Executive Committee, by retaining coordination 
and response related functions and assigning new functions to it in case of disasters 
or threatening disaster situation affecting more than one State. 


Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (2) in section 11 to make 
provision that the National Authority will coordinate the preparation of the 
National Plan and approve it; and to modify sub-section (4) in section 11 to make 
the review and updation of National Plan, every three years and at least once in five 
years respectively. 


Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to omit sections 12 and 13 related to “Guidelines 
for minimum standards of relief’ and “Relief in loan repayment etc.” respectively. 


Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to modify clause (5) in sub-section (2) of 
section 18 for assigning the function of coordination of preparation of State Plan to 
the State Authority; to insert new clause (ca) in sub-section (2) of section 18, for 
assigning the role of approval of District Plan and Urban Plan, prepared by the 
District Authorities and Urban Authorities respectively, to State Authority; and to 
insert new clauses (7) to (p) in sub-section (2) of section 18 by assigning policy, 
plans and guidelines related functions of State Executive Committee and to assign 
new functions to State Authority. 


Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to omit section 19 related to “Guidelines for 
minimum standards of relief by State Authority”. 


Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to insert new clause (c) in sub-section (2) of 
section 20 making Director General of Police of the State a member of State 
Executive Committee, ex officio. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to omit clauses (a), (2), (0), (४) and (0) in 
sub-section (2) of section 22, as these functions have been transferred to the State 
Authority; and to insert certain words related to Urban Authority in clauses (d), (7) 
and (m) of sub-section (2) of section 22. 


Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 23, 
for assigning the coordination, preparation and approval of State Plan to the State 
Authority; to substitute clause (a) under sub-section (4) in section 23, for including 
hazard and vulnerability profile of different parts of the State in the State Plan; and 
to substitute sub-section (5) of section 23 to make the review and updation of State 
Plan, every three years and at least once in five years. 


Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “any Urban Authority” after the 
words “any District Authority” in clause (e) of section 24 and this amendment is 
consequential in nature. 


Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to modify sub-section (4) of section 31, in order to 
make the periodicity of revision of District Plan at least once in two years or earlier, 
if necessary. 


Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to modify clause (a) of sub-section (2) of 
section 35; to omit clauses (9) and (d) under sub-section (2) of section 35, as these 
functions are covered under section 10 (2) (c) and (d); and to insert new clause (ha) 
in sub-section (2) of section 35, to notify the Ministries or Departments of the 
Government of India for assigning responsibility for monitoring, early warning etc. 
of various hazards. 


Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to substitute clause (7) of section 36 to clearly 
demarcate the functions of National Disaster Management Authority and National 
Executive Committee; and to insert new clauses (vi), (vii) & (viii) after 
sub-clause (v) in clause (g) of section 36, by shifting certain responsibilities of 
Ministries or Department of Government of India towards the National Executive 
Committee. 


Clause 20 of the Bill seeks, inter-alia, to insert new clause (ia) in 
sub-section (2) of section 38, to notify State-specific hazard wise nodal Departments 
for assigning responsibility for monitoring, early warning etc. for State specific 
hazards; and to substitute the existing clause (4) in sub-section (2) in section 38, to 
change “rehabilitation and reconstruction assistance” to “recovery and 
reconstruction assistance”. 


Clause 21 of the Bill seeks, inter-alia, to insert the words “Urban Authorities” 
in clauses (f), (2) and (A) of section 39 and this amendment is consequential in 
nature. 


Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to insert new clause in sub-section (/) after 
clause (d) of section 41, to assign functions regarding preparation of disaster 
management plan to Urban Authority. 


Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 41A to enable State 
Governments to constitute Urban Disaster Management Authority for State capitals 
and cities having Municipal Corporation, with its composition, functions and 
enabling provision for its Secretariat other than National Capital Territory of Delhi 
and Union territory of Chandigarh. 


Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 43 relating to “Officers, 
employees, experts and consultants of National Institute of Disaster Management 
and to empower the Central Government to prescribe their terms and conditions of 
service. 


Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to amend the heading of Chapter VIII to “DISASTER 
RESPONSE FORCE”. 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 44A to enable State 
Government to constitute the State Disaster Response Force for strengthening 
disaster response capability of States. 


Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to substitute certain words in sub-section (/) of 
section 46 related to constitution of National Disaster Response Fund by the Central 
Government for meeting different aspects of disaster management; and further to 
substitute sub-section (2) in section 46 to reflect the role of the laid down guidelines 
in application of Response Fund. 


Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to substitute certain words in sub-section (/) of 
section 47 related to disaster mitigation needs; and further to substitute 
sub-section (2) in section 47 to reflect the role of the laid guidelines in application 
of Mitigation Fund. 


Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (2) of section 48 to reflect 
the role of laid guidelines by the Central Government in application of State Disaster 
Response Fund and State Disaster Mitigation Fund. 


Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “or Urban Authority” after the 
words “or the District Authority” in section 50 and the said amendment is 
consequential in nature. 


Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “or Urban Authority” after the 
words “or the District Authority” in clauses (a) and (5) of section 51 and the said 
amendment is consequential in nature. 


Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to substitute certain words with the words “the 
District Authority or the Urban Authority” in section 52 and the said amendment is 
consequential in nature. 


Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to re-number section 56 as sub-section (/) of 
section 56; and further to insert sub-section (2) in section 56, to empower the State 
Government, on its own or on the directions given by the Central Government, to 
take such disciplinary action against any officer on grounds of insubordination or 
dereliction of duty etc. during a disaster, with a provision that action taken by the 
State Government shall not be inconsistent with the directions given by the Central 
Government in this regard. 


Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to substitute the figures “56” with “sub-section (/) 
of section 56” and the said amendment is consequential in nature. 


Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “the Urban Authority” after the 
words “‘the District Authority” in clause (a) and clause (b) of section 60 and the said 
amendment is consequential in nature. 


Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 60A to empower the Central 
and the State Governments to direct any person to take any action or refrain from 
taking any action for reducing the impact of a disaster and to impose a penalty not 
exceeding ten thousand rupees. 


Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to omit the word "compensation" in section 61, as 
the Governments provide only relief and not compensation to the victims of 
disasters. 


Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “or Urban Authority” after the 
words “or District Authority” in section 63 and the said amendment is consequential 
in nature. 


Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “or the Urban Authority” after 
the words “or the District Authority” in section 64 and the said amendment is 
consequential in nature. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “or Urban Authority” after the 
words “or District Authority” in sub-section (/) of section 65; and to modify 
clause (a) of sub-section (3) of that section to include human and material resources 
and equipment. 


Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “, a District Authority or an 
Urban Authority” for the words “or a District Authority” in section 67 and the said 
amendment is consequential in nature. 


Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “, a District Authority or an 
Urban Authority” for the words “or the District Authority” occurring at both places 
in section 68 and the said amendment is consequential in nature. 


Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “National Authority, State 
Authority, District Authority, Urban Authority” after the words “State Executive 
Committee” in section 69 to enable them to delegate power to their Chairperson. 


Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “, District Authority or 
Urban Authority” for the words “or District Authority” in section 71 and the said 
amendment is consequential in nature. 


Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “or the Urban Authority” after 
the words “the District Authority” occurring at both places in section 73 and the said 
amendment is consequential in nature. 


Clause 46 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “, District Authority or 
Urban Authority” for the words “or District Authority” in section 74 and the said 
amendment is consequential in nature. 


Clause 47 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules in 
certain matters. 


Clause 48 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 76A to empower the 
National Authority also to make regulations. 


Clause 49 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “and by the National Authority” 
after the words “National Institute of Disaster Management” in section 77 for laying 
the regulations made by the National Authority in Parliament. 


Clause 50 of the Bill seeks to empower the State Government to make rules 
in certain matters. 


Clause 51 of the Bill seeks to amend section 79 related to “Power to removal 
of difficulties’’. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM TO THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 


The Bill seeks to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005. The National 
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and National Institute of Disaster 
Management (NIDM) which have been set up under the Disaster Management Act, 
2005 are already in existence. The expenditure of these bodies is met from yearly 
Government Budgetary Support. 


2. The provisions regarding salaries and allowances payable to the officers, 
other employees and consultants of NDMA and NIDM are already in place under the 
Disaster Management Act, 2005 and these provisions are slightly modified without 
any substantive change. These provisions may result in expenditure in the discharge 
of statutory functions of the Government in regular course of business, which would 
be met from yearly budgetary support. However, any financial implication at this 
stage is not quantifiable. 


3. The expenditure for NDMA and NIDM constituted as statutory bodies 
under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 would continue to be met from the yearly 
Budgetary Support. The Budget allocation for financial year 2024-25 of NDMA and 
NIDM is Rs 149.07 crore. Rs. 86.24 crore under Revenue Head, Rs. 52.37 crore 
under the Capital Head and Rs. 10.46 crore under Schemes. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Section 75 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 empowers the Central 
Government to make rules consistent with the provisions of the Act for carrying out 
the provisions of the Act. It is proposed to amend the said section [clause 47 of the 
Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024], so as to make rules in the following 
matters, namely:— 


(a) the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of 
officers, other employees, experts and consultants of the National Authority 
under sub-section (3) of section 5; 


(b) the procedure to be followed by the National Crisis Management 
Committee in exercise of its powers and discharging of its functions under 
sub-section (4) of section 8A; 


(c) the salaries, allowances and the other terms and conditions of service 
of officers and other employees of the National Institute under sub-section (3) 
of section 43. 


2. It is proposed to insert a new section 76A in the Act vide clause 48 of the 
Bill empowering the National Authority also to make regulations consistent with 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of 
this Act. 


3. Section 78 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 empowers the State 
Governments to make rules consistent with the provisions of the Act for carrying 
out the provisions of the Act. It is proposed to amend the said section [clause 50 of 
the Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024], so as to make rules in the 
following matters, namely:— 


(a) the powers, functions and other matters relating to Urban Authority 
under sub-section (6) of section 41A; 


(6) the manner of constitution of State Disaster Response Force and the 
terms and conditions of service of Members of such Force under 
sub-section (2) of section 44A. 


4. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made are 
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for 
them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary General 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 
Kshitiz १ 
MGIPMRND—199GI(S3)—1-8-2024. Mohan? 


