रजिस्ट्री te डी० Uer—( TH) 04/0007/2003—26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


प्यारत का Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-20022026-270378 
CG-DL-E-20022026-270378 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — asl 
PART II — Section | 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


संग 5] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, फरवरी 20, 2026/फाल्गुन I, 947 (शक) 
No. 5] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 2026/PHALGUNA , 947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 20th February, 2026/Phalguna |, 947 (Saka) 


THE LAKSHADWEEP (REGISTRATION AMENDMENT) 
REGULATION, 2026 


No. 2 oF 2026 
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India. 


A Regulation further to amend the Registration Act, 908, with a view to modernise and 
digitise the document registration framework; to enhance the legal 
certainty and public notice of property rights; to curb fraudulent 
practices and improve accountability through regulation of document 
writers; to facilitate the smooth conduct of real estate and civil 
transactions in line with the economic development goals; and to empower the 
administration to regulate registration activity, in the Union territory of 
Lakshadweep. 


In exercise of the powers conferred by article 240 of the Constitution, the 
President is pleased to promulgate the following Regulation made by her:— 


l. (J) This Regulation may be called the Lakshadweep (Registration 
Amendment) Regulation, 2026. 


(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Administrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


Amendment of 
section |7. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


2. In section 2 of the Registration Act, 908 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act),— 


(i) in clause (/), for the words “his father’s name, or where he is usually 


described as the son of his mother, then his mother’s name”, the words “his 
marital status and his father’s name, or where he is usually described as the 
ward of his mother, then his mother’s name”’ shall be substituted; 


(ii) after clause (/), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘([A) “Administration” means the Administration of the Union 
territory of Lakshadweep headed by the Administrator appointed by the 
President under article 239 of the Constitution;’; 


(iii) for clause (2), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(2) “Book” includes a portion of a Book and also any number of 
sheets connected together with a view of forming a Book or portion of a 
Book and also includes a Book in electronic form. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this clause, the expression 
“electronic form” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in 
clause (r) of sub-section (/) of section 2 of the Information Technology 
Act, 2000.’; 


(iv) after clause (9), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(9A) “notification” means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette of the Union territory of Lakshadweep, and the expression 
“notified” shall be construed accordingly; 


(9B) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the 
Administration of the Union territory of Lakshadweep;’; 


(v) after clause (/0), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘7) “Union territory’ means the Union territory of 
Lakshadweep.’. 


3. In section 7 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), after clause (e) and before the proviso, the 


following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(f) any decree or order or award or a copy thereof, with respect to 
an immovable property, passed by a civil court, on consent of the 
defendants or on circumstantial evidence, but not on the basis of any 
instrument which is admissible in evidence under section 35 of the 
Indian Stamp Act, 899 such as registered title deed produced by the 
plaintiff, where such decree or order or award purports or operate to 
create, declare, assign, limit, extinguish whether in present or in future, 
the right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent, of the value of 
one hundred rupees or more; and 


(g) sale certificate issued by any competent officer or authority 
under any Central Act or State Act for the time being in force:”; 


(5) in sub-section (2),— 


(7) in clause (vi), for the words “‘any decree or order of a Court”, 
the words, brackets, letter and figure “any decree or order of a court, not 
being a decree or order or award falling under clause (f) of 
sub-section (/),” shall be substituted; 


(ii) the Explanation shall be omitted. 


6 of 908. 


2] of 2000. 


2 of 899. 


Sec. |] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


4. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


न_[90, (J) No document shall be accepted for registration, unless it is 


accompanied by a true copy thereof. 


(2) The true copy referred to in sub-section (/) shall be legibly 


handwritten, printed, typewritten, lithographed or otherwise prepared in 
accordance with such rules as may be made in this behalf, and such true copy 
shall be self attested.”. 


5. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the words 
“persons executing the document”, the words “and in the case of a document for 
sale of property, the persons claiming under that document also” shall be inserted. 


6. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


“22A. (/) The registering officer may refuse the registration of a 


document on the following grounds:— 


(a) the document is submitted without a true translation in a 
language commonly understood in the district of the registering officer; 


(6) any interlineation, blank, erasure or alteration appears in the 
document, unless attested with the signature or initial of such person 
executing the document; 


(c) non-testamentary document, as specified, is presented without 
sufficient description to identify the property that is the subject of 
registration as specified under section 2; 


(d) document, not being a will, is presented for registration later 
than four months after the date of execution, under section 23, subject to 
sections 24, 25 and 26; 


(e) the person by whom the document is purported to be executed— 
(7) denies the execution of the document; 
(ii) is a minor; 
(iii) appears to the registering officer to be a person with 
mental incapacity; or 


(iv) is dead and such person’s representative or assign denies 
execution; 


(f) the document relates to transfer of property by way of 
agreement to sale, sale, gift, exchange or lease or otherwise in respect of 
any immovable property owned by the Central Government or Union 
territory or any authority or undertaking of the Central Government or 
Union territory or any authority or undertaking constituted or 
established under any Central Act or any other Regulation for the 
time being in force, unless such document is accompanied by a 
no-objection certificate issued by the competent authority; 


(g) the document relates to transfer of property by way of 
agreement to sale, sale, gift, exchange or permanent alienation or lease 
or otherwise pertaining to any immovable property which is attached 
permanently or provisionally by any competent authority under any 
Central Act or any other Regulation for the time being in force or any 
court or tribunal or authority, upon the production of order of such 
attachment; 


Insertion of new 
section l9A. 


Documents 
presented for 
registration are 
to be 
accompanied by 
true copies 
thereof. 


Amendment of 
section 20. 


Insertion of new 
section 22A. 


Grounds for 
refusal of 
registration of a 
document. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(h) the document relates to the transfer of property in respect of 
which the approval of the Central Government or Union territory or any 
authority or undertaking of the Central Government or Union territory 
or any authority or undertaking constituted or established under any 
Central Act or any other Regulation is required under any law for the 
time being in force, before entering into any transactions in connection 
with such immovable property, unless such document is accompanied 
by an approval (by whatever name called) issued by the competent 
authority; 


(i) the appropriate registration fee under this Act has not been paid; 


(j) the registering officer finds that the document has not been 
executed by the person by whom it is purported to have been executed 
based on information accessed and examined; 


(k) the registering officer finds that he is not satisfied about the 
identity of the persons appearing before him and alleging to have 
executed the document; or 


(J) any other ground on which registration may be refused by the 
registering officer under this Act. 


(2) The power under this section must not be construed as empowering 
the registering officer to adjudicate upon questions of title or ownership of 
property, which are within the jurisdiction of any competent court or other 
authority under any other law for the time being in force: 


Provided that such a decision of refusal shall apply to documents 
executed from the date of promulgation of this Regulation. 


(3) Reasons for refusal to register to be recorded as specified under 


section 7.”. 
Amendment of 7. In section 28 of the principal Act, for the words, brackets and letters 
section 28. “clauses (a), (b), (2), (d) and (e),”, the words, brackets and letters “clauses (a), (8), 
(c), (४), (e), (f) and (g),” shall be substituted. 
Amendment of 8. In section 34 of the principal Act,— 
section 34. 


(i) in sub-section (/), after the words “persons executing such 
document,”, the words “and in the case of document for sale of property, the 
persons claiming under that document” shall be inserted; 


(ii) in sub-section (3), in clause (b), after the words “executed the 
document,”, the words “or they are claiming under the document” shall be 


inserted. 
Insertion of new 9. After section 34 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
section 34A. namely:— 
Person claiming “34A. Subject to the provisions of this Regulation, no document for sale 
under document of property shall be registered under this Regulation, unless the person 


for sale of 
property also to 
sign document. 


claiming under the document has also signed such document.”. 


Amendment of 0. In section 45 of the principal Act,— 
section 45. 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “cause the contents thereof’, the 
words “cause a true copy of the contents thereof” shall be substituted; 


(0) in sub-section (2), for the words “copy has been made”, the words 
“true copy has been filed” shall be substituted. 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


II. In section 46 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 


(a) for the words “unless the will has been already copied”, the words 
“unless a true copy of the will has already been filed” shall be substituted; 


(6) for the words and figure “cause the will to be copied into his Book 
No. 3”, the words and figure “cause a true copy of the will to be made and 
filed in his Book No. 3” shall be substituted. 


2. In section 50 of the principal Act, for the words, brackets, letters and 
figures “clauses (a), (0), (2) and (d) of section 7, sub-section (/)”, the words, 
brackets, letters and figures “clauses (a), (6), (०), (४), (e), (f) and (g) of 
sub-section (/) of section 7” shall be substituted. 


3. In section 5 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) In Book | shall be filed— 
(४) true copies of all documents; and 
(ii) the Memoranda, 


registered under sections 7, 8 and 89 which relates to immovable 
property, other than wills.”; 


(0) in sub-section (3), for the words “entered all documents”, the words 
“filed the true copies of all documents” shall be substituted; 


(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(5) If, any of the Books mentioned in sub-section (/) is destroyed 
or in the opinion of the Registrar, is in danger of being destroyed, or 
becoming illegible wholly or partially, the Registrar may, by a written 
order, direct such Book or such portion thereof as he thinks fit, to be 
reconstructed or recopied, as the case may be, and authenticated in such 
manner as may be prescribed, and the copy prepared and authenticated 
under such direction shall, for the purposes of this Regulation, be 
deemed to have taken the place of and to be the original Book or portion 
thereof and all references in this Regulation, to the original Book or 
portion thereof, shall be deemed to be references to the Book or portion 
so prepared and authenticated.” 


4. In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for clause (c), the 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(c) subject to the provisions contained in section 62, where a document 
is admitted to registration, a true copy thereof shall, without unnecessary 
delay, be filed in the appropriate Book according to the order of its 
admission.”. 


5. In section 53 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that where the Book is in electronic form, all entries and 
numbers in that Book and the Book maintained manually shall be identical.”. 


6. In section 54 of the principal Act, for the words “copied, or filed a 
memorandum of”, the words “filed a true copy or a memorandum 07 shall be 
substituted. 


Amendment of 
section 46. 


Amendment of 
section 50. 


Amendment of 
section 5]. 


Amendment of 
section 52. 


Amendment of 
section 53. 


Amendment of 
section 54. 


Amendment of 
section 55. 


Amendment of 
section 58. 


Amendment of 
section 60. 


Amendment of 
section 62. 


Insertion of new 
sections 68A and 
68B. 


Prohibition of 
unlicensed 
person. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


7. In section 55 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2), for the words “document entered or memorandum 
filed”, the words “document of which a true copy or a memorandum, is filed” 
shall be substituted; 


(5) in sub-section (4), for the words “authority entered”, the words 
“authority of which a true copy is filed” shall be substituted; 


(c) in sub-section (5), for the words “document entered”, the words 
“document of which a true copy is filed” shall be substituted. 


8. In section 58 of the principal Act,— 


(i) in sub-section (/), after clause (a), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(aa) in the case of a document for sale of property, the signature 
and addition of every person admitting the claim under such document, 
and, if such claim has been admitted by the representative, assignee or 
agent of any person, the signature and addition of such representative, 
assignee or agent;”; 


(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words “execution of a document”, the 
words “and in the case a document for sale of property, any person admitting 
the execution of such document, or any person admitting the claim under that 
document” shall be inserted. 


9. In section 60 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words “the 
document has been copied”, the words “the true copy of the document has been 
filed” shall be substituted. 


20. In section 62 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(Z) When a document is presented for registration under section 9, the 
translation together with the true copy of the document, shall be filed in the 
appropriate Book.”. 


2. After section 68 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“68A. (7) No person who is not licensed as provided under section 68B, 
shall engage in the profession of document-writer and any document 
drawn-up and signed by a person who does not hold a licence, shall not be 
accepted for registration by the registering officers: 


Provided that no advocate or pleader shall be required to have a licence 
under section 68B. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall prohibit an executant of a document 
from preparing a document to be presented for registration or from performing 
any other act on his own behalf for which a licensed document-writer could 
have been otherwise engaged. 


(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to a document executed outside of 
India or outside of the Union territory or a will or a document scribed by a 
licensed document-writer authorised for one sub-district or district, as the case 
may be, or a document executed by or on behalf of the Union territory or local 
authorities or other corporate bodies. 


Sec. |] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


688. (/) The Registrar of district or any other officer authorised by him 
in this behalf may, grant a licence in the prescribed form, to a document-writer 
or his apprentice, on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed: 


Provided that such licence shall be— 
(i) valid for one sub-district or one district; and 


(ii) granted after conducting a written test in such manner as may 
be determined by the Administrator. 


(2) A licence may be granted to any person who has been in the 
profession of the document-writer for at least ten years prior to date of 
commencement of this Regulation, without requiring him to appear in the 
written test referred to in sub-section (/), if the Registrar of a district or any 
other officer authorised by him in this behalf is satisfied that he is otherwise 
fit to take the profession of a document-writer. 


(3) A licence granted under sub-section (/) shall remain valid for three 
years from the date of grant of licence and shall be subject to renewal before 
the expiry of its period of validity, on such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) The licence granted under sub-section (/) may, at any time, be 
suspended or cancelled for breach of such conditions as may be prescribed or 
for any other reason to be recorded in writing by the Registrar of the district 
or an officer authorised by him, after giving the document-writer an 
opportunity to show cause against the proposed suspension or cancellation of 
the licence and after the same has been duly considered. 


(5) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Registrar of the district or 
an officer authorised by him, may file an appeal to the Inspector-General of 
Registration within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such 
order passed under this section: 


Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain the appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if he is satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented by a sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the given time. 


Explanation —For the purposes of sections 68A and this section, the 
expressions,— 


(0) “Apprentice” means a person who assists a document-writer in 
the preparation of document and transcribing them (including copies, if 
any) to be presented for registration; and 


(ii) “Document-writer” means and includes a person engaged in 
the profession of preparing documents, namely, doing the work of 
conveyancing, investigation of titles, preparation of draft deeds and 
engrossing and transcribing the deed, including copies, if any, for 
registration, as well as conducting searches and inspection under the 
Regulation.’. 


22. In section 69 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after clause (0), the 


following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(bb) providing for the grant of licences to document-writers and 
apprentices to document-writer, the suspension and cancellation of such 
licences, the terms and conditions under which licences may be granted and 
generally for all other purposes connected with the writing of documents to be 
presented for registration;”. 


Grant of licence 
to document- 
writers. 


Amendment of 
section 69. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Insertion of new 23. After section 70 of the principal Act, the following Part shall be inserted, 
Part XIA. न 
namely:— 
‘PART XIA 
REGISTRATION OF DOCUMENTS BY MEANS OF ELECTRONIC DEVICES 
Application of 70A. This Part shall apply to the areas only in respect of which a 
this Part. : ५ कि Raa : : 
notification is issued by the Administration under section 70B. 

peo 708. (/) The Administration may, by notification, direct that in any 
हि berate office as may be specified therein, the process of registration of any category 
devices in areas or categories of documents may be completed and copying done with the help 
notified by of the electronic devices like computers, scanners and the compact disks and 


0 जि: copies preserved on such devices and retrieved when required. 

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation or any other 
law for the time being in force in the Union territory, a copy of any documents 
registered and scanned using the electronic devices and certified or attested by 
the registering officer in-charge of the office shall be admissible as evidence 
of any transaction as is described in the said document. 


(3) The registration and authentication of electronic records shall be 
carried out using secure authentication mechanisms, including but not 
limited to— 


(a) “electronic signatures” as defined in clause (ta) of 
sub-section (/) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000; 2 of 2000. 


(6) Aadhaar based e-authentication under the Aadhaar (Targeted 
Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) 
Act, 206; 8 of 206. 


(c) any other form of digital verification as may be prescribed. 


(4) All data storage, processing and retrieval under this provision shall 
comply with the provisions of the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023, 22 of 2023. 
including appropriate data protection, encryption, access control, audit trails 
and cyber security protocols to ensure confidentiality, integrity and 
availability of personal and sensitive data. 


(5) The Administration shall ensure periodic review and updating of the 
technological infrastructure and protocols used for electronic registration and 
document management, in alignment with prevailing national cyber security 
standards and data protection laws. 


payin: 70C. Nothing contained in this Part shall apply— 


(i) to any document, which in the opinion of registering officer, is 
not in a fit condition to be processed by means of electronic devices; 


(ii) in the case of unforeseen eventuality like break down of the 
computerised system of registration: 


Provided that the registering officer shall record the reason in writing 
therefor: 


Provided further that the registering officer shall ensure that the data and 
images of the documents registered during the period of non-application of 
this Part, due to a breakdown of the computerised system, are duly 
incorporated into the computer system, after the same is restored, in such 
manner as may be prescribed.’. 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. |] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


24. After section 78 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely: — 


“78A. If the Administration is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient 
in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification, reduce or remit, whether 
prospectively or retrospectively, in the whole or any part of the Union 
territory, any fee or fees payable in respect of any of the matters specified in 
clauses (a) to (7) of section 78, either generally or for any particular class or 
classes of cases and in respect of persons generally or any particular class or 
classes of persons.”. 


25. After section 80 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“80A. (Z) If on inspection or otherwise, it is found that any fee payable 
under this Regulation has not been paid or has been paid insufficiently, such 
fee may (after failure to pay the same on demand within the period specified 
therein), on a certificate of the Inspector-General of Registration, be recovered 
as an arrear of land revenue from the person from whom such demand is made, 
the certificate issued by the Inspector-General shall be binding on the parties: 


Provided that no such certificate shall be granted unless due inquiry is 
made and such person is given an opportunity of being heard. 


(2) Where the Inspector-General of Registration finds the amount of fee 
in excess of that which is legally chargeable has been charged and paid under 
the provisions of this Regulation, he may, upon an application in writing or 
otherwise, refund the excess fee so charged and paid.”. 


26. For section 8] of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


#8] . Every registering officer appointed under this Regulation and every 
person employed in his office for the purposes of this Regulation, who, being 
charged with the endorsing, copying, translating, registering or filing a true 
copy of any document presented or deposited under its provisions, endorses, 
copies, translates, registers or files a true copy of such document in a manner 
which he knows or believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to cause or 
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause, injury, as defined in 
clause (/4) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, to any person, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven 
years, or with fine, or with both.”. 


27. In section 82 of the principal Act, in clause (5), for the words and figures 


“section |9 or section 2”, the words “this Regulation or the rules made thereunder” 
shall be substituted. 


28. After section 82 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely: — 


“82A. (2) On and from such date as the Administration may, by 
notification, appoint in this behalf, no person shall write a document for 
another person for presentation to a registering officer, except under a licence 
granted in accordance with the rules made under this Regulation: 


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply where the writer of 
such document is an authorised agent of the executants or a pleader engaged 
by the executants for drawing up the document or the registered clerk of such 
pleader. 


Insertion of new 
section 78A. 


Power to reduce 
or remit fees. 


Insertion of new 
section 80A. 


Recovery of fees 
and provision for 
refund. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 8]. 


Penalty for 
incorrectly 
endorsing, 
copying, 
translating, 
registering or 
filing documents 
with intent to 
injure. 


Amendment of 
section 82. 


Insertion of new 
section 82A. 


Penalty for 
writing 
documents 
without licence. 


Amendment of 
section 83. 


Amendment of 
section 84. 


Insertion of new 
section 87A. 


Delegation of 
powers. 


Insertion of new 
section 89A. 


Power to make 
tules. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (/), shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.”. 


29. In section 83 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following 


sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“ (॥) No prosecution for any offence under this Regulation shall be 
commenced save by or with the permission of the Inspector-General or any 
officer empowered in this behalf by the Administration.”. 


30. In section 84 of the principal Act,— 


(i) in sub-section (/), for the words “Indian Penal Code”, the words and 
figures “Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in sub-section (3), for the words and figures “In section 228 of the 
Indian Penal Code”, the words and figures “In section 267 of the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023” shall be substituted. 


3l. After section 87 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“87A. The Administration may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette of the Union territory, delegate all or any of the powers conferred on 
them under this Regulation to the Inspector-General of Registration, who shall 
exercise the same subject to such restrictions and conditions as the 
Administration may impose.”. 


32. After section 89 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“89A. (J) The Administrator, by notification and subject to conditions 
of previous publication, may, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this 
Regulation. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the manner of preparation of true copies accompanied to 
documents for registration under sub-section (2) of section 9A; 


(6) the manner of reconstruction or recopying and authentication 
of Book or portion of such Book by the Registrar under sub-section (5) 
of section 5]; 


(c) the form, terms and conditions and the method of conducting a 
written test for granting of a licence by the Registrar under sub-section (/) 
of section 68B; 


(d) terms and conditions for renewal of licence by the Registrar 
under sub-section (3) of section 68B; 


(e) the conditions for suspension or cancellation of licence under 
sub-section (4) of section 68B; 


(f) any other form of digital verification under clause (c) of 
sub-section (3) of section 70B; 


(g) the manner of restoration of documents through electronic 
devices mentioned under the second proviso to section 70C; and 


(A) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in 
respect of which provision is to be made, by rules. 


(3) Every rules made under this section shall be notified in the Official 
Gazette of the Union territory and, unless they are expressed to come into force 
on a particular day, shall come into force on the day on which they are so 
notified. 


45 of 860. 
45 of 2023. 


45 of 860. 
45 of 2023. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l] 


(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.” 


33. In section 90 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in clause (d), for the Amendment of 
words “grants or assignments by Government of land or of any interest in land”, the 80220 
words “grants, assignments or leases by Government of immovable property or of 
any interest in immovable property” shall be substituted. 

34. After section 93 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new 
inserted, namely:— cue 

“94. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Power to remove 

Regulation, the Administrator may, by order published in the Official Gazette eae 

of Union territory, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions 

of this Regulation as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 

removing the difficulty: 

Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of two years from the date of commencement of this Regulation. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 

after it is made, before each House of Parliament.” 

DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054. 


KSHITIZ. feta 
Date: 2026.02.20 
MGIPMRND—69 GI—20.02.2026 MOHAN 22६4+०७७ 


