रजिस्ट्री सं" So Weie—(WA)04/0007/2003—24 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—24 


The Gazette of Gudia 


Ol. GH. -S1. Wet. -37.-29082024-256715 
CG-DL-E-29082024-256715 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग II— खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं" 19] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, अगस्त 9, 2024 /श्रावण 18, 1946 (शक) 
No. 19] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, AUGUST 9, 2024/SRAVANA 18, 1946 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on 9th August, 2024:— 
Bill No. 78 of 2024 
A Bill to regulate the manner of the functioning and exercise of powers of Indian Intelligence 


Agencies within and beyond the territory of India and to provide for the coordination, 
control and oversight of such agencies. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (J) This Act may be called the Intelligence Services (Powers and Regulation) Short title, 
Bill, 2024. extent, 


application and 
(2) This Act shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by commencement. 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


(3) This Act extends to the whole of India and applies to:— 


(a) allcitizens of India, inside and outside India; 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(b) persons in the service of the Government wherever they may be; and 
(c) persons on ships and aircrafts registered in India wherever they may be. 
Definition. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(i) “Committee” means the National Intelligence and Security Oversight 
Committee established under section 12; 


(ii) “Intelligence Bureau” means the Intelligence Bureau constituted under 
section 4; 


(iii) “Indian territory” shall have the same meaning as is ascribed to the territory 
of India under article 1 of the Constitution; 


(iv) “law enforcement agency” means and includes— 
(a) any government department; and 


(6) any other person charged with the duty of investigating offences or 
charging offenders; 


(v) “Member of the Tribunal” means the members appointed under section 24; 


(vi) “National Technical Research Organisation” means the National Technical 
Research Organisation constituted under section 6; 


(vii) “national security” includes the sovereignty, territorial integrity, economic 
stability and upholding of the Constitution; 


(viii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(ix) “Research and Analysis Wing” means the Research and Analysis Wing 
constituted under section 3; 


(x) “threats to national security” includes:— 
(a) terrorist acts, including international terrorism; 


(b) espionage directed against the country or otherwise detrimental to 
the security of the country; 


(c) sabotage directed against the vital national infrastructure of the country 
or otherwise directed against the country; 


(d) organized crime directed against the country or otherwise detrimental 
to the security of the country; 


(e) drug, arms and human trafficking directed against the country or 
otherwise detrimental to the security of the country; 


(f) illegal international proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or 
the components thereof as well as materials and tools required for their 
production; 


(g) illegal trafficking of internationally controlled products and 
technologies; and 


(A) organized acts of violence or intimidation against ethnic or religious 
groups within the country; 


(xi) “terrorist act” shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it in the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; and 


(xii) “Tribunal” means the National Investigation Tribunal” established 
under section 23. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


PART II 
THE RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS WING 


3. (/) There shall be constituted a Research and Analysis Wing (hereinafter referred to Research and 
as the R& AW) which shall function under the control of the Prime Minister. Analysis 


Wing. 
(2) The functions of the R&AW shall be exercisable:— 


(a) in the interests of National security, with particular reference to the defence, 
security strategic, economic and foreign policies of the Union of India; or 


(b) in aid of the neutralization of threats from external sources. 


(3) The day-to-day operation of the R& AW shall be vested in an officer not below the 
rank of a Secretary to the Government of India who shall be appointed by the Prime Minister 
and who shall hold office for a period of two years or till he attains the age of sixty-two 
years, whichever is later. 


(4) It shall be the duty of the head of the R& AW to ensure that — 


(a) no information is collected and used by the R&AW except what is necessary 
for discharge of its functions and that no information under their custody is disclosed 
by it except so far as necessary for the proper and efficacious conduct of functions 
assigned to it; 


(b) the R&AW does not take any action that furthers the interests of any 
political party or coalition of political parties or other such interest groups; and 


(c) there are appropriate arrangements for coordination with the IB, the NTRO 
Central Para-Military Organizations and other law enforcement agencies for proper 
implementation of the mandate of this Act. 


(5) The head of the R& AW shall submit a bi-annual report on the working of the 
R&AW, including of its accounts, to the Prime Minister and may, at any time, report to the 
Prime Minister on any matter relating to its work. 


(6) The head of the R&AW shall not be eligible for reappointment to any post under 
the State except as an Advisor to the Government of India. 
PART III 
THE INTELLIGENCE BUREAU 


4. (/) There shall be constituted an Intelligence Bureau (hereinafter referred toas the Intelligence 
IB) which shall function under the control of the Prime Minister. Bula 


(2) It shall be the duty of the IB to work for national security in the context of internal 
conflict and, in particular, provide protection against threats from espionage, terrorist acts 
organized by other countries within the territory of India with the help of Indian nationals or 
residents and from actions intended to subvert the Constitution of India by violent means. 


(3) It shall perform the following functions:— 
(i) collection and management of intelligence within the country; 


(ii) safeguarding the economic well-being of the Union of India against threats 
posed by the actions or intentions of any person whether Indian national or otherwise 
within the country; and 


(iii) acting in aid to the central and state police agencies including Para-Military 
Organizations and other law enforcement agencies. 


5. (1) The day-to-day control of the IB shall be vested in a Director who shall be Director of 
appointed by the Prime Minister and shall hold office for a period of two years or till he 1018: 
attains the age of sixty-two years, whichever is earlier. 


National 
Technical 
Research 
Organisation. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(2) It shall be the duty of the Director to ensure that— 


(a) no information is collected and used by the IB except what is necessary for 
discharge of its functions and that no information under their custody is disclosed by 
it except so far as necessary for the proper and efficacious conduct of functions 
assigned to it; 


(b) the IB does not take any action that furthers the interests of any political 
party or coalition of political parties or other such interest groups; and 


(c) there are appropriate arrangements for coordination with the R&AW, the 
NTRO, Central Para-Military Organizations and other law enforcement agencies for 
proper implementation of the mandate of this Act. 


(3) The Director shall submit a bi-annual report on the working of the IB, including of 
its accounts, to the Prime Minister and may, at any time, report to the Prime Minister on any 
matter relating to its work. 


(4) The Director shall not be eligible for reappointment to any post under the State 
except as an Advisor to the Government of India. 


PART IV 
THE NATIONAL TECHNICAL RESEARCH ORGANISATION 


6. (/) There shall be constituted a National Technical Research Organisation (hereinafter 
referred to as the NTRO) which shall function under the control of the Prime Minister. 


(2) It shall perform the following functions— 


(a) to monitor and interfere with all forms of communications using such technical 
equipments as it may think fit within and beyond the territorial boundaries of India 
and also monitoring the uses of such equipments; 


(6) to collect and provide information so collected in such form and to such 
agencies as may be prescribed; and 


(c) to provide advice and assistance about— 


(7) languages including technical terminology used for technical matters, 
and 


(ii) cryptography and other matters relating to the protection of classified 
information and other such material, to the armed forces of the Union of India, 
to the Central Government or to any other organization which is determined for 
the purposes of this section in such manner as may be specified by the Prime 
Minister. 


(3) The function referred to in sub-section (2)(a) above shall be exercisable only— 


(a) in the interests of national security, with particular reference to the fields of 
defence, internal security and furtherance of foreign policy of the country; or 


(0) in the interests of economic well-being of the country in relation to the 
actions or intentions of any person whether Indian national or otherwise, inside or 
outside the Indian territory; or 


(c) in support of prevention, detection, interdiction or investigation of such 
crimes as may be assigned to it by the Prime Minister. 


(4) In this Act, the expression “NTRO” refers to the National Technical Research 
Organisation and to any unit or part ofa unit of the armed forces of the Union of India, which 
is for the time being, required by the Prime Minister to assist the NTRO in carrying out its 
functions. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


7. (1) The day-to-day operation of the NTRO shall be vested in a Chairman who shall 
be appointed by the Prime Minister and who shall hold office for a period of two years or 
attaining the age of sixty-two years, whichever is earlier. 


(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairman to ensure that— 


(a) no information is obtained by NTRO except when it is necessary for the 
discharge of its functions under the Act and that no information is disclosed to any 
person or agency except when it is necessary for discharge of its functions or for the 
purpose of any matter connected with ensuring the security, stability and sovereignty 
of the country; 


(5) it does not take any action that furthers only the interests of any political 
party or similar interest group. 


(3) The Chairman shall submit a bi-annual report on the working of the NTRO, including 
of its accounts, to the Prime Minister and may, at any time, report to the Prime Minister on 
any matter relating to its work. 


(4) The Chairman shall not be eligible for reappointment to any post under the State 
except as an Advisor to the Government of India. 


PART V 
AUTHORISATION AND PROCEDURES 


8. (1) No entry on any property or interference with any form of communication including 
wireless telegraphy under the Act shall be lawful unless it is authorized by a warrant issued 
by the authority designated for the purpose by the Central Government: 


Provided that the authority so designated shall not be an officer below the rank of a 
Secretary to the Government of India (hereinafter referred to as the Designated Authority). 


(2) The Designated Authority may, on an application made by the IB or the R& AW or 
the NTRO, as the case may be, issue a warrant under this section authorizing the taking of 
such action as is specified in the warrant in respect of any property or in respect of all forms 
of communication including wireless telegraphy, if the Designated Authority— 


(a) deems it necessary for the action to be taken on the ground that it is likely to 
be of substantial value in assisting, as the case may be,— 


(i) the R& AW in carrying out any of its functions under section 3; or 
(ii) the IB in carrying out any of its functions under section 4; or 
(iii) the NTRO in carrying out any function which falls within section 6; 


(8) is satisfied that the objective cannot reasonably be achieved by any other 
means; and 


(c) is satisfied that adequate arrangements are in force with respect to the 
disclosure of information obtained under this section and that any information 
obtained under the warrant shall be subject to those arrangements. 


(3) Awarrant authorizing action for prevention or detection or interdiction of any 
terrorist act may also include action outside the Country in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) Subject to sub-section (5), the IB may make an application under sub-section (2) 
for a warrant to be issued authorizing the IB (or a person acting on its behalf) to take such 
action as is specified in the warrant on behalf of the R& AW or the NTRO and, where such a 
warrant is issued, the functions of IB shall include the carrying out of the action so specified, 
whether or not it would otherwise be within its functions: 


Chairman of 
the NTRO. 


Authorisation 
of certain 
actions for the 
R&AW, the IB 
and the 
NTRO. 


Warrants. 
procedure, 
duration for 
the R&AW, 
the IB and the 
NTRO. 


Authorisation 
of acts outside 
the Indian 
territory for 
the R&AW 
and NTRO. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Provided that no application shall be made for a warrant by virtue of sub-section (4) 
above except where the action proposed to be authorized by the warrant— 


(a) is an action in respect of which the R&AW or the NTRO, as the case may be, 
could make such an application; or 


(b) is to be taken otherwise than in support of preservation of national security. 
9. (1) A warrant shall not be issued except— 
(a) under the hand of the Designated Authority; or 


(6) in an urgent case where the Prime Minister has expressly authorized its 
issue and a statement of that fact is endorsed on it, under the hand of the Director of 
IB or the Secretary of the R&AW or the Chairman of the NTRO, as the case may be. 


(2) Awarrant shall, unless renewed under sub-section (3), cease to have effect,— 


(a) if the warrant had been issued under the hand of the Designated Authority, 
at the expiry of the period of three months from the date on which it was issued; and 


(5) in any other case, at the expiry of the period ending with the second working 
day following the day on which it was issued. 


(3) If, at any time before the day on which a warrant would cease to have effect, the 
Designated Authority considers it necessary for the warrant to continue to have effect for 
the purpose for which it was issued, he may, by an instrument, under his hand, renew it for 
a further period of three months beginning with the day it would otherwise have ceased to be 
effective. 


(4) The Designated Authority may cancel a warrant if he is satisfied that the action 
authorized by it is no longer necessary. 


10. (Z) If, except in so far as provided for in this Part, a person is liable to the Union of 
India for any act done outside the Indian territory, he shall not be so liable if the act is one 
which is authorized to be done by virtue of an authorization given by the Designated Authority 
under this section. 


(2) The Designated Authority shall not give an authorization under this section unless 
he is satisfied— 


(a) that any act which may be done in reliance on the authorization or, as the 
case may be, the operation in the course of which the acts may be done will be 
necessary for the proper discharge of a function of the R& AW and the NTRO, as the 
case may be; and 


(b) that satisfactory arrangements are in force to ensure— 


(i) that nothing is done in reliance on the authorization beyond what 
is necessary for the proper discharge of a function of the R&AW or the NTRO, 
as the case may be; 


(ii) that, in so far as any acts may be done in reliance on the authorization, 
their nature and likely consequences will be reasonable, having regard to the 
purposes for which they are carried out; and 


(c) that satisfactory arrangements are in force with respect to the disclosure of 
information obtained by virtue of this section and that any information obtained by 
virtue of anything done in reliance on the authorization will be subject to those 
arrangements. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the power of the Designated Authority to 
give an authorization under this section, such an authorization— 


(a) may relate to a particular act or acts, of a description specified in the 
authorization or to acts undertaken in the course of an operation so specified; 

(b) may be limited to a particular person or persons ofa description so specified; 
and 

(c) may be subject to such conditions as may be specified. 
(4) An authorization shall not be given under this section except— 

(a) under the hand of the designated authority; or 

(6) in an urgent case where the Prime Minister has expressly authorized its 


issue and a statement of that fact is endorsed on it, under the hand of the Director of 
IB or the head of the R&AW or the Chairman of the NTRO, as the case may be. 


(5) An authorization shall, unless renewed under sub-section (6) below, cease to have 
effect— 

(a) if the authorization was given under the hand of the Designated Authority, 
at the expiry of the period of three months from the date of its issue; 

(5) in any other case, at the expiry of the period ending with the second working 
day following the day on which it was given. 

(6) If, at any time before the day on which a warrant would cease to have effect, the 
Designated Authority considers it necessary for the authorization to continue to have effect 
for the purpose for which it was issued, he may, by an instrument, under his hand, renew it 
for a further period of three months beginning with the day it would otherwise have ceased 
to be effective. 

(7) The Designated Authority shall cancel an authorization if he is satisfied that any 
act authorized by it is no longer necessary. 

11. (J) Any information obtained by the R&AW, IB and NTRO without a specific 
warrant or authorization under section 9 or 10, shall not be used to take action against 
individuals to whom this information relates to. 


(2) Such information obtained without specific warrant may only be used for the 
limited purpose of authorizing fresh warrants. 


(3) The R&AW, the IB and the NTRO, as the case may be, shall apply for fresh 
warrants in accordance with section 9 and 10 herein within forty-eight hours of obtaining 
any such information in the event of any such information being relevant to the discharge of 
functions and duties of the R& AW, IB and NTRO, as applicable. 


PART VI 
THE NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE 


12. (/) There shall be constituted a Committee, to be known as the National Intelligence 
and Security Oversight Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) to examine the 
administration and compliance of policy laid down under this Act. 


(2) The Committee shall, unless it is necessary to perform the functions assigned 
to it under the Act, not go into the operational aspects and sources of intelligence of the 
functioning of the R&AW, the IB and the NTRO, as the case may be. 


(3) The Committee shall consist of the following:— 
(a) the Chairman of the Council of States, Chairperson; 
(0) the Speaker of the House of the People, Member; 


(c) the Prime Minister, Member; 


Unauthorised 
information. 


Establishment 
of National 
Intelligence 
and Security 
Oversight 
Committee. 


Tenure of 
Office. 


Procedure. 


Access to 
information. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(d) the Minister of Home Affairs, Member; 
(e) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People, Member; 
(f) the Leader of Opposition in the Council of States, Member; and 


(g) one member each from the House of the People and the Council of States to 
be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses, as members. 


(4) The Cabinet Secretary shall be the Secretary to the Committee, ex-officio. 


(5) The Committee shall submit an annual report on their functioning to the Prime 
Minister and may at any time report to him on any matter relating to discharge of those 
functions. 


(6) If it appears to the Prime Minister, after consultation with the Committee, that the 
publication of any matter in a report would be prejudicial to the discharge of the functions of 
the R& AW, the IB or the NTRO, the Prime Minister may exclude that matter from the annual 
report. 


(7) The Prime Minister shall lay on the table of each House of Parliament a copy of each 
annual report submitted by the Committee under sub-section (5) together with a statement 
as to whether any matter has been excluded. 


13. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member of the Committee shall hold 
office for the duration of his membership of the House to which he has been elected. 


(2) Amember of the Committee shall vacate office— 


(a) if he ceases to be the Speaker of the House of the People or a member of the 
House of the People or; 


(b) ifhe ceases to be the Chairperson of the Council of States or a member of the 
Council of States; 


(c) if he ceases to be the Leader of Opposition in the Council of States or the 
House of the People; 


(व) by resigning at any time through a notice to the Chairperson of the Committee. 


14. (7) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Committee may determine their 
own procedure. 


(2) Ifon any matter there is an equality of voting among the members of the Committee, 
the Chairperson shall have and exercise the casting vote. 


(3) The Chairperson may appoint one of the members of the Committee to act, in his 
absence, as the Chairman at any meeting of the Committee, but the person acting as such 
shall not have a casting vote. 


(4) The quorum for a sitting of the Committee shall be three. 


15. (/) If the Director of the IB or the Secretary of the R& AW or the Chairman of the 
NTRO is asked by the Committee to disclose any information under their custody, then, as to 
the whole or part of the information which is sought, he shall either— 


(a) arrange for it to be made available to the Committee subject to and in 
accordance with arrangements approved by the Cabinet Secretary; or 


(6) inform the Committee that it cannot be disclosed because— 


(i) it is sensitive information which, in his opinion, may not be made 
available; or 


(ii) the Prime Minister has certified that it should not be disclosed. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(2) The fact that any particular information is sensitive shall not prevent its disclosure, 
if the Director, IB or the Secretary, R& AW or the Chairman, NTRO, as the case may be, 
consider it safe to disclose. 


(3) Any information which has not been disclosed to the Committee on the ground that 
25 it is sensitive information, shall be disclosed to them if the Cabinet Secretary certifies in 
the prescribed manner that it is fit to be disclosed in public interest. 


(4) The disclosure of information to the Committee in accordance with the provisions 
of this section shall be regarded for the purposes this Act as necessary for the proper 
discharge of the functions of the R& AW, the IB and the NTRO. 


Explanation.— In this section, the expression ‘sensitive information’ shall include— 


(a) an information which might lead to the identification of, or provide details of 
the sources of information or operational methods used by the R& AW, the IB and the 
NTRO; 

(6) information about specific operations which have been, are being or are 
proposed to be undertaken in pursuance of any of the functions of those bodies; and 


(c) information provided by the Government or an agency of any other country 
which does not consent to the disclosure of the information. 


PART VII 
INTELLIGENCE OMBUDSMAN 


16. (/) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the National Intelligence 
and Security Oversight Committee, appoint an Intelligence Ombudsman (hereinafter referred 
to as the “Ombudsman”) from amongst persons having special knowledge in the field of 
intelligence to address the grievance of the members of staff and officers of the R&AW, the 
13 and the NTRO: 


Provided that no person shall be appointed as an Ombudsman who has served as the 
Secretary, R&AW; the Director, IB or the Chairman, NTRO. 


(2) The administrative control of the Ombudsman shall be vested in the Cabinet 
Secretary. 


(3) The Ombudsman shall be appointed for a tenure of three years from the date ofhis 
appointment or till he attains the age of sixty-eight years, whichever is earlier. 


(4) The Ombudsman shall perform the following functions:-— 


(i) resolve grievances of members of staff or officers of the R& AW, the IB 
and the NTRO, as the case may be; 


(ii) suggest changes in the administrative practices of the R&AW, the IB 
and the NTRO, as the case may be, to mitigate the problems of the members of 
staff or officers of the R& AW, the IB and the NTRO, as the case may be. 


(5) Not later than thirty-first day of March of each calendar year, the Ombudsman shall 
prepare and submit a report of its functioning to the Prime Minister. 


(6) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the report shall 
contain— 


(a) the recommendations of the Ombudsman for improving functioning of the 
R&AW, the IB and the NTRO; 


(6) a summary of the problems of the members of staff or officers with the 
R&AW, the IB and the NTRO, as the case may be, including a description of the 
nature of such problems; 


Intelligence 
Ombudsman. 


Procedure. 


Complaints to 
the 
Ombudsman. 


Reference and 
investigations 
by the 
Ombudsman. 


Disposal of 


the complaint. 


Remedies. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(c)a summary of,— 
(i) action taken in matters enumerated in clauses (a) and (6); 
(ii) the result of such action; 


(iii) the matters where no action was taken and the period for which the 
matter has been pending; 


(iv) the reasons why no action was taken along with the persons responsible 
for such non-action; 


(v) the recommendations with a view to solve the problems of the members 
of the R&AW, the IB and the NTRO; and 


(व) such other information as the Ombudsman may deem necessary. 


(7) The Ombudsman may consult the heads of the R& AW, the IB and the NTRO, as the 
case may be, in carrying out the Ombudsman’s responsibilities under this section. 


17. (1) The orders of the Ombudsman in relation to any complaint by a member of staff 
or officer of the R& AW, the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, shall be implemented by the 
Government in such manner as it may specify. 


(2) It shall be the duty of every member of the R& AW, the IB or the NTRO to disclose 
or to give to the Ombudsman such documents or information as may be required for the 
purpose of enabling him to carry out his functions under this Act. 


(3) The Ombudsman shall carry out his functions in such a way as to ensure that no 
document or information disclosed or given to him by any person is disclosed without the 
consent of such person to any complainant or to any person holding office under the Union 
of India or to any other person; and accordingly the Ombudsman shall not, except in its 
reports under sub-section (/) of section 22, give any reasons for a determination notified by 
them to a complainant. 


(4) Subject to sub-section (3), the Ombudsman may determine his own procedure. 


18. Any complaint bya member or ex-member of the IB, the R&AW or the NTRO, as 
the case may be, in relation to his service and, unless the Ombudsman consider that the 
complaint is frivolous, vexatious or without any valid basis, shall be dealt with in accordance 
with this Part. 


19. (/) After the submission of the complaint, if the Ombudsman is prima facie satisfied, 
a copy of such complaint shall be forwarded to the persons heading the IB, the R& AW and 
the NTRO, as the case may be, for their reply and comments on the allegation or grievances 
reported in the application by the complainant. 


(2) The R&AW, the IB and the NTRO shall submit their replies or comments, as the 
case may be, within three weeks of receipt of the complaint from the Ombudsman. 
(3) The Ombudsman shall give its decision within 45 days of the receipt of the complaint. 
20. Where the Ombudsman determines that the R&AW, the IB or the NTRO, as the 
case may be, did not have reasonable grounds for their actions or inactions, they shall— 
(a) give notice to the complainant that they have made a determination in his 


favour; and 


(6) send a recommendation of their findings to the persons heading the R&AW, 
the IB and the NTRO, as the case may be. 


21. Where the Ombudsman passes a finding or an order, the Ombudsman may do all or 
any of the following, namely,— 


(a) direct that any action by which the complainant is so aggrieved be reversed 
or if the act cannot be reversed, give such relief including compensation to the 
complainant as it may determine; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


(b) direct the persons heading the R& AW, the IB or the NTRO, as the case may 
be, to pay to the complainant such sums by way of compensation as may be specified 
by the Ombudsman. 


22. The Director of IB or the Secretary of the R& AW or the Chairman of the NTRO, as 
the case may be, shall establish procedures, requiring a formal response to all complaints 
received from the Ombudsman and comply with the findings, orders or recommendations of 
the Ombudsman within three weeks of the receipt of the order of the Ombudsman. 


PART VIII 
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE TRIBUNAL 


23. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a 
tribunal to be known as the National Intelligence tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the 
Tribunal), for the purpose of investigating complaints against the R&AW, the IB or the 
NTRO. 

24. The Tribunal shall consist of— 


(i)a Chairperson who shall be a sitting or a retired judge of the Supreme 
Court, to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief 
Justice of the Supreme Court; 


(ii) one member who is or has been a judge of the High Court to be appointed by 
the Central Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court 
concerned; and 


(iii) one member who shall be appointed from amongst persons who have been 
the head of the IB or the R& AW, to be appointed from the two services alternately. 


25. The Chairperson or members of the Tribunal shall hold office for a term of five 
years from the date on which they enters upon office and shall not be eligible for 
reappointment. 


26. (1) The Chairperson or a member of the Tribunal may, by notice in writing under his 
hand, addressed to the President, resign his office: 


Provided that the Chairperson or a member shall, unless permitted by the President to 
relinquish office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date 
of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his 
office or until the expiry ofhis term of office, whichever is earlier. 


(2) The Chairperson or a member other than a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or a 
High Court, as the case may be, of the Tribunal shall not be removed from office except by an 
order made by the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an 
inquiry made by a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court in which such Chairperson or other 
member had been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in respect of those charges. 


(3) The Central Government may, by rules to be prescribed, regulate the procedure for 
the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson or other members referred 
to in sub-section (2). 


27. (1) The Chairperson shall have the power to review the exercise by the State of its 
powers of issuing authorizations or warrants under sections 8, 9, 10 and 11 of this Act. 


(2) The Tribunal shall submit a bi-annual report on their functioning to the 
Prime Minister. 


(3) The Prime Minister shall cause to lay before each House of Parliament a copy of 
each annual report submitted by the Committee under sub-section (2) together with a statement 


R&AW, IB 
and NTRO to 
comply with 
the orders of 
the 
Ombudsman. 


National 
Intelligence 
Tribunal. 


Constitution 
of the 
Tribunal. 


Term of 
office. 


Resignation 
and removal. 


Functions of 
the 
Chairperson. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


as to whether any matter has been excluded from that report in pursuance of 
sub-section (4). 


(4) If it appears to the Prime Minister, after consultation with the Chairman of the 
Tribunal, that the publication of any matter in a report would be prejudicial to the discharge 
of the functions of the R& AW, the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, he may exclude that 
matter from the annual report laid before each House of Parliament. 


(5) The Prime Minister may, in consultation with the Chairperson provide the Tribunal 
with such staff and infrastructure facilities as the Chairperson thinks necessary for the 
discharge of his functions. 


Salaries and 28. The Chairperson and members shall hold office in accordance with the terms of 
SXPENSES: their appointment and they shall be paid such salary and allowances equivalent to their last 
drawn salary and allowances. 


Financial and 29. The Chairperson shall exercise such financial and administrative powers over the 


Administrative Tribunal as may be prescribed: 
Powers of the 


Chairperson. Provided that the Chairperson shall have the authority to delegate such of his financial 
and administrative powers as he may think fit to any other member or any officer of the 
Tribunal, subject to the conditions that such member or officer shall, while exercising such 
delegated powers, continue to act under the direction, control and supervision of the 


Chairperson. 
Staff of the 30. (/) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of the officers 
Tribunal. and other employees required to assist the Tribunal in the discharge of its functions and 


provide the tribunal with such officers and other employees as it may think fit. 


(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of the officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(3) The officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall discharge their functions 
under the general superintendence of the Chairperson. 


Jurisdiction, 31. (J) It shall be the duty of the Government or any of its agencies to implement the 
powers and orders of the tribunal. 

authority of 

the Tribunal. (2) It shall be the duty of the R&AW, the IB or the NTRO to disclose or give to the 


Tribunal such documents or information as it may require for the purpose of carrying out its 
functions under this Act. 


(3) The Tribunal shall carry out its functions under this Act in such a way as to ensure 
that no document, or information disclosed or given to the Tribunal by any person is disclosed 
without the consent of such person to the complainant or to any person holding office under 
the Union of India or to any other person; and accordingly the Tribunal may not give any 
reason for their decision notified to a complainant. 


(4) Subject to sub-section (3), the Tribunal may determine its own procedure. 


(5) For the purpose of investigating and adjudicating a complaint under this Act, the 
Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:— 5 of 1908. 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him 
on oath; 


(6) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) subject to the provisions of sections 129 and 130 of the Bharatiya Sakshya 
Adhiniyam, 2023, requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such 47 of 2023. 
record or document from any office; 


45 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and 
(f) reviewing its decisions. 


(6) The Tribunal shall have the power to decide both questions of interpretation of 
provisions of this Act and facts that may be raised before it. 


32. (/) Any person may complain to the Tribunal ifhe is aggrieved by anything which 
he believes the R& AW or the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, has wrongfully done in 
relation to him or to his property. 


(2) On receipt of a complaint by any person aggrieved by the actions of the R& AW or 
the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, if the Tribunal after such inquiry, as it may deem 
necessary, is satisfied that it is fit for adjudication by it, admit such complaint; but where the 
Tribunal is not satisfied, it may dismiss the application after recording its reasons in writing. 


(3) In so far as the complaint alleges that anything has been done wrongfully in 
relation to any property of the complainant, the Tribunal shall investigate— 


(a) whether the R&AW or the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, had obtained 
or provided information or performed any other tasks in relation to the submissions 
of the complainant; and 


(b) if so, whether the R& AW or the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, had 
reasonable grounds for taking that action. 


(4) If, in the course of the investigation of a complaint by the Tribunal, if the Tribunal 
consider it necessary to establish whether a warrant and/or an authorization was issued/ 
given to the R& AW or the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, under sections 9 and/or 11 of 
this Act for the commission of any act, it shall refer so much of the complaint as relates to the 
doing of that act to the Designated Authority for validation of the actions. 


(5) If the Tribunals hold that a valid warrant was issued or a valid authorization was 
given, it shall determine whether the Designated Authority was acting properly in issuing or 
renewing the warrant or, as the case may be, in giving or renewing the authorization. 


(6) The Tribunal shall make a determination within forty-five days of the receipt of the 
complaint. 


(7) All proceedings before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings for 
the purposes of sections 228, 229, 257 and 267 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and the 
Tribunal shall be deemed to be a court for the purposes of section 215 and Chapter XXVIII of 
the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 


(8) The decision of the Tribunal shall be taken by majority and it shall be binding on all 
parties. 


33. (/) A person making a complaint to the Tribunal may either appear in person or take 
the assistance of a legal practitioner before the Tribunal. 


(2) The Central Government or the competent authority, as may be prescribed, may 
authorize one or more legal practitioners or any of its law officers to act as counsel and every 
person so authorized by it may present its case with respect to any complaint before the 
Tribunal. 


34. Where the Tribunal determines under section 32 that the R&AW or the IB or the 
NTRO, as the case may be, did not have reasonable grounds for its actions or inactions, the 
Tribunal may, by an order, direct— 


(a) that the obtaining and providing of information in relation to the complainant 
or, as the case may be, the conduct of other activities in relation to him or to any 
property of his shall cease and that any records relating to such information so 
obtained or provided shall be destroyed in such manner as to render them unusable 
henceforth such activities shall be stopped forthwith; 


Investigation 
of complaints. 


Assistance of 
legal 
practitioner. 


Relief, 
compensation 
and 
restitution. 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(60) payment of compensation to the person who has been aggrieved by the 
actions of the R& AW or the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be; 


(c) restitution of property damaged by such actions; 


(d) quashing of any warrant or authorization which the Tribunal has found to 
have been improperly issued, renewed or given; and 


(e) institution of proceedings under the relevant statutes and applicable laws 
against the persons responsible for that. 


Appeal. 35. Any person, aggrieved by an order made by the National Intelligence Tribunal, he 
may prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court within a period of ninety days from the date of 
such order. 

Power to 36. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 

make rules. for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Intelligence agencies are responsible for maintaining internal security and combating 
external threats to the sovereignty and integrity of the nation. These responsibilities range 
from counter-terrorism measures tackling separatist movements to critical infrastructure 
protection. These agencies are operating without an appropriate statutory basis delineating 
their functioning and operations. This tends to, among other things, compromise operational 
efficiency and weakens the professional fabric of these agencies. It also results in intelligence 
officers not having due protection when performing their duties. 


Assessments and gathering of information by intelligence agencies are catalysts for 
law enforcement units to act, necessitating that these be reliable, accurate and in accordance 
with law. This kind of efficiency has been hindered by obscured responsibilities that have 
plagued the functioning of the agencies. 


Article 21 of the Constitution provides that no person shall be deprived of his life and 
personal liberty except according to the procedure established by law. The Supreme Court of 
India has carved a right to privacy from the right to life and personal liberty. Such rights to 
privacy are compromised when agencies undertake surveillance operations. In Re: Peoples 
Union of Civil Liberties v. Union of India, the Supreme Court issued detailed guidelines 
regarding telephone tapping. A proper legal framework is required to regulate surveillance of 
other forms, using different technologies, as well. There is an urgent need to balance the 
demands of security and privacy of individuals, by ensuring safeguards against the misuse 
of surveillance powers of intelligence agencies. Therefore, legislation is imperative to regulate 
the possible infringement of privacy of citizens, while giving credence to security concerns. 


In view of the reasons stated, the Bill seeks to enact a legislation pursuant to Entry 8 
of List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India to provide:-— 


(a) A legislative and regulatory framework for the Intelligence Bureau, the 
Research and Analysis Wing and the National Technical Research Organisation; 


(6) Designated Authority regarding authorization procedure and system of 
warrants for operations by these agencies; 


(c) A National Intelligence Tribunal for the investigation of complaints against 
these agencies. 


(व) A National Intelligence and Security Oversight Committee for an effective 
oversight mechanism of these agencies; and 


(e) An Intelligence Ombudsman for efficient functioning of the agencies and for 
matters connected therewith. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives. 


New DELHI; MANISH TEWARI 
July 9, 2024. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Research and Analysis Wing 
under the control of the Prime Minister. Clause 4 provides for the establishment of an 
Intelligence Bureau under the control of the Prime Minister. Clause 5 provides for appointment 
ofa Director for day-to-day operation of the IB. Clause 6 provides for the establishment ofa 
National Technical Research Organisation under the control of the Prime Minister. Clause 7 
provides for appointment of a Chairman in whom shall be vested the day-to-day operations 
of the NTRO. Clause 12 provides for the constitution of a National Intelligence and Security 
Oversight Committee to examine and administer and ensure compliance of the policies laid 
down under the Act. Clause 16 provides that an Intelligence Ombudsman shall be appointed 
by the Central Government. Clause 21 provides for remedies including compensation to the 
persons aggrieved by the actions of the intelligence agencies. Clause 23 provides that a 
National Intelligence Tribunal shall be established by the Central Government. Clause 24 
provides for appointment of the Chairperson and members of the Tribunal. Clause 28 provides 
for salaries and other expenses of the Chairperson and members of the Tribunal. Clause 30 
provides for the staff for the effective functioning of the Tribunal. Clause 34 provides for the 
payment of compensation to the persons who have suffered loss by any action of the 
R&AW or the IB or the NTRO. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is estimated that sum of rupees ten thousand crore will be involved as recurring 
expenditure per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be 
incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 36 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


Bill No. 86 of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024. 


2. In article 80 of the Constitution, in clause (5), the following proviso shall be added 
at the end, namely:— 


"Provided that the representative of the Union territory of Chandigarh in the 
Council of States shall be elected by an electoral college consisting of elected members 
of the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh constituted under the Punjab Municipal 
Corporation (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994.". 


3. In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table— 
(a) after entry 31, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:— 
"32. Chandigarh..................0 Ls 
(5) for the figures "233", the figures "234" shall be substituted. 


Short title. 


Amendment of 
article 80. 


Amendment 
of the Fourth 
Schedule. 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Article 79 of the Constitution provides for the Constitution of Parliament. Article 80 
stipulates the Composition of the Council of States. Article 80 (5) states that the 
representatives of the (Union territories) in the Council of States shall be chosen in such 
manner as Parliament may by law prescribe. The words "States specified in Part C of the 
First Schedule" were omitted and replaced by Union territories by section 3 (1) (d) of the 
Constitution (Seventh) Amendment Act 1956 with effect from the Ist day of 
November, 1956. 


The Union territories of Puducherry, Jammu and Kashmir and the National Capital 
territory of Delhi find representation in the Council of States. While the Union territories of 
Ladakh, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli - Daman and Diu, Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
and Lakshadweep are unrepresented in the Council of States. 


A special law in terms of article 80 (5) of the Constitution therefore needs to be 
enacted to provide representation to the unrepresented Union territories in the Council of 
States. The proposed Bill is however specific to providing representation to the Union 
territory of Chandigarh in the Council of States. 


The Bill provides that one person shall be elected to the Council of States from 
Chandigarh. Just as the Delhi Metropolitan Council served as the electoral college for 
electing three persons to the Council of States from Delhi from 1966 to 1990, similarly it is 
proposed that an electoral college consisting of the elected members of the Municipal 
Corporation of Chandigarh as brought into existence by an Ordinance, namely, the Punjab 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 as extended to Union territory Chandigarh by the Punjab 
Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Ordinance, 1994 and promulgated 
by the President of the India with effect from the 24th day of May, 1994 bringing the said 
Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh into existence, shall for the purposes of providing 
representation to Chandigarh in the Council of States constitute the electoral college for 
the same. 


The said ordinance was replaced by the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension 
to Chandigarh) Act, 1994 as further amended by the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law 
(Extension to Chandigarh) Amendment Act, 2017. 

The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide one seat to Union 
territory of Chandigarh in the Council of States. The representative would be elected by an 
electoral college consisting of elected members of the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh 
constituted under the Punjab Municipal Corporation (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994. 

Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; MANISH TEWARI 
July 9, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for allocation of one seat in the Council of States to the 
Union territory of Chandigarh. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure 
of about rupees two lakhs from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


Bill No. 67 of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. () This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024. Short title and 


7 5 . commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In article 324 of the Constitution,— Amendment of 
हि हि article 324. 
(a) for clause (2), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election 
Commissioner and such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the 
President, may, in consultation with the Committee of Appointments, from time 
to time, fix. 


Insertion of 
new article 
328A. 


Election 
Commission 
to regulate, 
monitor and 
superintendent 
the election 
of registered 
political 
parties. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(2A) The appointment of Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners 
and Regional Commissioners shall, subject to the provisions of any law made in 
that behalf by Parliament, be made by the President on the recommendations of a 
Committee consisting of,— 


(i) the Prime Minister — Chairperson; 
(ii) The Union Home Minister — Member; 
(iii) | the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States — Member; 
(iv) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the — Member; 
People 
(v) the Chief Justice of Supreme Court — Member; 
(vi) _ two senior most puisne judges of Supreme Court of _— Member; 


India to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, “the Leader of the Opposition in the 
House of the People” or “the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States” shall, when 
no such leader has been so recognized, include the Leader of the single largest group in 
Opposition of the Government in the House of the People or the Council of States, as the 
case may be. 


(2B) Notwithstanding any law made in that behalf by the Parliament, the term of office 
of the Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners under clause (2) and 
Regional Commissioners under clause (4) shall be six years and three years from the date of 
assuming office, respectively. 


Provided that after their retirement the Chief Election Commissioner, Election 
Commissioners or the Regional Commissioners shall not be eligible for appointment to any 
office under the Government of India, State Governments or under the Constitution;”. 


(5) in clause (4), for the words, “after consultation with Election Commission”, the 
words “on the recommendation of the Committee” shall be substituted; and 


(c) for clause (5), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(5) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of 
service of the Election Commissioners and the Regional Commissioners shall be such 
as the President may be rule determine: 


Provided that the Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and 
Regional Commissioners shall not be removed from his office except in like manner and 
on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court and the conditions of service of the 
Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and Regional Commissioners shall 
not be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.”. 


3. After article 328 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:-— 


“328A. (/) The regulation, monitoring and superintendence of internal functioning 
including but not limited to internal election of all registered political parties under the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 shall be vested in the Election Commission. 


(2) The Election Commission shall regulate, monitor and superintendent the internal 
election of registered political parties under clause (/) in accordance with their respective 
constitutions until a Model Internal Code is prescribed by the Election Commission: 


Provided that it shall incumbent on all registered political parties to incorporates 
Model Election Code into their respective constitutions after formulation by the Election 
Commission. 


43 of 1951. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


(3) Ifany registered political party fails to comply with the advisories, duration and 
instructions issued by the Election Commission with regard to their internal functions, the 
recognition of such political party as a State or National may be withdrawn including any 
other action as the Election Commission deems fit under section 16A ofthe Election Symbols 
(Reservation and Allotment Order), 1968, as the case may be.”. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The framers of the Constitution of India made a giant leap of faith when they 


incorporated universal adult suffrage into the design of India’s founding document and 
enshrined it in article 326 of the Constitution. 


In 1947 India’s literacy rate was only twelve per cent. in other words eighty-eight per 
cent. of India was illiterate. What this decision meant was that all Indian citizen’s irrespective 
of caste, colour, creed, sex, place of birth or any other disability including illiteracy would 
henceforth be qualified to participate in the great Indian democratic experiment that was set 
to unfold in 1952. 


With every election since 1952 our democracy has deepened and got more broad 
based. In 1988 the voting age was lowered to eighteen years. By the 73rd and 74th amendment 
to the Indian Constitution, Parliament institutionalized democracy at the third tier or at the 
grass root level. 


However there remains a very serious infirmity in the functioning of India’s democratic 
model and that is the functioning of political parties that underpin our democratic edifice. 
The internal functioning and structures of an overwhelming number of these political parties 
are very opaque and ossified . There is a need to make their functioning transparent, 
accountable and rules based. At the last count there are 2858 political parties registered 
with the Election Commission of India. Out of these 8 are national parties, 54 are state 
parties and 2797 are unrecognised parties. On the 13th of August 1996 the Election 
Commission had issued a circular to all political parties registered with it whether national, 
state or unrecognised that they must hold regular elections in accordance with their 
respective constitution’s. Under Section 29-A of the Representation of People’s Act 1951 
the Commission has the powers to register a political party but not deregister it. 


While the Election Commission of India has superintendence, direction and control 
of elections under Part XV of the Constitution of India it has repeatedly argued before 
various Courts of Law that this does not extend to the supervision or superintendence of 
internal elections and functioning of political parties. This bill seeks to provide the Election 
Commission of India with the necessary wherewithal to regulate, monitor and superintend 
the internal functioning ofall political parties registered with and withdraw recognition as 
national or state parties and to take such appropriate action under section 16-A of the 
Election Symbols (Reservation and allotment order) 1968 if they fail to comply with the 
directions of the Commission with regard to their internal functioning. 


There is growing concern with regard to the independence and autonomy of the 
Election Commission. To maintain the impartiality and integrity of the Commission, it has 
become imperative that the Chief Election Commission and such other Election 
Commissioners as are deemed necessary be appointed by a Panel consisting of the Prime 
Minister of India, Union Home Minister, Leader of Opposition or Floor Leader in Lok Sabha, 
Leader of Opposition or Floor Leader in Rajya Sabha and Chief Justice of India and two 
senior most puisne judges of the Supreme Court of India. 


It is also pertinent that the Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners 
shall be given a fixed term of six years and the Regional Commissioners fixed term of three 
years from the dates of their respective appointments. They should not be removed from 
office except in accordance with the procedure laid down for the removal of a Supreme 
Court Judge. Also, after retirement they should not be eligible for any reappointment to any 
office under the Government of India, State Governments and the Constitution. 


This is the second wave of Democratic Reforms that India requires. The Bill seeks to 
achieve the above objectives. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; MANISH TEWARI 
July 9, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


Bill No. 80 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for compulsory military training in schools and other educational institutions 
in order to promote discipline, physical fitness, national unity and preparedness 
among the youth of the nation. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Compulsory Military Training in Schools and Other Short title, 


Educational Institutions Act, 2024. extent and 
commencement. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Compulsory 
Military 
Training to 
students. 


Curriculum 
and Training 
Modules for 
the Military 
training to 
the students. 


Training 
Instructors. 


Monitoring 
and 
Evaluation. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all the other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) “educational institution” means any school, college, university or other 
institution imparting education at primary, secondary, senior secondary or higher 
education, as the case may be; 


(c) “military training” includes basic training in physical fitness, drill, discipline, 
self-defense, first aid and knowledge of the military heritage and values of the country; 


(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 
(e) “student” means any person enrolled in an educational institution. 


3. (1) The appropriate Government shall include compulsory military training in 
curriculum for students from classes ninth to twelfth and in undergraduate level. 


(2) The military training referred to in sub-section (/) shall be conducted for a minimum 
of two hours per week by the educational institutes. 


(3) Every educational institution shall establish a Military Training Coordination 
Committee (MTCC) to manage and coordinate the military training activities in such manner 


as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Military Training Coordination Committee (MTCC) established under 
sub-section (3) shall submit bi-annual reports on the progress and effectiveness of the 
military training program to the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 


4. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Union Ministry of 
Defence and the Ministry of Education, prescribe the curriculum and training modules for 
the military training to the students. 


(2) The curriculum and training module for military training to the students under 
sub-section (/) shall include,— 


(a) physical fitness exercises; 

(8) drill and ceremonial parades; 

(c) basic self-defense techniques; 

(d) first aid and emergency response training; 

(e) awareness of national security and defense mechanisms; and 
(f) education on military heritage and values of the country. 


5.(/) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Union Ministry of 
Defence, appoint instructors for imparting military training to students in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(2) The Instructors appointed under sub-section (/) may be retired military personnel, 
members of the National Cadet Corps (NCC) or such other individuals as deemed suitable 
by the appropriate Government. 


6. (/) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Union Ministry of 
Defence, establish a monitoring and evaluation mechanism to assess the impact of the 
military training program. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


(2) The monitoring of evaluation mechanism established under sub-section (/) shall 
include periodic reviews and audit of the military training program to ensure its quality and 
effectiveness in such manner as may be prescribed. 


7. The Central Government shall provide requisite funds including infrastructure and 
resources necessary for carrying out purposes of this Act. 


8. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every educational institution complies 
with the provisions of this Act. 


9. (1) Ifany educational institution fails to comply with the provisions of this Act, it 
shall be liable to such penalties as may prescribed. 


(2) The penalties referred to in sub-section (/) may include fines, reduction in grants, 
or such other actions as may be deemed appropriate by the appropriate Government. 


10. (/) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


11. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette of India, make rules 
and regulations for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 


(2) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule and regulation or both 
the Houses agree that the rule and regulation should not be made, the rule and regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule and regulation. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Compliance. 


Penalty. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to make 
rules. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill seeks to introduce compulsory military training in schools and other 
educational institutions to foster discipline, physical fitness, national unity, and a sense of 
preparedness among the youth. This initiative aims to imbue students with essential life 
skills and a deeper understanding of national security and defense mechanisms. Through 
structured military training, it is sought to create a disciplined, aware, and resilient generation 
ready to contribute positively to the nation’s progress and security. 


Compulsory military training in schools and other educational institutions in India 
could be advocated for several reasons, but it is also important to consider the potential 
drawbacks and the complexity of implementation. 


Military training instills a sense of discipline, responsibility, and respect for authority, 
which can positively influence students’ personal and academic lives and regular physical 
training can improve students’ health, fitness levels, and overall well-being. It can also help 
combat the growing issue of sedentary lifestyles and obesity. 


Military training can foster a sense of patriotism and national pride. Understanding 
the sacrifices made by armed forces can enhance students’ respect for their country and its 
values with Students can acquire various skills such as leadership, teamwork, survival 
skills, and crisis management, which are valuable in both personal and professional contexts. 


Military training can prepare students to respond effectively in emergency situations, 
such as natural disasters, by equipping them with basic first aid and survival skills and 
exposure to military training can open up career opportunities in the defense sector and 
related fields. It can also help students make informed decisions about pursuing a career in 
the armed forces. Shared experiences in training can build camaraderie and break down 
social barriers among students from diverse backgrounds, promoting social cohesion and 
mutual respect. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SHRIRANG APPA BARNE 
July 8, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint instructors 
for imparting military training to students. Clause 6 provides that the appropriate Government 
shall establish a monitoring and evaluation mechanism to assess the impact of the military 
training program. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite 
funds including infrastructure and resources necessary for carrying out purposes of this 
Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore is likely to be 
involved. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two thousand crore is likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


Bill No. 87 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for the visual representation of income tax collected from the taxpayers of 
the country in an accessible and transparent manner and for matters connected 


therewith. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Visual Representation of Income Tax Collections Short title, 
Act, 2024. extent and 


commencement. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Central 
Government 
to Provide 
Visual 
Representation 
of Income 
Tax Collected. 


Accessibility 
and 
Transparency 
of the Income 


Tax Collected. 


Report to the 
Parliament. 


Penalty for 
Non- 
compliance. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Financial Year” means the year starting from April Ist and ending on 
March 31st of the subsequent year; 


(5) “income tax “ means the tax as defined under sub-section (43) of section 3 
of the Income Tax Act, 1961; 


(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(d) “taxpayer” means an assessee as defined under sub-section (7) under the 
Income Tax Act, 1961; and 


(e) “visual representation” means graphical representation in the form of charts, 
graphs and other visual aids. 


3. (1) The Central Government shall publish a visual representation of the income tax 
collected for each financial year in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The visual representation under sub-section (/) shall include, but not be limited 
to;— 


(a) total income tax collected in each financial year; 
(6) breakdowns by various tax brackets; 


(c) breakdowns by different types of taxpayers including individuals and 
companies; 


(d) breakdowns by geographical regions. 


(3) The visual representation under sub-section (/) shall be prepared in a_user- 
friendly format including, but not be limited to, pie charts, bar graphs, line charts and 
infographics. 


4. (/) The visual representation of income tax shall be published on the official website 
of the Income Tax Department in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The information under sub-section (/) shall be updated annually and within six 
months of the end of each financial year. 


(3) The information under sub-section (/) shall be incorporated in the annual report 
of the Income Tax Department. 


5. The Central Government shall cause to be laid before each House of Parliament an 
annual report containing the visual representation of income tax collected, analysis of the 
data and recommendations for improving transparency and taxpayer education in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


6. Any failure by the officials of the Income Tax Department to comply with the 
provisions of this Act shall be reported to the Central Vigilance Commission which may take 
actions as it deem fit against the official as may be prescribed. 


7. The Central Government shall provide requisite funds including infrastructure and 
resources necessary for carrying out purposes of this Act. 


8. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


43 of 1961 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Power to 
make rules. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Transparency and accountability in the collection and utilization of income tax in 
India is required to be done. By providing a visual representation of collected income tax, 
the proposed Bill aims to make tax data more accessible and understandable to the general 


public, thus fostering greater trust in the tax system. Furthermore, it seeks to educate 
taxpayers and encourage a more informed and engaged citizenry. 


In recent years, transparency and accountability have become crucial elements in 
governance, particularly concerning the collection and utilization of public funds. This Bill 
addresses the need for greater clarity in how income taxes are collected and spent by the 
government. Transparency is pivotal in ensuring that taxpayers know exactly where their 
contributions are going and how they are being used to benefit society. By mandating the 
creation of a visual representation of income tax data, the Bill aims to demystify the tax 
system and make information more readily available to all citizens. 


The visual representation aspect of this Bill is a significant step forward. Numbers 
and statistics, while informative, can often be overwhelming or incomprehensible to the 
average person. By translating these figures into easily digestible charts, graphs, and 
infographics, the government can convey complex information in a more straightforward 
and engaging manner. This approach not only aids in understanding but also highlights 
key areas where tax revenue is being utilized, such as healthcare, education, infrastructure, 
and defense. When taxpayers see a clear and direct correlation between their contributions 
and the improvements in their community or country, it fosters a sense of ownership and 
responsibility towards the nation’s development. 


One of the primary goals of this Bill is to build and sustain trust between the government 
and its citizens. Taxation is often seen as a burden, and the lack of visible impact can lead to 
skepticism and reluctance to comply. By implementing transparent measures and providing 
clear, visual insights into the collection and spending of income tax, the government can 
demonstrate its commitment to integrity and responsible governance. This, in turn, can 
lead to higher compliance rates and a more robust tax base, as citizens are more likely to 
contribute when they trust that their money is being used effectively and ethically. 


Beyond transparency, this Bill places a strong emphasis on education. It recognizes 
that an informed taxpayer is a crucial asset to the nation. By making tax data accessible and 
understandable, the Bill aims to educate citizens about the importance of taxes in Nation 
building. Educational campaigns and resources, alongside visual data representations, can 
help demystify the tax process, elucidate the various facets of income tax, and highlight the 
significance of timely and accurate tax payments. Such education can empower citizens, 
making them more knowledgeable about their fiscal responsibilities and the impact of their 
contributions on national development. 


An informed citizenry is more likely to be engaged and participative in the democratic 
process. By providing clear, visual tax data and educational resources, this Bill encourages 
citizens to take a more active role in civic life. When people understand how their taxes are 
collected and used, they are better equipped to hold their government accountable, advocate 
for necessary changes, and participate in policy discussions. This engagement can lead to 
more responsive governance and policies that better reflect the needs and desires of the 
populace. 


For the successful implementation of this Bill, several key components must be in 
place. Firstly, there must be a robust system for collecting and processing tax data accurately 
and efficiently. This system should be integrated with technological tools that can generate 
visual representations of the data in real time. Secondly, a comprehensive public awareness 
campaign should be launched to inform citizens about the availability of these new resources 
and how to access and interpret them. Thirdly, an oversight committee should be established 
to ensure that the data presented is accurate, unbiased, and regularly updated. In conclusion, 
this Bill represents a significant advancement in promoting transparency and accountability 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31 


in the collection and utilization of income tax in India. By providing a visual representation 
of tax data, it aims to make information more accessible and understandable, thereby fostering 
greater trust in the tax system. Furthermore, by educating taxpayers and encouraging a 
more informed and engaged citizenry, the Bill supports the development of a more robust, 
participatory democracy. Ultimately, the successful implementation of this Bill has the 
potential to transform the relationship between the Government and its citizens, leading to 
more effective governance and a stronger, more united nation. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SHRIRANG APPA BARNE 
July 8, 2024. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the Central Government to publish visual 
representation of the income tax collected in each financial year. Clause 4 provides for the 
Central Government to publish on the official website of the Income Tax Department of the 
visual representation of income tax collected. Clause 7 provides for the Central Government 
to provide requisite funds for carrying out purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that 
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is likely to be involved. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


Bill No. 68 of 2024 


A Bill to ensure uniformity and standardization in the manufacturing, distribution, and 
pricing of glucotest strips across India with a view to improve diabetes 
management and ensure affordability of glucotest strips for all and for matters 
connected therewith. 


Wuereas diabetes is a chronic condition affecting a significant portion of the 
population in India; 


AnpD Wetereas regular monitoring of blood glucose levels is essential for effective 
diabetes management; 


AND WetereaS glucotest strips are a crucial component in the monitoring process; 


Anp Wuereas there is a need to ensure uniformity, affordability, and accessibility 
of glucotest strips for all individuals, 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Uniform 
Standards for 
Glucotest 
Strips. 


Licensing and 
Compliance. 


Regulation of 
Prices. 


Restraint on 
Sale of 
glucotest 
strips at 
prices 
exceeding 
MRP. 


Subsidies and 
Support for 
Low-Income 
Groups. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Glucotest Strips (Regulation and Price Control) 
Act, 2024. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “distributor” means any company engaged in the distribution of glucotest 
strips; 


(b) “glucotest strip” means a strip used in a glucometer to measure blood 
glucose level in the human body; 


(c) “manufacturer” means any company engaged in the production of 
glucotest strips; and 


(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. (7) The Central Government shall, within six months of the commencement of 
this Act, prescribed uniform standards for the manufacturing and quality of glucotest 
strips in the country. 


(2) The standards under sub-section (/) shall include specifications for accuracy, 
reliability and safety of the glucotest strips in such manner as may be prescribed. 


4. (J) No person shall manufacture or import glucotest strips without a valid 
license issued by the authority prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government. 


(2) The authority prescribed under sub-section (/) shall ensure compliance with 
the standards set forth under section 3. 


(3) The Central Government shall conduct regular inspection and audits of the 
manufacturers and distributors to ensure compliance of the provisions of this Act. 


5. (4) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish 
a Committee to regulate and monitor the prices of glucotest strips in the country in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The composition of and other terms and conditions of the Committee shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Committee shall determine the price of glucotest strips and ensure that 
the prices are fair, affordable and uniform across the country in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


6. No manufacturer and distributor shall sell glucotest strips at prices exceeding 
the maximum retail price determined by the Committee. 


7. (1) The Central Government shall introduce schemes to subsidize the cost of 
glucotest strips for low-income groups in the country in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) The public healthcare facilities including hospitals and clinics shall provide 
glucotest strips at subsidized rates or free of cost to the persons living below poverty 
line as may be determined by the Central Government, from time to time. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


8. Any person who manufactures, distributes or sell glucotest strips in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act shall be liable to a fine which may extend to 
five lakh rupees and in case of repeated offence, the person shall be liable to 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend 
to fifteen lakh rupees. 


9. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every 
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business shall be deemed to be guilty of the 


offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the implementation of the provisions of 
the Act. 


11. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary 
for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two 
years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


12. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and 
if, before the expiry of the sessions immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule of both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 


Penalties. 


Offence by 
Companies. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Power to 


Remove 
difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The price of glucose test strips in India exhibits significant variation due to multiple 
factors such as brand, quality, availability, distribution channels, and regional economic 


conditions. Typically, the cost of glucose test strips ranges from ' 300 to ' 1,500 for a 
pack of 50 strips, but this can fluctuate based on several key determinants. 


Firstly, brand reputation plays a crucial role in pricing. Established brands like 
Accu-Chek, OneTouch, and Dr. Morepen generally command higher prices due to their 
perceived reliability and widespread recognition. These brands often invest heavily in 
research and development, ensuring accuracy and consistency in their products, which 
justifies the premium pricing. Conversely, lesser-known or generic brands offer more 
affordable options, though they may lack the same level of trust and reliability among 
consumers. 


Secondly, the quality and features of the test strips impact their cost. Strips that 
offer advanced features such as faster reading times, smaller blood sample requirements, 
and compatibility with mobile apps or data management systems tend to be priced 
higher. These features cater to users looking for convenience and more integrated 
health management solutions. 


Availability and distribution channels also influence prices. In urban areas with 
numerous pharmacies and healthcare providers, competition can drive prices down. 
However, in rural or remote areas where access to medical supplies is limited, prices 
might be higher due to logistical challenges and reduced competition. Online 
marketplaces like Amazon and Flipkart often offer competitive pricing and discounts, 
potentially lower than brick-and- mortar stores, due to reduced overhead costs and 
bulk purchasing advantages. 


Regional economic conditions and government policies further affect pricing. 
States with better healthcare infrastructure and higher purchasing power may see lower 
prices due to economies of scale and better supply chain management. Additionally, 
government initiatives to make healthcare more affordable, such as subsidies or price 
controls on essential medical supplies, can also help in stabilizing or reducing the cost 
of glucose test strips. 


Therefore, this Bill aims to address the disparities in the availability and pricing of 
glucotest strips across India. By establishing uniform standards, regulating prices, and 
providing subsidies to low-income groups, the Bill seeks to make diabetes management 
more accessible and affordable. The increasing prevalence of diabetes necessitates 
such measures to ensure the well-being of the affected population. 


Hence, this Bill. 


New DELHI; SHRIRANG APPA BARNE 
July 8, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Committee to regulate and 
monitor the prices of glucotest strips in the country. Clause 10 of the Bill provides for 
the Central Government to provide necessary funds for carrying out the purpose of this 
Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation will involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two thousand 
crore, may be involved as recurring expenditure per annum. 


Non recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two thousand crore may also 
involve from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bill No. 91 of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 
2005. 


Be it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


Short title and 1. (J) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
commencement. Guarantee (Amendment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


2. In section 3 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
42 of 2005... Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “one hundred days”, the words “two 
hundred days” shall be substituted; and 


(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) Every person who has done the work given to him shall be entitled 
to receive wages at the rate of rupees eight hundred or at the wage rate for 
each day of work, whichever is higher.”’. 


3. In the principal Act, in Schedule II, after paragraph 35, the following paragraphs 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“36. Every registered person under the Scheme shall be entitled to the benefit of 
36 of 2020. Employees’ State Insurance Fund constituted under the Code on Social Security, 2020.” 


37. It shall be the duty of the Gram Panchayat to register all registered persons 
after making such enquiry as it deems fit and to comply all the procedure formalities to 
issue Employees’ State Insurance Scheme card containing such details of members of 
the household affixing their photographs for extending the benefit of Employees’ State 
Insurance Scheme as may be prescribed by the State Government.”. 


Amendment 
of section 3. 


Amendment 
of Schedule II. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 is a social 


security legislation that provides employment for rural population and ensuring minimum 
number of employment days. 


Keeping in view the changing needs of the society, it is essential to amend the 
law for providing more working days, high wages and health amenities to the registered 
persons under the Act. The present number of days of employment wages are very less 
and the registered persons are not able to find out their primary needs depending on 
the employment and salary as per the scheme formulated under the parent Act. The 
social security welfare measures provided to the workers are also less. It is highly 
necessary to increase the number of working days and wages. Moreover, providing 
health protection to the registered persons under Employees’ State Insurance Fund 
constituted under the Code on Social Security, 2020 is also inevitable. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 with a view to— 


(a) increase the maximum number of days of employment to the registered 
persons from hundred days to two hundred days; 


(b) increase the wages per day to a minimum of rupees eight hundred; and 


(c) extend the benefit of Employees’ State Insurance Fund constituted under 
the Code on Social Security, 2020 to all the registered persons under the Act. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; N.K. PREMACHANDRAN 
July 8, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 41 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for increasing the number of days of employment of 
the registered persons from one hundred days to two hundred days under the Act. It 
also provides for ensuring minimum wage of registered persons to rupees eight hundred 
for each day of work. Clause 3 provides for extending the benefit of Employees’ State 
Insurance Fund constituted under the Code on Social Security, 2020 to all the registered 
persons under the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about 
rupees ten lakh crore per annum is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed paragraph 37 empowers the State Government 
to prescribed rules for ensuring Employees’ State Insurance Scheme benefits to the 
registered persons. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative powers is of a normal character. 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bill No. 64 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for regularization of the services of ASHA workers and conferring the 
status of permanent employee of the Government and for matters connected 


therewith. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows :— 
Short title, 1. (7) This Act may be called the ASHA Workers (Regularisation of Service and 
extent and Other Benefits) Act, 2024. 


commencement. 
(2) It extends to the Union territories only. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “ASHA worker” means accredited social health activist working as 
community health worker instituted by the Government of India, Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare as a part of National Health Mission; and 


(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, take 
steps to regularize the services of ASHA workers and confer the status of Group “C” 
employees of the Government on such ASHA workers who are serving in National 
Health Mission immediately before the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every ASHA worker whose service has been regularized shall be entitled to 
such tenure, terms and conditions of service including remuneration, leave, provident 
fund, retirement and other terminal benefits as are available to Group “C” employees of 
the Central Government. 


4. The Central Government shall take steps to provide accommodation to all 
ASHA workers within the vicinity of their workplace. 


5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after expiry of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force. 


7. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 


Definitions. 


Regularization 
of services of 
ASHA 
workers. 


Accommodation 
to ASHA 
workers. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulty. 


Provisions of 
the Act to be in 
addition to 
other laws. 


Power to 
make rules. 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

ASHA workers the accredited social health activists are working under the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as part of National Health Mission contributing 
remarkable service in Health sector. The ASHA workers working as link between Health 
Department and Common man so as to create awareness and promote health activities 
in the country. The contribution of ASHA workers is helpful to improve the health 
standard of the country. The ASHA workers are good promoters of various schemes of 
the Central Government and State Government and ensuring the health of common man. 
The duties and service rendered by the ASHA workers are very important for the 
protection of the health. The ASHA workers do not have job security and the honorarium 
given to them are not sufficient for meet their immediate requirement. This may adversely 
affect the working of the integrated child development scheme. 


The ASHA workers are one of the main link between Government and general 
public. They are helping the Government for the effective implementation of health 
programmes. Considering the importance of their duties and service, it is highly 
necessary to protect their service and welfare. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; N. K. PREMACHANDRAN 
July 8, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides the regularization of service of ASHA workers and 
confer the status, wages and welfare not less than the status, wages and welfare of 
Group “C” employees of the Central Government. Clause 4 provides for provision of 
accommodation to ASHA workers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore per annum is likely to be incurred 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to 
be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative powers is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


Bill No. 72 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for regularisation of the services of Anganwadi Workers and conferring 
the status of not less than those of Group ‘C’ employees of the Central Government 
on such Anganwadi Workers. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (7) This Act may be called the Anganwadi Workers (Regularisation of Service 
and Welfare) Act, 2024. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Regularisation 
of services of 
anganwadi 
workers. 


Savings. 


Power to 
make rules. 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “anganwadi” means an anganwadi centre set up by the Central 
Government or State Government or Union territory Administrator to implement 
the Integrated Child Development Scheme; 


(0) “anganwadi worker” means any person working in an anganwadi on 
regular or contract or daily wages basis; and 


(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, take all 
such steps as may be necessary to regularize the services of anganwadi workers and 
confer the status of not less than those of Group ‘C’ employees of the Central Government 
on all such anganwadi workers. 


(2) The Central Government shall also provide such wages and welfare facilities 
as are available to, or not less than, Group ‘C’ employees of the Central Government. 


4. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 


5. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out all purposes of this Act ensuring the service status and welfare of 
the Anganwadi workers. 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions 
aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity or anything 
previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Anganwadi Centres were started in this country by the Central Government and 
State Governments for implementation of the Integrated Child Development Services 
Scheme. It includes the comprehensive development of health awareness among women 
and child welfare. The contribution of Anganwadi Centres is remarkable and has become 
an integrated and essential part of life in rural areas. The Anganwadi workers are good 
promoters of various schemes of the Central Government and State Government and 
ensuring the health and welfare of child and women. The duties and service rendered 
by the Anganwadi workers are very important for the protection of the health and 
welfare of women and children. The Anganwadi workers do not have job security and 
the honorarium given to them are not sufficient to meet their immediate basic 
requirements. This may adversely affect the working of the Integrated Child 
Development Scheme. 


The Anganwadi workers are one of the main links between Government and general 
public. They are helping the Government for the effective implementation of women 
and children health and welfare scheme. Considering the importance of their duties and 
service it is highly necessary to protect their service and welfare. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; N. K. PREMACHANDRAN 
July 8, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for regularisation of the services of anganwadi 
workers and confer the status not less than those of Group ‘C’ employees of the Central 
Government on all such anganwadi workers. It also provides for such wages and welfare 
measures as are available to or not less than Group ‘C’ employees of the Central 
Government to anganwadi workers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve 
expenditure from the consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about 
rupees three thousand crore is likely to be involved per annum from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore is also likely to 
be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative powers is of a normal character. 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bill No. 100 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for setting up of a Board for speedy development of backward areas 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 
Short title, 1. (7) This Act may be called the Backward Areas Development Board Act, 2024. 
cin ae (2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Board” means the Backward Areas Development Board constituted 
under section 3; and 


(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


3. (1) The Central Government, to be known as BackwardArea Development Board, Establishment 
by notification in the official gazette, establish a Board for the speedy development of of Backward 


all backward areas in the country. ae 
Development 
(2) The Board shall consists of,— 1081: 


(a) a Chairman who shall be renowned economist of the country; 


(6) not more than five members representing industry, agriculture, 
infrastructure, banking, planning, information technology; and 


(c) one representative from each State where backward areas exist. 


to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members shall 


be such as may be prescribed. Functions of 


4. (J) The Board shall identify all backward areas of the country. thes Boars 


(2) Till such time the Board identifies the backward regions in the country, the 
following areas shall be deemed to be backward areas in the country:— 


(i) Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga, Tirunelveli, Virudhunagar, Madurai, 
Dindigul, Theni district in the State of Tamil Nadu; 


(ii) Rayalaseema in Andhra Pradesh; 

(iii) Andaman and Nicobar Islands; 

(iv) Lakshadweep Islands; 

(v) Desert district in Rajasthan and Gujarat; 

(vi) Hilly district of Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand; and 

(vii) North Eastern States. न 


5. (1) The Board shall consider the following aspects to determine of backwardness Backwardness. 
of any areas,— 


(i) the geographical condition; 

(ii) the climatic condition; 

(iii) existing industries; 

(iv) available employment opportunities; 


(v) agriculture including horticulture, sericulture, floriculture, aquaculture, 
breeding cattle farming, fishing, poultry farming, fruitculture, vegetable farming; 


(vi) existing infrastructure facilities; 
(vii) available educational facilities; 
(viii) available medical facilities; and 


(ix) any such other aspect the Board may deem necessary for identifying 
region as a backward region. 


(2) The Board shall study the reasons for backwardness in each area and 
recommend an Action Plan for speedy development of the areas to the Central 


Government and to the respective State Governments. ला 
entra 


6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by Government 
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Board for carrying out the purpose of Coen’ 
this Act. 


Annual 
Report. 


Power to 
make rules. 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


7. The Central Government shall place before each House of Parliament an Annual 
Report containing the recommendations of the Board and Action taken thereon. 


8. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 51 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Ever since India attained independence in 1947 the country has progressed in 
many fields. There has been considerable development and growth in industry, 
infrastructure, employment opportunities, medical facilities and education facilities and 
social welfare schemes. The standard of living of population has seen a positive growth 
in last 75 years. The poverty level has been contained and the literacy level has increased 
to a great level. The export from the country has been increasing rapidly over the years. 
The Make in India concept has been successful and our imports of various products 
has seen a significant decline in the recent years. 


However it may be seen that the growth is restricted mainly to metropolitan cities, 
a few select States and Union Territories. There is considerable regional imbalance in 
the country. There are many districts in the country which do not even have a single 
industry. People of these areas have to migrate to other places in search of their 
livelihood, medical and educational facilities, etc. Therefore it is necessary that an 
Action Plan be carried out for the speedy development of these backward regions. 


It is accordingly proposed to set up a Board which would recommend the steps to 
be taken by the Government for the development of backward areas. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; K. NAVASKANI 
July 8, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to make provision for setting up of a Board for 
development of backward areas in the country. The Bill further seeks to provide for 
appointment of Chairman and members of the Board. Clause 6 provides for the Central 
Government to provide adequate fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about rupees one lakh crore per annum would be involved from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three lakh crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bill No. 95 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for ban on entrance examinations to all professional courses in the 
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and 1. (1) This Act may be called the Ban on Entrance Examination in Professional 
commencement. Courses Act 2024 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


2. Notwithstanding anything contained in any order, judgement or direction of 
any Court or any other law for the time being in force or any rule, notification or order 
issued in this behalf, on and from the academic year 2024-25, no entrance examination 
to the professional courses including medical and engineers shall be conducted by the 
Central Government or its agencies: 


Provided that if any entrance examination for the academic session 2024-25 for 
any professional courses has already been held, such examination shall be deemed to 
have been cancelled and declared null and void. 


3. The Central Government shall ensure that admission to professional courses 
shall be made in accordance with the percentage of marks obtained in the courses or 
exams which is a prerequisite for the admission to the professional courses. 


4. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two 
years from the date of the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, 
be laid before each House of Parliament. 


Ban on 
conducting 
Entrance 
Examination 
for 
Professional 
Courses. 


Admission to 
professional 
courses on the 
basis of 
percentage of 
marks. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the recent years, entrance examination are held for admission to various 
professional courses including medical and engineering, etc. Though a student, scores 
very high marks in the 12th examination he shall be given admission only if he scores 
high percentage in the entrance examination. Though the student is intelligent, he will 
not be able to crack the entrance examination as the syllabus is different from what he 
studied in the school. 


Moreover, he has to spend a great amount of money by way of taking admission 
in coaching institutes to pass the entrance examination. But the poor students especially 
from rural areas cannot afford such huge fees in coaching institutes. Therefore, their 
ambition of becoming a doctor or an engineer remains a dream. 


There are may instances of students committing suicide due to failure in the 
entrance examination. Due to this intelligent students are discouraged to take these 
examinations. Besides in the current times, there has been an alleged irregularities in 
the entrance examination conducted by Nation Testing Agencies. 


To avoid such instances, it is proposed to ban entrance examination to all 
professional courses to facilitate intelligent and poor students to have access to 
professional courses in the country. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; K. NAVASKANI 
July 8, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 55 


Bill No. 52 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for welfare of Indian citizens employed outside the country and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows :— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Overseas Workers (Welfare) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:— 


(a) “Fund” means the Overseas Workers Welfare Fund constituted under 
section 7; and 


Short title 
and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Maintenance 
of Register of 
Overseas 
workers. 


Assessment 
study. 


Formulation 
of welfare 
schemes. 


Obligations of 
the Central 
Government. 


Overseas 
Workers’ 
Welfare Fund. 


Compulsory 
registration of 
recruiting 
agencies. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(b) “overseas worker” means and includes any Indian citizen who is employed 
outside India by a person who is not an Indian citizen or any company or any enterprise 
or any vessel which is not registered in the territory of India but does not include 
Indian citizens working in the organs or agencies of the United Nations Organization 
(UNO). 


(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. The Central Government shall prepare and maintain a Register of all overseas 
workers containing names and such other particulars including the country in which they 
are employed, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


4. The Central Government may, from time to time, undertake or cause to be 
undertaken, using agencies as it may consider necessary, studies in the countries where 
there are substantial number of overseas Indian workers with a view to assess the following 
in regard to overseas Indian workers:— 

(i) access to basic human rights; 


(ii) access to health facilities; 
(iii) access to legal remedies; and 
(iv) ability to live in a safe and secure manner. 


5. (7) The Central Government shall formulate and implement welfare schemes for 
overseas workers in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such schemes 
shall also provide for,— 


(a) insurance and disability cover; 


(6) old age protection including pension to those who returned to India in their 
old age; 

(c) orientation and skill upgradation; 

(d) meeting expenditure on airlifting of mortal remains of deceased overseas 


Indians to India or for cremation/burial of such persons if the employer is unable or 
unwilling to do so and the family is unable to meet the cost; 


(e) welfare of persons who become victims of human trafficking; 
(f) emergency medical care to overseas Indians in need; and 


(g) such other provisions as the Central Government may consider necessary. 


6. The Central Government shall— 


(i) take such measures as it may deem necessary including entering into bilateral 
agreements to generate international co-operation to check human trafficking of Indian 
citizens; and 

(ii) enter into social security agreements with other countries for ensuring 
protection and welfare of Indian citizens working overseas. 


7. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
a Fund to be known as the Overseas Workers’ Welfare Fund. 


(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the Fund as the Central Government may think 
fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


8. It shall be mandatory for all persons or agencies involved in the recruitment or 
placement of Indian citizens for employment with foreign nationals or companies outside 
the country to get themselves registered with such authority, as may be designated by the 
Central Government for the purpose. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 57 


9. Whoever, in contravention of section 8 recruits any person for employment outside 
the country, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years and with fine which may extend to rupees ten lakh or with both. 


10. The provisions of thisAct and rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. 


11. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Punishment. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to 
make rules. 


58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Around 50 Lakh Indians are overseas worker. More than ninety per cent. of this work 
force is in the Gulf countries. There has been a consistent and steady increase in the 
number of persons going abroad in search of employment. There are about five million 
Indians employed outside the country. Indian workers who migrate for work legally also 
face many problems like non-payment or delay in payment of wages, harsh working and 
inhuman living conditions, retention of passport by owners, cheating by intermediaries, 
incidents of physical abuse and sexual exploitation, etc. In most of the countries access to 
legal recourse is denied to such workers. Moreover, in some countries legal recourse is so 
expensive that in most cases employees are not able to afford such options. The Central 
Government is required to take care of those who contribute to Indian economy by sending 
their hard earned money to their family members in India. 


Therefore, there is an urgent need for a legislation providing for the management and 
welfare of Indian citizens working abroad. The Bill, inter-alia, seeks to provide for:— 

(7) registration of all Indian citizens who migrate from the country in search of 
employment; 

(ii) entering into bilateral agreement with other government of other nations to 
safeguard the interest of Indian workers in those respective countries; 

(iii) compulsory registration of recruitment agencies for overseas employment; 

(iv) insurance and disability cover; 

(v) old age protection including pension to those who returned to India in their 
old age; 

(vi) orientation and skill upgradation; 

(viZ) meeting expenditure on airlifting of mortal remains of deceased overseas 
Indians to India or for cremation/burial of such persons if the employer is unable or 
unwilling to do so and the family is unable to meet the cost; 

(viii) welfare of persons who become victims of human trafficking; and 

(ix) emergency medical care to overseas Indians in need and other welfare 
measures as are required to meet the needs of Indian workers abroad. 

Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; K. NAVASKANI 
July 8, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the maintenance of a register of overseas workers. 
Clause 4 provides for an assessment study in the countries where there are overseas Indian 
workers. Clause 5 provides for formulation and implementation of welfare schemes for 
welfare of overseas workers. Clause 7 provides for constitution of a Overseas Workers’ 
Welfare Fund for welfare of overseas workers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is difficult to give an exact 
estimate of expenditure likely to be involved as the exact amount of expenditure likely to be 
involved will depend upon the number of schemes formulated by the Government. However, 
it is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore is 
likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


Bill No. 105 of 2024 


A Bill to enhance the quality of education in professional and technical courses by providing 
mandatory structured internships to the students, providing basic remuneration under 
the internship and establishing a national-level platform for internship application 
and for matters connected therewith. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (/) This Act may be called the Quality Education (Enhancing through Internship) — Short title, 
Act, 2024. extent and 


commencement. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Responsibilities 
of companies 
to provide 
internship 
opportunities. 


Minimum 
Internship 
Remuneration. 


Employment 
opportunity 
to the 
interns. 


Establishment 
of the 
National 
Internship 
Portal. 


Portal 
Management 
and 
Functionality. 


Monitoring 
and 
Compliance. 


60 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) “company” means any firm, organisation, or business entity legally 
registered under Indian law or any other company registered outside India but 
operating in India; 


(c) “internship” means a period of work experience offered by a company for a 
limited period of time; 


(d) “Portal” means the National Internship Portal established for managing 
internship applications and placements of the students enrolled in professional 
courses under section 6; 


(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


(f) “professional/technical courses” means the courses offered by recognized 
educational institutions that provide specialised training in fields such as engineering, 
medicine, law, management and such other disciplines; and 


(g) “student” means a person enrolled in any under-graduate or post- 
graduate professional or technical course. 


3. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every registered company shall offer 
internship opportunities to students enrolled in any professional or technical courses 
based on capabilities and to provide remuneration during the internship programme in the 
company. 


4. Every company shall provide minimum internship remuneration to the students 
undergoing internship in the company to compensate for the cost of travel and food for 
internships lasting one month or more based on the cost of living index as may be prescribed. 


5. 14 student undergoes internship for six months or more in the same company, he 
may request the company for the offer for employment and company may consider the 
request in good faith and based on the performance of the student and employment needs 
of the company. 


6. (/) The Central Government shall establish a National Internship Portal to facilitate 
internship applications and placements of the Students. 


(2) It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government to update the data 
relating to student application and placement State wise and district wise in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


7.(1) The portal established under section 6 shall facilitate students to apply and 
select the companies statewise and districtwise where they intend to undertake their 
internship. 


(2) The portal shall enable the students to have access to the available internship 
opportunities based on their preferences, qualifications and availability. 


(3) The Companies offering internships shall register on the portal and provide details 
of available positions, duration, remuneration and such other relevant information as may 
be prescribed. 


(4) The Companies shall update the list of employment opportunities at least once in 
three months. 
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official gazette, establish a 


monitoring mechanism to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 61 


(2) The composition of and the funds of the monitory mechanism shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 


(3) Any non-compliance by companies of the provisions of the Act shall attract 
penalties as may be prescribed. 


9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


10. (/) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two 
years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act. 


12. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
other law. 


Power to 
make rules. 


62 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Internships plays a crucial role in shaping the career of the students, particularly to 
those enrolled in professional and technical courses. The Internship not only helps the 
students to gain real exposure to the working environment but also helps to develop requisite 
skills for their future avenues. In the Indian perspective, the need is to enhance the quality 
of education in professional and technical courses by providing students with structured 
internship opportunities. By ensuring that companies offer internships based on their 
capacity and provide basic remuneration, students will gain practical experience and financial 
support. The proposed establishment of a National Internship Portal will streamline the 
application process, making it easier for students to find suitable internships and for 
companies to find qualified interns. 


The Bill aims to bridge the gap between academic learning and professional practice, 
thereby improving employability and career readiness among students enrolled in 
professional and technical course. 


Hence this Bill. 


New Deut; PRANITI SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE 
July 8, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish a National 
Internship Portal to facilitate internship applications and placements of the Students. Clause 
8 provides for establishment of a Monitoring mechanism by the Central Government. Clause 
9 provides for the Central Government to provide adequate funds. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated 
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum is likely to be 
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 63 


Bill No. 81 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for the segregation and re-cycling of municipal solid waste, use of 
re-cyclable waste in waste-energy plants for generation of energy and transportation 
of non-recyclable waste into landfills and for matters connectedtherewith or incidental 


thereto. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Solid Waste Management Act, 2024. Short title, 
extent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commencement. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Duty of waste 


64 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(8) “large manufacturing facility’ means any manufacturing facility with an 
investment of more than rupees twenty crore; 


(c) “municipal authority’ means Municipal Corporation, Municipal Committee, 
Municipality, Nagar Palika, Nagar Nigam, Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council 
including Notified Area Committee (NAC) or any other local body constituted under 
the relevant statutes and entrusted with the responsibility of management and handling 
of municipal solid wastes; 


(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(e) “segregation” means separation of municipal solid wastes into organic, 
inorganic, bio-degradable, non-biodegradable, recyclable and non-recyclable waste 
and hazardous wastes; 


(f) “waste-energy plants” means plants where solid waste is treated using 
different techniques to produce any form of energy; and 


(g) “waste generating unit” means any entity, household or large manufacturing 
facility where waste is generated and which require waste disposal. 


3. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every waste generating unit 


generating unit within its jurisdiction segregates waste before its disposal. 


and large 
manufacturing 
facility. 


Duty of the 
municipal 
authority. 


Penalty. 


(2) In case of large manufacturing facility, the owner or the in-charge of the facility 
shall, as the case may be— 


(a) ensure that the waste is segregated, re-used and re-cycled at source; and 


(6) undertake transportation of re-cyclable waste to waste-energy plants and 
the non-recyclable and non-biodegradable waste to the notified landfills, as the case 
may be. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the waste generating units are 
liable to pay for the waste generated by them that is sent to the landfills on the basis of the 


weight of the waste in such manner as may be prescribed. 
4. It shall be duty of the Municipal authority to— 
(a) collect the segregated waste from the waste generating units; 


(6) ensure that the segregated waste collected and transported is not mixed 
with any other waste or any material, to the extent that mixing would hamper its re- 
use, re-cycle, further treatment or its use in waste- energy plants; 


(c) undertake treatment of organic waste through bio-degradation such as 
vermin composting, mechanical composting, by window method or any other suitable 
method as approved by the Central Pollution Control Board or the State Pollution 
Control Board, as the case may be; and 


(d) transport the non-recyclable waste, non-biodegradable waste to the notified 
landfills. 


5. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend up to three months and fine which may extend up to rupees 
twenty thousand. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 65 


6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act. 


7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law, for the time being in force. 


8. (/) The Central Government in consultation with the State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid before each House of the Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
requisite 
funds. 

Act not in 


derogation of 
any other law. 


Power to 
make rules. 


66 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


It is estimated that more than ten lakh tonnes of waste is generated in our country. 
The waste is largely composed of bio wastes, metals, plastics, paper, food, glass and 
presently majority of the waste is sent to the landfills with only a portion being used in 
waste-energy plants or recycled or reused. For this every municipal corporation should be 
provided with incinerators of different capacities depending upon the waste generated. 
This energy from waste can be used as an alternative to the depleting petroleum products 
and it would also keep the environment safe and clean. Waste is not a waste until it is 
wasted. 


The Bill seeks to ensure that waste from landfills is segregated and recycled, reused 
as input to waste-energy projects. Non-recyclable wastes and hazardous wastes can be 
dumped in the notified landfills. Proper handling and disposal of municipal waste could 
result in generating employment and serve as an opportunity for entrepreneurs in the 
waste-energy sector. In various countries there are laws for proper disposal of wastes. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; T. SUMATHY (A) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN 
July 8, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain steps to be taken by the municipal authorities 
for collection of Segregated municipal Solid Waste, transportation of recyclable waste to 
waste-energy plants and non-recyclable waste to the notified landfills. 


Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite 
funds to State Governments to carry out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, if enacted, would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of 
rupees one thousand crore would be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 67 


Bill No. 59 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu for the purpose 
of sustainable and balanced development of growth-oriented infrastructure such as 
housing, drinking water, roads, sanitation, creation of grain and fodder 
banks, skill development, cloud seeding, contour bunding and welfare schemes 
for the women, children, senior citizens and people living below poverty line 
in the State and for encouraging traditional water conservation through 
lakes, ponds, wells, rainwater harvesting and afforestation and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Short title and 
Tamil Nadu Act, 2024. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


68 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India, 
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance 
to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be 
undertaken by the Government of Tamil Nadu with the approval of Union Government for 
the purposes of— 


(7) improvement of drinking water facilities in the State; 


(ii) implementation of schemes aimed at improving the health and educational 
standards of girl child; 


(iii) implementation of welfare measures aimed at improving the condition of 
agricultural and migrant labourers; 


(iv) providing for measures aimed at lowering of infant mortality rate, improving 
the maternal health and promoting institutional delivery in the State; 


(v) providing employment to members of families living below poverty line 
and unemployed youth through skill development; 


(vi) providing water and sanitation facilities in rural and urban areas; 


(vii) creating good quality infrastructure of roads, highways, street lights, 
schools, colleges and transport; 


(viii) creating awareness amongst people about disaster preparedness plan 
and training them to deal with disasters; 


(ix) creation and maintenance of water conservation bodies such as check 
dams in the State of Tamil Nadu; 


(x) digging of open wells, ponds and desiltation of such bodies from time to 
time under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005; 


(xi) encouraging and providing irrigation facilities to the farming sector and 
promotion of drip irrigation facility in these regions; 


(xii) capping the cultivation area of sugarcane crop and promotion of drought 
resilient crops; 


(xiii) promotion of rain water harvesting and watershed development to ensure 
replenishment of groundwater; 


(xiv) afforestation particularly on vacant or barren and waste land with the help 
of villagers and village panchayats including community afforestation; 


(xv) promotion of growing fodder and setting up fodder and foodgrain 
Banks at conspicuous places; 


(xvi) initiating welfare measures for improving the conditions of agricultural 
workers, senior citizens, women, children and poor people living in these regions; 


(xvii) establishing cold storages and warehouses for the farmers; 
(xviii) settling the debt of farmers; 


(xix) providing compensation and relief to farmers and agricultural labourers 
for any damage to crops caused due to rainfall deficit, pest attack, flood, hailstorm or 
any other natural calamity; 


(xx) encouraging and providing sustainable practices like organic farming 
coupled with modern irrigation facilities like drip irrigation, contour bunding and 
sprinklers to farmers; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 69 


(xxi) promotion of research and development through Krishi Vigyan Kendra in 
agriculture and drought management to ensure better and inexpensive inputs like 
seeds, fertilizers and pesticides; 


(xxii) promotion of research and development in sectors like livestock and 
poultry; 

(xxiii) promoting food processing industries based on local agricultural 
products; 


(xxiv) implementation of social awareness campaigns through non- 
Governmental Organisation and Self-Help Groups relating to farmer credit, water 
literacy and drought management through change in cropping pattern; 


(xxv) promotion and implementation of cloud seeding through silver iodide 
in the State; and 


(xxvi) such other provisions as the Government of the State of Tamil Nadu 
may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
y y ying purp 


3. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 


Government may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act which appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the 


date of commencement of this Act. 


4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 


law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
other laws. 


70 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The State of Tamil Nadu needs assistance from the Central Government for the 
successful completion of various schemes being undertaken at present with an aim to 
improve the standard of life of the people, improve the level of education and health condition 
of the girls, to encourage the girl students of families living below poverty line to pursue 
higher education and also to provide incentives for people living below poverty line to 
pursue higher education. The condition of farmers and agricultural labourers in the State, 
their welfare and protection are of paramount importance. Central assistance to the State is 
also needed for the holistic development and further reduction in the maternal and infant 
mortality rates. 


Recurring droughts have made the State farmers to seek support from the Government. 
The situation is where droughts have been a frequent occurrence during the past fifty years 
has to be stopped through massive water conservation with check dams and other structures 
to arrest rain water run off. 


The traditional methods of water conservation through digging of open wells, ponds, 
lakes and such other bodies and time to time desiltation of such water bodies needs to be 
undertaken. Rain water harvesting has to be promoted as a mass movement in this region. 
Afforestation on a large scale particularly on barren lands and wastelands has to be promoted 
in these regions involving villagers and village panchayats by providing incentives. This 
can certainly arrest the desertification in these regions. Unfortunately certain backward 
regions of the State are not much developed in comparison to other urban regions of the 
State in terms of infrastructure facilities such as potable water, roads, electricity, sanitation 
and other development indicators such as employment, per capita income and education 
particularly of the girl child. Welfare measures for the senior citizens, widows, physically 
handicapped or infirm do not exist in these regions of the State. Tamil Nadu has to be 
allocated its fair share of resources by the Central Government. As a welfare State, the 
Government has to provide all these facilities and work towards giving a requisite push for 
overall and all round development of the State. 


Hence this Bill. 


New Delhi; T. SUMATHY ALIAS THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN 
July 8,2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as 
special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of such schemes of 
development, as may be undertaken by the State of Tamil Nadu with the approval of the 
Central Government. The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Tamil 
Nadu. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Tamil Nadu as special 
financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after 
the welfare schemes to be implemented by the State Government are identified, it is not 
possible to give the estimates of recurring or non-recurring expenditure, which would be 
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 71 


Bill No. 85 of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024. 
2. In the Seventh Schedule to Constitution,— 
(Z) in List 1—State list, entry 17 shall be omitted; and 


(ii) in List 11]—Concurrent List, after entry 32, the following entry shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“32A. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage 
and embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of 
entry 56 of list I.”. 


Short title. 


Amendment 
of the 
Seventh 
Schedule. 


72 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Life is impossible without water. All living beings including human, animals and 


plants need water for their survival. Therefore, it is desirable that requisite amount of water 
is available without any hindrance for drinking and irrigation. 


Around ninety-seven per cent of the water on the Earth is salty water and only three 
per cent is fresh water; slightly over two thirds of this fresh water is frozen in the form of 
glaciers and polar ice caps. The remaining unfrozen fresh water is found mainly as ground 
water. 


Ground water is a renewable resource, yet the world’s supply of ground water is 
steadily decreasing with the depletion of water table, most prominently in Asia and North 
America. It is still not clear that how much natural renewal balance of fresh water is available 
or whether ecosystem will be threatened for want of fresh water in near future. The framework 
for allocating water resources to water users where such a framework exists is known as 
water rights. 


At present, water is a State subject and is considered as primary responsibility of the 
State Governments. 


The Bill seeks to amend that Seventh Schedule to the Constitution with a view to 
transfer entry 17 of List Il-State List pertaining to ‘Water’, to List I[]-Concurrent List so that 
the Parliament and the Central Government can also play their due role for conservation and 
sustainable use of water to meet the growing needs of the society. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; PP. CHAUDHARY 
July 9, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 73 


Bill No. 99 of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. () This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In article 58 of the Constitution, in clause (2), for the words ‘’local or other authority”, 
the words ‘’local or other authority or institution of self-government” shall be substituted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
article 58. 


74 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments passed by Parliament in 1992 introduced 
local self governance throughout the territory of India. The Acts came into force as the 


Constitution (73rd Amendment) Act, 1992 on April 24, 1993 and the Constitution 
(74th Amendment) Act, 1992 on June 1, 1993. 


These amendments added two new parts to the Constitution, namely,— 


¢ 73rd Amendment added Part IX titled “The Panchayats” adding Articles 243 to 
243 (O) dealing with Panchayats; and 


¢ 74th Amendment added Part [XA titled “The Municipalities” adding Articles 243(P) 
to 243 (ZG) dealing with Municipality. 


Articles 243(G) and 243(W) prescribe the powers, authorities and responsibilities etc. 
of Panchayats and Municipalities respectively. The XI and XII schedule of the Constitution 
define the matters in respect of which schemes for economic development and social justice 
are to be implemented by Panchayats with regards to Article 243(G) and by Municipalities 
with regards to Article 243(W) respectively. The Constitution, hence, deals with Panchayats 
and Municipalities in great detail. 


The 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments substantially changed the Constitution 
of India and the manner in which representation of the citizens, governance and devolution 
of powers in the nation was to be conducted. 


However, while monumental in themselves, the amendments failed to change the 
qualifications for the election of the President of the Union of India. 


Article 58(2) states the ineligibility for election as President of India by cause of 
holding an Office of Profit and the above two chapters were introduced without reflecting 
within the article the change in the makeup of the State as undertaken by the institution of 
the third level of governance under Panchayats and Municipalities by these amendments. 


The inclusion of Panchayats and Municipalities as separate and distinct bodies in 
the Constitution as established by the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments requires 
their inclusion as a disqualification under Office of Profit for the election to the nation’s 
Presidency. This is because the highest holder of office in the nation should not be influenced 
in any manner by any authority in the discharge of his/her duties. 


Now in view of the above mentioned proposed amendment the Panchayats and 
Municipalities will also be enshrined within the executive offices of the State as offices of 
profit for the Presidency of the nation as distinct bodies rather than their present inclusion 
under ‘any local or other authority’. 


Hence it has become expedient to introduce the words ‘’or Institution of Self 
Government” within Article 58(2) of the Constitution of India. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; P.P. CHAUDHARY 
July 9, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 75 


Bill No. 94 of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024. Short title. 
2. In the Seventh Schedule to Constitution,— Amendment 
f th 
(7) in List W—State list, entry 14 shall be omitted; and es 
Schedule 


(ii) in List IW1—Concurrent List, after entry17B, the following entry shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“17C. Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection 
against pests and prevention of plant diseases.”. 


76 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Agriculture has got pivotal role in Indian economy. Though the share of agriculture 
in the national income is declining, it has a substantial share in Gross Domestic Product of 
the country. Agriculture is the mainstay of livelihood in rural areas. As nearly as 65 per cent. 
to 70 per cent. of our total population is engaged in agriculture related activities. Agriculture 
sector can be revitalized by concerted efforts to be made by the State Government as well as 
the Union Government. However, the role of the Union Government is negligible in the 
development of agriculture sector for the reason that agriculture has been listed in the State 
list and is considered as primary responsibility of the State Governments. 


The Bill seeks to amend the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution with a view to 
transfer entry 14 of List II—State List pertaining to ‘Agriculture’, to List I1—-Concurrent 
List so that the Parliament and Central Government can also play their due role for 
development of agriculture. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; PP. CHAUDHARY 
July 9, 2024. 


27 of 2006. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 77 


Bill No. 71 of 2024 
A Bill to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development 
(Amendment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, after 
section 10, the following sections shall be inserted, namely: — 


“10A. (/) Every scheduled commercial bank shall lend to the micro, small 
and medium enterprises at the rate of one per cent. plus the rate of fixed deposit of 
such banks. 


(2) Every micro, small or medium enterprise shall be entitled to collateral free 
loan of upto rupees two crore from scheduled commercial banks. 


10B. The Central Government shall, from time to time, notify suitable 
incentives to increase the inflow of equity capital in micro, small and medium 
enterprises.”. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new sections 
10A and 10B. 


Lending rate 
and limit for 
lending of 
collateral free 
loans. 


Incentives to 
increase the 
inflow of 
equity capital. 


78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 aims to provide 
for facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of 
micro, small and medium enterprises in the country. The said Act, as well as the guidelines 
issued by the Reserve Bank of India in its circular dated Ist July, 2011 and the 
recommendations of various committees and task groups have brought about 


considerable positive changes in various areas of development of competitiveness of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). 


However, the MSMEs, that contribute to nine per cent. of the country’s Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP), forty-five per cent. of the manufactured output, forty 
per cent. of our exports and that employs an estimated ten million people, continue to 
face serious bottlenecks in its development. Lack of access to adequate and timely 
credit at a reasonable cost is the most critical problems faced by this sector. Hence, 
there is an urgent need to make it mandatory by law for scheduled commercial banks to 
provide affordable lending rates to MSMEs. 


The Bill, hence, aims to ensure lowest lending rates to MSMEs, fixed at one 
per cent. plus the rate of interest for fixed deposits of the scheduled commercial banks 
in the country. This would ensure more credit flow to the MSME sector, without hurting 
commercial banks, as they will continue to have freedom to fix lending rates to other 
sectors or units. The Bill also aims to make it mandatory for scheduled commercial 
banks to offer MSMEs, collateral free loans, up to rupees two crore. These two key 
changes in the principal Act would revive MSMEs through increased credit flow. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; D.M. KATHIR ANAND 
July 9, 2024 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 79 


Bill No. 88 of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called as the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Short title and 
Act, 2024. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, appoint. 


80 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Amendment 2. In section 3 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter refer to as 
of section 3... the principal Act),— 


(a) after clause (5), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ba) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;”; 


(b) after clause (2) the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(ca) “child” means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of 
eighteen years;”; 


(c) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(ga) “Council” means the Nutrition Council constituted under 
section 17A;”; and 


(d) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(ha) “educational institution” includes— 


(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate 
Government or a local authority; or 


(ii) a school receiving aid or grants from the appropriate 
Government or the local authority to meet whole or part of its expenses; 


(iii) a school belonging to specified category; or 


(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to 
meet its expenditure; or 


(v) an educational institution managed by a private entity, society 
or a trust, which imparts elementary education;”. 


Insertion of 3. After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections 
eas Chapter thereunder shall be inserted, namely:— 
“CHAPTER ITA 


NUTRITION COUNCIL 


Establishment 17A. The Central Government shall, by notification in the official gazette, establish 
of Nutrition —_g Council to be known as the Nutrition Council to regulate sale and advertising of food 


£0ए्ट; products which cause obesity amongst children. 
Composition 17B. The Council shall consist of — 
of Nutrition 
Council. (a) the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Chairperson, ex-officio; 
(5) not more than three members having expertise in medicine with at least 
fifteen years of experience in handling issues related to nutrition and child health; 
(c) one expert each in the field of labelling and claims, advertisement, food 
additives, processing aids; and 
(d) one member from the Union Ministry of Women and Child Development 
not below the rank of Joint Secretary. 
Functions of 17C. The Council shall— 


the Council. 
(a) lay down policies and principles to regulate sale and advertising of food 
products cause obesity amongst children; 


(b) determine its procedure in the performance of its functions; 


34 of 2006. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 81 


(c) admit any complaints regarding non-implementation of its policies; and 
(d) initiate action for violating provisions of this Chapter. 


17D. The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and other 
employees to the Council as may be necessary for efficient discharge of its functions. 


17E. All food products containing high sugar, calories, sodium, saturated fat or 
any other ingredient present in food products beyond limits stipulated and detrimental 
to health of children shall bear label warning about the presence of excess ingredient in 
black bold letters. 


17F. All food products labelled under section 17E shall not be sold within a radius 
of one kilometre of educational institution. 


170. All food products labelled under section 17E shall not be advertised in print, 
television or any other form targeting children below the age of eighteen years. 


17H. Whoever sells a labelled food product in contravention of the provisions of 
this Chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto 
three years and fine which may extend upto rupees ten lakhs. 


17. Whoever advertises a labelled food product in contravention of provisions 
of this Chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto 
two years and fine which may extend upto rupees five lakhs.”. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
Officers and 
employees. 


Labelling of 
food products 
by the 
Council.. 


Prohibition of 
sale of 
labelled food 
products near 
educational 
institution. 


Prohibition 
on advertising 
of labelled 
food products. 


Punishment 
for sale of 
labelled food 
products. 


Punishment 
for 
advertisement 
of labelled 
food product. 


82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Increasing exposure to variety of fast foods has led to rise in consumption of 
food products which are largely detrimental to the health of the persons. While adults 
can recognise the harmful effects the targeted advertising of such unhealthy food 
products towards younger population has led to poor lifestyle standards amongst 
youth. The need is to regulate the sale and advertising of such food products so as to 
save children from their harmful effects. 


Childhood obesity is a major challenge in the battle against rising rate of non- 
communicable diseases in India. While India is already facing challenges in providing 
affordable healthcare access to its citizens, the effects of poor lifestyle habits among 
its urban citizens adds further burden on the country’s resources. The establishment of 
Nutrition Council under the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare with adequate 
representation of professionals will be vital in regulating use of ingredients resulting in 
obesity. A warning label on food products having more than permissible limit of certain 
ingredients would caution the consumers about their ill-effects. 


It is also necessary to place restriction on advertisement of food products which 
cause obesity and sale of such food products near educational institutions. The Bill, 
accordingly, seeks to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 with a view to 
reduce consumption of unhealthy food products by children. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; D.M. KATHIR ANAND 
July 9, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute a Nutrition Council to regulate the sale and 
advertising of food products which cause obesity amongst children. It also provides 
for appointments of experts, officers and employees to the Nutrition Council. The Bill, 
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It 
is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per annum would be 
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to 
be involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 83 


Bill No. 82 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs 
of repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and 
archaeological sites and remains including excavation of new archaeological sites 
and remains situated in the State of Tamil Nadu. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains in the State of Tamil Nadu Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Special 
Financial 
Assistance to 
the State of 
Tamil Nadu. 


Act not in 
derogation of 


any other law. 


84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires “ancient monument” means 
any structure, erection or monument, or any tumulus or place of interment, or any cave, 
rock- sculpture, inscription or monolith which is of historical, archaeological or artistic 
interest and which has been in existence for not less than one hundred years and 
includes: — 


(i) remains of an ancient monument; 
(ii) site of an ancient monument; 


(iii) such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may 
be required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such monument; 
and 


(iv) the means of access to, and convenient inspection of, an ancient 
monument. 


3. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial 
assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of repairs, renovations and 
preservation of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains 
including excavation of new archaeological sites and remains situated in the State of 
Tamil Nadu, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Central 
Government. 


4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 85 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The State of Tamil Nadu is one of the most favourite destinations of tourists, both 
domestic and foreign, famous for its rich ancient architecture, art, culture and tradition, 
fairs and festivals worldwide. The different tourist destinations attract the tourists 


because of various reasons including its ancient and historical monuments and 
archaeological sites and remains. 


At present, the Archaeological Survey of India is looking after the maintenance 
and conservation of 242 centrally protected monuments/sites in the State of Tamil 
Nadu. Besides more than 500 monuments and buildings have been notified as protected 
monuments in the State of Tamil Nadu. These monuments and archaeological remains 
of diverse nature are located in the region since prehistoric times and are scattered from 
the Palaeolithic site at Gudiyam in Tiruvallur District to the Microlithic or Mesolithic 
sites in Teri Sand in Southern districts of Tirunelveli and Thuthukudi. There are splendid 
array of Megalithic monuments, pre-historic and historic monuments, the exquisite 
stone architecture of the Pallavas, Cholas, Pandiyas and the Nayaks. There are hundreds 
of archaic buildings constructed during the rule of Nawabs of Arcot and the British. 
The great repertoire of ancient monuments and plethora of ancient temples makes Tamil 
Nadu the greatest treasure of ancient world. The grand Vellore Fort and the 
Jalakandeswarar temple complex situated in my Vellore Parliamentary constituency is 
world renowned and attracts great attention. 


Taking care of the monuments is an important duty that devolves on the respective 
State Government as well as the Central Government. It needs adequate funds to engage 
people who can look after monuments, ensure that the miscreants do not harm them, as 
also to get the damaged portion repaired from expert designers and engineers. The 
Central Government must provide adequate funds for each monument. 


The proper upkeep and maintenance of ancient and historical monuments and 
archaeological sites and remains in the State of Tamil Nadu shall boost heritage tourism 
which will in turn increase employment, revenue generation and local business in Tamil 
Nadu. 


It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special 
financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of repairs, renovations 
and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and 
remains including excavation of new archaeological sites and remains situated in the 
State of Tamil Nadu. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; D.M. KATHIR ANAND 
July 9, 2024. 


86 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money out of 
the Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation 
provide, as special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of 
repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and 
archaeological sites and remains including excavation of new archaeological sites and 
remain situated in the State of Tamil Nadu, as may be undertaken by the State with the 
approval of the Government of India. 


The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Tamil Nadu as 
special financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known 
only after the plans to be implemented by the State Government with the approval of 
Government of India are identified, it is not possible at present to give the estimates of 
recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India 
at this stage. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 87 


Bill No. 106 of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment) Short title and 
Act, 2024. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, appoint. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Insertion of 
new 
section 90A. 


Central 
Government to 
provide financial 
assistance to 
State of Andhra 
Pradesh for 
Polavaram 
Irrigation 
Project. 


2. In the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, in Part IX, in section 90, the 


following section shall be inserted: — 


5900, The Central Government shall, for the purposes of the section 90,— 


(a) provide financial assistance of rupees 55,548.87 crore as per the Revised 
Cost Estimates (RCE) of the 2017-18 price level approved by the Technical 
Advisory Committee (TAC) of the Central Water Commission (CWC); 


(5) consider the water supply component as an integral part of the irrigation 
component of the Polavaram Irrigation Project (PIP); 


(c) reimburse the expenditure incurred by the State of without restricting to 
component-wise eligibility including expenses incurred towards the construction 
of the PIP and towards the Rehabilitation and Resettlement of the people displaced 
by the project: 


Provided that the reimbursement shall not be delayed for a period more than 
one month from the date that the State Government of Andhra Pradesh raised a 
demand through proper channels: 


Provided further that the reimbursement shall be made from an Escrow 
Account maintained by the Reserve Bank of India in which the Central Government 
shall deposit an amount which is not less than the Revised Cost Estimates (RCE) 
of the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of the Central Water Commission 
(CWC) as per clause (a).”. 


6 of 2014. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 89 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Polavaram Project is a National Project and is considered the lifeline of the 
people of Andhra Pradesh, having grave important to the State’s people. As per the 
Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, it is upon the Central Government to execute 


the project and obtain all requisite clearances including environmental, forests and 
rehabilitation and resettlement norms. 


The estimated cost was Rs. 16,010.45 crore at the 2010-11 Price Level and has 
increased multi folds considering time and cost overruns, the inclusion of command 
area development works and increased compensation under the Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act, 2013. Owing to the inflation and severe cost overruns, it is difficult to execute the 
project in 2022 at the 2011-12 Price Level. 


The Andhra Pradesh Government submitted the 2nd Revised Cost Estimate 
(REC-ID for Rs. 57,297.42 crore at 2017-18 Price Level in 2018 with the provisions required 
for completion of the Polavaram Irrigation Project as recommended by the Polavaram 
Project Authority. The Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of the Central Water 
Commission approved RCE-II for Rs. 55,548.87 crore at the 2017-18 Price Level in 2019. 
Further, the same dispensation is sought for funding the water supply component from 
the centre, as it is an integral part of the irrigation component. But regardless of the 
submission, these issues are yet to be placed before the cabinet for their approval. The 
Bill, therefore seeks to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 to achieve 
the stated objectives. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELut; MADDILA GURUMOORTHY 
July 9, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 90A provides for the provision of 
financial assistance of Rupees fifty-five thousand five hundred forty-eight crore as per 
the Revised Cost Estimates of 2017-18 price level, approved by the Technical Advisory 
Committee of the Central Water Commission (CWC). It also provides that Central 
Government shall reimburse the expenditure incurred by the State for the Polavaram 
Irrigation Project. Further, it also provides that the Central Government shall provide 
adequate funds for the Rehabilitation and Resettlement of the people displaced by the 
project. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is estimated that a non- recurring expenditure of about rupees 55548.87 crore is 
likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


No recurring expenditure is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


90 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bill No. 76 of 2024 
A Bill to provide for the teaching of Sanskrit as a compulsory language in schools. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and 1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Sanskrit Language in 
commencement. Schools Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the Government 
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government. 


(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 91 


3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette specify, the Sanskrit language shall be taught in every school as a compulsory 
subject up to eighth standard in such manner as may be prescribed. 


4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification 
under section 3, issue direction for teaching of Sanskrit language as a compulsory 
subject upto eighth standard in every school within its jurisdiction. 


5. The Central Government and the State Governments shall equally share the 
expenditure likely to be incurred on the implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both 15 Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 


Teaching of 
Sanskrit as a 
compulsory 
language in 

schools. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to issue 
directions for 
compulsory 
teaching of 
Sanskrit 
language in 
schools. 


Expenditure 
to be shared 
by Central 
Government 
and State 
Governments. 


Power to 
make rules. 


92 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Sanskrit, the mother of all Indo-Aryan languages, which has also helped in 
development and enrichment of almost all languages across the globe is fighting a 
tough battle in its own country of origin i.e. India. The language, acknowledged and 
documented to be the most structured and scientific language in the entire world, and 
which was once the /ingua-franca, has now been reduced to a vanishing minority with 
just about 14,000 speakers left, across a country of over 1.2 billion population. 


India’s official education policy specifically mentions that facilities for the 
intensive study of Sanskrit have to be encouraged. Still, the apathy, neglect and 
propaganda against Sanskrit went on to such an extent that the Supreme Court of India 
had to intervene in 1994 to declare that Sanskrit had to be a part of education. However, 
the various States of India are still disadvantaging, discouraging and discriminating 
with teaching of Sanskrit language at school, college and University level. 


It is absolutely essential that Sanskrit be taught as language in all schools and 
institutions of higher learning. State must ensure that institutions of higher learning 
produce good Sanskrit teachers and that all vacancies of Sanskrit teachers in schools 
are filled-up immediately. It is highly deplorable that such a language which has a vast 
literature is being neglected in its own country. 


It is high time now to make sincere efforts to increase awareness in the younger 
generation about the importance of Sanskrit. Teaching of Sanskrit as a compulsory 
language in schools at least upto eighth standard will enable the younger generation to 
enrich their personality and to be aware of the noble traditions and thoughts of India 
which would help them become better citizens. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SMITA UDAY WAGH 
July 9, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the total expenditure incurred on teaching of 
Sanskrit as a compulsory language in every school upto eighth standard shall be borne 
equally by the Central Government and the State Governments. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Although, 
the exact amount of expenditure cannot be estimated, however, it is estimated that a 
recurring expenditure of about twenty crore rupees per annum is likely to be involved 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 93 


Bill No. 92 of 2024 


A Bill to constitute a Youth Commission for the purpose of evolving and implementing 
programmes for educating and empowering the youth and to function as protector of 
the rights of youth and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the National Youth Commission Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Commission; 


(b) “Commission” means the National Youth Commission constituted under 
section 3; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Constitution 
of the 
Commission. 


Term of 
office and 
conditions of 
service of the 
Chairperson 
and the 
members. 


94 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(c) “member” means a member of the Commission; 
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 
(e) “youth” means a person who has attained eighteen years of age but has 
not completed thirty five years of age. 
CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTION OF THE COMMISSION 


3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the commencement 
of this Act, by notification in the Gazette, constitute a Commission to be known as the 
National Youth Commission to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the 
functions assigned to it under this Act. 


(2) The Commission shall consist of,— 
(a) a Chairperson; and 


(b) such number of members not more than ten, out of which one shall be a 
woman, one each shall be a person belonging to the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled 
Tribe and one shall be a qualified legal practitioner, 


to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Chairperson and the members of the Commission shall be youth. 


(4) The Central Government shall appoint a person who holds, or has held, a post 
not below the rank of an Additional Secretary to the Central Government as the Secretary 
of the Commission. 


(5) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at New Delhi. 


4. (1) The Chairperson and members of the Commission shall hold office for a 
period of three years from the date on which they assume office: 


Provided that the Chairperson shall continue to hold such office until his successor 
is appointed in accordance, with the provisions of section 3 and assumes office, or for 
six months, whichever is earlier. 


(2) The Chairperson or member may, at any time, by writing under his hand 
addressed to the Central Government, resign from his office. 


(3) A casual vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or member, caused by reason 
of death, removal or resignation or otherwise, shall be filled by fresh appointment and 
the person so appointed shall hold office for the remaining period of the term of the 
person in whose place he is appointed. 


(4) The Central Government may, by order, remove the Chairperson or any member 
from his office if he,— 


(a) is adjudged as an insolvent; or 


(b) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, 
in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or 


(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent Court; 
or 


(d) without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, is absent from 
three consecutive meetings of the Commission; or 


(e) is in the opinion of the Government, abused his official position so as to 
render his continuance in office prejudicial to the interest of the youth or to the 
public interest: 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 95 


Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause unless he has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 


(5) Where the Chairperson or a member cease to be a youth he shall cease to hold 
the office. 


(6) The Chairperson or a member shall not be eligible to hold office for more than 
two terms. 


(7) The general superintendence, direction and administration of the day-to-day 
affairs of the Commission shall vest in the Chairperson and he shall be assisted by the 
other members. 


(8) The Chairperson shall be a full-time officer having the rank of Secretary to the 
Central Government and shall be paid with such salary and allowances, as may be 
prescribed. 


(9) The members shall be paid with such allowances or sitting fees, as may be 
prescribed, for attending the meetings of the Commission. 


5. (4) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with such officers 
and other employees as may be required for the proper functioning of the Commission. 


(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Commission 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 


6. The salary and allowances payable to the Chairperson and the allowances or 
sitting fees payable to the members and the administrative expenses including the 
salary, allowances and pension payable to the officers and other employees referred to 
in section 5 shall be paid out of the grants referred to in sub-section (/) of section 12. 


7. No act or proceedings of the Commission shall be invalid on the ground merely 
of the existence of any vacancy in the Commission or any defect in its constitution. 


8. (1) The Commission shall meet at such places and at such time as the 
Chairperson may think fit and the Commission shall have the power to regulate its own 
procedure. 


(2) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the 
signature of the Chairperson or any other member authorised by the Commission in this 
behalf and other instruments executed by the Commission shall be authenticated by the 
signature of the Secretary or any other officer of the Commission authorised by the 
Chairperson in this behalf. 


(3) The Commission may, for the purpose of transacting any business before it or 
for considering any special issue, invite persons not exceeding two, having specialized 
knowledge in the matter, but they shall have no right to vote in the meetings of the 
Commission. 


CHAPTER III 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
9. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of the Commission 


to guide, assist, promote and develop, for the welfare of the youth and to perform such 
functions as the Central Government may, from time to time, assign to it. 


Staff of the 
Commission. 


Salary, 
allowances and 
administrative 
expenses to be 
paid out of 
grants. 


Vacancies etc. 
not to 
invalidate the 
proceedings of 
the 
Commission. 


Meetings of 
the 
Commission. 


Functions of 
the 
Commission. 


96 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(2) The Commission may, in furtherance of its object, perform the following 
functions, namely:— 


(a) co-ordinate the Government departments for securing better education 
and employment opportunities to youth; 


(b) function as a protector of youth affairs of the country; 
(c) include and educate the dignity of labour among the youth; 


(d) collect sector-wise data of youth of the country according to age, 
education, field, economical condition to formulate policy for youth; 


(e) undertake promotional and educational research so as to suggest the 
Central Government better ways of ensuring employment opportunities to the 
youth; 


(f) monitor occupational hazards faced by the youth in the unorganized 
sector; 


(g) formulation of policies and programmes according to clustered data with 
the help of experts; 


(h) formation of Youth Hubs at different levels; 


(i) engagement and coordination for implementing policies with Universities, 
College, Institutes, Government and non-Governmental organizations at State, 
national and international level, Nehru Yuva Kendra Sanghathan, National Service 
Scheme, National Cadet Corps, Model Career Centre (MCC), National Green Corps 
(NGC) and United Nations; 


() establish and developed Youth Development Institute in each districts; 


(k) coordination with Youth Affairs and Sports ministries at National and 
State level; 


(J) implementing schemes and programmes by Government and non- 
Governmental organizations for youth at different levels; 


(m) monitoring sector-wise training of youth at different levels; 
(n) formulation of different programmes with the help of all engaged systems; 
(०) monitoring implementation of all the programmes; 


(p) Union Public Service Commission/Maharashtra Public Service 
Commission competitive exam Training Center; 


(4) formation of Local Youth Organizations working under supervision of 
National Youth Commission; 


(r) Anti-Drug Campaign; 


(s) establishing district level health-care centers specifically dealing in 
counselling into depression and anxiety; 


(¢) conducting Mission — Ek Ghar Ek Rojgar; and 


(४) vouch for dialogue between the youth and various educational institutes, 
Universities, non-Governmental organisations, International Forums for policy 
recommendations. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 97 


10. (7) The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out its functions, utilize 
the services of,— 


(a) any officer of the Central Government with prior permission of the Central 
Government; or 


(b) any officer of the Central Government-owned Corporations or of the 
local Authorities with the consent of such Corporation or local Authority and 
with the concurrence of the Central Government. 


(2) The Commission shall, while performing its functions under section 9, have all 
5 of 1908. the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in 
respect of the following matters, namely: — 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining 
him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; 


(e) appointing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; 
and 


(f) for any other matter, as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Commission shall, while conducting the enquiry under section 9, afford 
opportunity to all parties to present their views by themselves or through authorised 
representative. 


(4) The findings of the Commission on any enquiry conducted under this Act 
shall be communicated to the Central Government with its recommendation for 
appropriate action or relief to the parties to the dispute. 


11. The Commission shall, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, 
and subject to such terms and conditions as may be required by the Central Government 
in this matter, receive money from any organization or person by way of donation, 
contribution or in any other name, for creating endowments and for providing prizes to 
encourage the youth in various literary, cultural and sports activities. 


CHAPTER IV 


FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 


12. (J) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide to the Commission by way of grant, such sums 
of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purpose of 
this Act. 


(2) The Commission shall spend such sums out of the grants as it may deem fit for 
performing the functions under this Act and such sums shall be treated as expenditure 
payable out of the grants referred to in sub-section (/). 


13. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General. 


(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited annually by the Comptroller 
and Auditor General and any expenditure incurred in respect of such audit shall be paid 
by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor General. 


Powers of the 
Commission. 


Donations, 
contributions 
etc. to the 
Commission. 


Grants by the 
Government. 


Accounts and 
Audit. 


Annual report 
of the 
Commission. 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 


Chairperson, 
members, 
Secretary and 
officers of the 
Commission 
to be public 
servant. 


Application 
of other laws 
not barred. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


98 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor General and any person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have the 
same rights and privileges as usually the Comptroller and Auditor General has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular shall have the 
right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other 
documents and papers and to inspect any office of the Commission. 


(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor 
General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit 
report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Government by the Commission and 
the Central Government shall, within a period of six months from the date of its receipt, 
cause the report to be laid before the Parliament. 


14. (1) The Commission shall, as soon as may be, after the end of each financial 
year, submit to the Central Government an annual report giving a full account of the 
activities and programmes undertaken during the previous financial year, together with 
a status statement of the youth, in such form and on such date, as may be prescribed. 


(2) A copy of the report received under sub-section (/) shall be laid before the 
Parliament within six months after it is received by the Government. 


CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 


15. No suit, or prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Commission, the Chairperson or any member or Secretary or any officer or any other 
employee of the Commission acting under the direction of the Commission in respect of 
anything which is done or purported to be done in good faith under this Act. 


16. The Chairperson, members, Secretary, officers and employees of the 
Commission shall be deemed to be public servant within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code, 1860. 


17. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force. 


18. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Government may, by order published in the Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient, 
for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be issued after the expiry of a period of two 
years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, 
be laid before the Parliament. 


19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of 
service of, the Chairperson, allowances and sitting fees payable to the members; 


(b) allowances and other benefits payable to other officers engaged for 
duties under clauses (a) and (6) of sub-section (/) of section 10; 


45 of 1860. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 99 


(c) the summoning and holding of the meetings of the Commission and the 
quorum for the meeting; 


(d) the powers and functions of the Secretary of the Commission; 
(e) the form of annual statement of accounts to be maintained; 

(f) the form of annual report to be prepared; and 

(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 


(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before the Parliament while it is in session for a total period of fourteen days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, the Parliament 
makes any modification in the rule or decides that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


100 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Our country has one of the largest youth population in the world. According to 
census data we have a population of forty-two crores (approx.) in the age group of 
fifteen to thirty- five years out which male youth population is 21.76 crores and female 
youth population is 43 crores (approx). 


The purpose of bringing this Bill is to have a National Youth Commission for the 
purpose of evolving and implementing programmes for educating and empowering the 
youth. The National Youth Commission can work on motto of “Atmavat Manyet Jagat” 
which means “Consider World Like your own self”. 


With the vision of inculcation of values of patriotism, nationalism among youth 
and strive for world peace, promotion and protection of physical, moral, spiritual and 
intellectual well-being of the youth as well as developing innovative and scientific 
attitude among the youth with traditional value system, the need for setting of a National 
Youth Commission has been felt for a long time. 


The aim of the constitution of National Youth Commission is to mobilize and 
organize dynamic youth of nation for resolution of problems of community and to 
undertake issues pertaining to their constructive development and hence to utilize this 
power for overall sustainable development of nation. 


In view of the above, our Nation needs an institutional mechanism with the 
objectives to formulate skilled and flourished youths especially from rural and tribal 
areas, to devise young generation for their perennial and overall development, to mould 
energetic young human resources for sustainable development of the community, to 
manoeuvre competent youths in policy making, involvement in different welfare 
activities of Government for national building and also to make available platform on 
national level as well as globalisation of traditional Indian eco friendly skill. 


World’s superpowers are struggling for the young workforce whereas our country 
is the youngest country in the world and in India there is wide human resources which 
is youth. But the fact is these human resources are not utilized in proper way and 
grievously youth of our nation has neutrality about participation in Government 
initiatives mainly in supporting good governance and policy making. Youth are the 
nation builders and they have capacity to transform the face of the nation. 


In order to organize the youth in proper way with achieving the both goals of 
their development and nation building, it demands a powerful focused system 
comprehend all the youth development activities under common aegis. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SMITA UDAY WAGH 
July 9, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 101 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National Youth Commission. 
Clause 5 provides for appointment of Officers and employees of the Commission. Clause 
6 provides for payment of salaries, allowances and administrative expenses in respect 
of the National Youth Commission. Clause 12 provides for the payment of grants by the 
Central Government to the Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about rupees five crore may be incurred per annum. 


Anon-recurring annual expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be 
incurred. 


102 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 103 


Bill No. 102 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for the rehabilitation and compensation to the victims of natural 
lightning strike disaster and for matters connected therewith. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (J) This Act may be called the Victims of Natural Lightning Disaster (Compensation) — Short title, 
Act, 2024. extent and 
commencement. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 
(a) “appropriate Authority” means an Officer appointed under section 3; 


(6) “natural lightning disaster” means the disaster caused due to lightning 
strike which generally occurs during rain or prior to it; 


(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


Appointment 
of 
Appropriate 
Authority. 


Financial 
assistance and 
other 
benefits. 


Savings. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


104 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(d) “victims of natural calamity” means a person who suffers physical bodily 
harm or whose property, including livestock, crop, orchard, field, machine or tools, is 
lost, destroyed or damaged due to lightning strike and includes, in the case of death 
of such victim due to lightning disaster, his family members. 


3.(/) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments 
appoint an Appropriate Authority in such a manner as may be prescribed for providing 
financial assistance and other benefits to the victims of lightning disaster. 


(2) The Appropriate Authority appointed under sub-section (/) shall be provided 
with such staff as may be necessary for efficient discharge of his duties under this Act. 


(3) It shall be the duty of the Appropriate Authority to ensure provision of food, 
medical care, adequate shelter and financial assistance to the victims of lightning disaster in 
such a manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The financial assistance to the victims of lightning disaster shall be disbursed as 
early as possible but not later than three months from the occurrence of the lightning 
disaster. 


4. (/) Aclaim for receiving financial assistance shall be made in the prescribed form 
by the victims of lightning strike to the Appropriate Authority, who shall disburse the 
financial assistance to the victims, after making such inquiry and in such manner, as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) The victim of lightning disaster shall be provided with the following financial 
assistance and other benefits:— 


(a) in case of loss of life,— 


(7) financial assistance in the form of a compensation of not less than 
rupees ten lakh shall be given to the next of the kin of the deceased; and 


(ii) suitable employment shall be provided to one of the dependants of 
the deceased; 


(b) in case of severe injury,— 
(7) medical treatment free of cost; and 


(ii) such financial assistance as, in the opinion of the Appropriate 
Authority, is necessary for his rehabilitation, subject to a minimum amount of 
rupees two lakh and maximum amount of rupees five lakh; 


(c) in case of damage to the dwelling unit or property of any forms which 
includes commercial space, machine, tools and vehicle, victim shall be provided with 
such financial assistance as is required for the repair or reconstruction of dwelling 
unit or property after due assessment by recognised assessors; 


(d) in case of loss of livestock, the victim shall be given adequate financial 
assistance in proportion to the losses suffered by him. 


5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force. 


6. (/) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary 
or expedient for the removal of the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry ofa period of two years from 
the date of the commencement of this Act. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 105 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid 
before each House of Parliament. 


7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised of one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Power to 
make rules. 


106 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The loss of lives and damages to dwelling units, commercial spaces, machines, tools, 


crops, livestock, etc. due to lightning strikes across the country have increased in recent 
times. 


There has been nearly a 35 per cent. increase in the overall count of lightning strikes 
and 40 per cent. increase in incidents of cloud to ground lightning in the country. 
Thunderstorms and lightning have emerged as major weather hazards in recent years, killing 
about 2,500 people annually and the most affected are people in rural areas or working 
outdoors are most at risk. 


Because of the climate change constituting heat waves further in coming years, the 
lightning strikes are also expected to increase more. 


India suffers huge human casualties from lightning compared to other developed 
countries and about two people in a million die from lightning and properties worth several 
crores get damaged in India each year. 


A bolt from the blue that kills thousands in India and yet the Central Government is 
yet to declare lightning a natural disaster, saying that deaths caused by lightning can be 
avoided through education and awareness. This justification by the Central Government 
cannot and will not be accepted as every disaster can be prevented by education and 
awareness and not only the lightning disaster alone. 


Many States have been demanding the Central Government to declare lightning 
strike a natural disaster. Therefore, the Central Government should declare lightning a 
natural disaster or calamity to get compensation for the victims of this lightning natural 
disaster. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; V.K. SREEKANDAN 
July 9, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 107 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appointment of an Appropriate Authority — for 
providing financial assistance and rehabilitation measures to the victims of lightning disaster. 
Clause 4 provides for financial assistance of rupees ten lakh to the next ofkin ofa person 
who dies in any lightning disaster and medical treatment for injured persons and other 
welfare measures for the victims of lightning disaster. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to give an exact 
estimate of the actual expenditure to be involved to meet any unpredictable eventuality. 
However, it is estimated that recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore per annum 
would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to 
be involved. 


108 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 109 


Bill No. 97 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of a Permanent Bench of the High Court of Kerala at 
Palakkad. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the seventy-fifth year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the High Court of Kerala (Establishment of a Permanent 
Bench at Palakkad) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. There shall be established a Permanent Bench of the High Court of Kerala at 
Palakkad and such Judges of the High Court of Kerala, being not less than five in number, 
as the Chief Justice of that High Court may, from time to time nominate, shall sit at Palakkad 
in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in that High Court 
at Ernakulam in respect of cases arising in the district of Palakkad and other districts 
falling in the Malabar region of Kerala and such other territories within that State 
as the President may by notification specify. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Establishment 
of a 
Permanent 
Bench of High 
Court of 
Kerala at 
Palakkad. 


110 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The principal seat of the Kerala High Court is at Ernakulam, which is situated at a 


distance of nearly 150 kilometres from Palakkad and more distance from other districts 
falling in the Malabar region of Kerala to Ernakulam. 


Palakkad is the second most industrial district in the State of Kerala, having industrial 
units of both Central and State Governments, apart from private sector units. Palakkad is 
also the divisional headquarter of Southern Railways. In addition to the above, the density 
of the population in the district is also quite high as also in the neighbouring districts. 
Therefore, the litigations are bound to be quite high here. However, since the present seat 
of the High Court of Kerala is far away from here, the litigants are not able to pursue their 
legal cases as promptly as they should be. Even if the litigants manage to reach the present 
High Court at Ernakulam, after sparing their valuable time and money, it is not sure that the 
case will be heard on that day, the case is either postponed for many reasons or the sitting 
is cancelled in the absence of judges, and this way the litigations take years to come to a 
conclusion and this creates a question mark on our judicial system. Moreover, it is the duty 
of a State to make judicial system at the doorstep to provide justice to its citizens and to 
erase the saying that justice delayed is justice denied. 


It will be, therefore, appropriate ifa Bench of the High Court is established at Palakkad 
in the State of Kerala. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; V.K. SREEKANDAN 
July 9, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 111 


Bill No. 83 of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (/) This Act may be called the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 2024. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
25 of 1956. 2. After section 3 ofthe All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956, the following Insertion of 


section shall be inserted, namely:— a section 


Establishment 
of All India 
Institute of 
Medical 
Sciences at 
Palakkad in 
the State of 
Kerala. 


112 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


“3A. (/) There shall be established an All India Institute of Medical Sciences at 
Palakkad in the State of Kerala which shall be a body corporate, to be known as the All India 
Institute of Medical Science Palakkad. 


(2) The provision of this Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to the All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Palakkad established under sub-section (1).”. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 113 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It has been a long pending of the people of Kerala to establish an All India Institute 
of Medical Sciences in Kerala. 


The Union Government has so far sanctioned 22 All India Institutes of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS) under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) across the country, but 
sorry to note that not a single such institution has been sanctioned for the State of Kerala 
and it is an injustice or discrimination towards the people of Kerala and against the spirit of 
our Constitution which provides equality to all. 


Generally, the people of Kerala are very health conscious, but not now, from time 
immemorial. However, the new diseases one after the other, further accelerated their 
consciousness on health, and therefore, there is always a huge rush in all government-run 
hospitals which are the only source for the poor people. 


The two deadly viruses were first detected in the State of Kerala i.e. Nipah outbreak 
in the year 2018 and the Covid-19 in the year 2020 and on both the occasions the Union 
Government had to depute a central team to take control of the situation, and therefore, such 
an institution like AITMS is a must in the State of Kerala, to tackle such a situation, if arises 
in the future, in addition to providing world-class treatment. Recently cases of Nipah and 
Zika viruses were reported in Kerala. 


While I demand to set up an AIIMS in the State of Kerala, I recommend a place for the 
same, which is Palakkad. Palakkad would be an ideal place as such an institution at Palakkad 
will fill the gaps in tertiary healthcare infrastructure in this part of Kerala, since Palakkad 
lacks healthcare infrastructure is not matching with the other places, the people of Palakkad 
district now have to undertake a journey ranging from 60 kms. to 120 kms. to get treatment 
from specialty hospitals located at either Thrissur, Malappuram, Kozhikode or Coimbatore. 


Therefore, looking into the gaps in tertiary healthcare infrastructure in the district of 
Palakkad, I urge upon the government to establish an AITMS at Palakkad in Kerala. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; V.K. SREEKANDAN 
July 9, 2024. 


114 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of an All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences at Palakakd in the State of Kerala. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an expenditure of 
about rupees 50 crore would be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is likely to be 
involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 115 


Bill No. 90 of 2024 


A Bill to promote organic farming in the country, reduce dependency on chemical 
fertilizers in farming and highlight ill effects on health of the individuals and for 
matters connected therewith. 


Whereas It is expedient to promote organic farming in India to ensure sustainable 
agricultural practices, improve soil health, protect the environment, and safeguard human 
health; 


AnD WteREAS it is necessary to reduce the dependency on chemical fertilizers due to 
their adverse effects on soil, water, human health and the overall ecosystem. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Promotion of Organic Farming Act, 2024. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Establishment 
of the 
National 
Organic 
Farming 
Board. 


Schemes and 
Incentives for 
Organic 
Farmers. 


Certification 
and Labeling. 


Research and 
Development. 


116 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(5) “agricultural produce” includes wheat, paddy, pulses, sugarcane, cotton, oil 
seeds, coarse grains like maize, millet, jowar, bajra, gram, soyabean, fruits and 
vegetables such as potato, onion, tomato, cauliflower, cabbage including such other 
agricultural or horticultural produce which are used for human consumption or for 
any medicinal purposes; 


(c) “Board” means the National Organic Farming Board established under 
section 3; 


(d) “chemical fertilizers” means substances synthesized chemically that are 
added to soil to supply one or more plant nutrients essential to the growth of plants; 


(e) “organic farming” means a method of farming that excludes the use of 
synthetic chemicals, fertilizers, pesticides, and genetically modified organisms and 
relies on techniques such as crop rotation, green manure, compost and biological 
pest control; and 


(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish 
a Board to be known as the National Organic Farming Board for carrying out the purpose of 
the Act. 


(2) The Board shall be responsible for promoting organic farming in the country. 


(3) The composition, powers and functions of the Board shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


4. (J) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Board, formulate schemes 
to provide financial and technical assistance to farmers adopting organic farming in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2)The schemes formulated under sub-section (/) may include subsidies, financial 
assistance and training programs to the farmers aimed at encouraging organic farming 
practices. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall implement the schemes formulated under sub- 
section (/) in their respective States in such manner as may be prescribed. 


5. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a certification process for certifying any agricultural produce as an organic product 
to ensure their authenticity and quality under their jurisdiction. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every certified organic product 
under sub-section (/) shall carry a label indicating their organic status in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


6. (1) The Central Government shall promote research and development in organic 
farming through various agricultural research institutions in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) The Central Government shall ensure that research and development under 
sub-section (/) focus on developing sustainable organic farming techniques, improving 
crop yields and finding natural alternatives to chemical fertilizers and pesticides. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 117 


7. Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punishable with 
such penalty as may be prescribed. 


8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


9. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central 
Government, the State Government or any officer of these Governments for anything done 
in good faith under this Act. 


10. (/) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament. 


11. (/) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Everyrule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature. 


Penalty. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Protection of 
Action Taken 
in Good Faith. 


Power to 
Remove 
Difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


118 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Continuous use of chemical fertilizers leads to soil degradation, reducing its fertility 
and productivity over time. Chemical fertilizers often cause soil acidification, which adversely 
affects the growth of crops. Excessive use of chemical fertilizers leads to water pollution due 
to runoff, contaminating rivers, lakes and groundwater. Nitrogen-based fertilizers contribute 
to the emission of nitrous oxide, a potent greenhouse gas that contributes to climate change. 


Over-reliance on chemical fertilizers creates a dependency cycle, requiring increasing 
amounts for the same yield. The cost of chemical fertilizers imposes a financial burden on 
farmers, reducing their profitability. Residues of chemical fertilizers on crops can pose 
health risks to consumers, including various chronic diseases such as cancer, endocrine 
disruption, and developmental disorders. Chemical residues in food can lead to acute 
poisoning and long-term health issues for consumers. The need is to promote organic 
farming in India asa sustainable agricultural practice, reducing the dependency on chemical 
fertilizers. 


The proposed Bill seeks to address the adverse effects of chemical fertilizers on soil 
health, environment and human health and to provide a framework for supporting and 
encouraging organic farming across the country. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; RAJKUMAR CHAHAR 
July 9, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 119 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the National Organic Farming Board 
for carrying out the purpose of the Act. Clause 4 provides for the Central Government to 
formulate schemes to provide financial and technical assistance to farmers adopting organic 
farming including subsidies, financial assistance and training programs to the farmers aimed 
at encouraging organic farming practices. Clause 5 provides for the appropriate Government 
to establish a certification process for certifying any agricultural produce as an organic 
product to ensure their authenticity and quality under their jurisdiction. Clause 6 provides 
for the Central Government to promote research and development in organic farming through 
various agricultural research institutions. Clause 8 provides for the Central Government to 
provide adequate funds for carrying out the purpose of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that 
a sum of rupees twelve hundred crore would involve as recurring expenditure per annum 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved. 


120 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character. 


42 of 2005. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 121 


Bill No. 69 of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act, 2005. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee (Amendment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. After section 5 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following sections shall be 
inserted,— 


“SA. The Central Government or the State Government may, within the limits of their 
jurisdiction ensure that the persons employed under the Scheme,— 


(a) are paid their wages on time; 


(b) are not imposed any technological change and innovations without proper 
consultation and training; and 


(c) are not made to suffer due to paucity of funds.”. 


3. In section 25 ofthe principal Act, for the words, “which may extend to one thousand 
rupees”, the words “which shall not be less than rupees ten thousand but which may 
extend upto rupees one lakh” shall be substituted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new section 
5A. 


Timely 
payment of 
wages under 
the Scheme, 
etc. 


Amendment 
of Section 25. 


122 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) is 
a flagship programme of the Government of India aimed at providing employment to rural 
households in the country. The success of the programme depends on the efficient 
functioning of its employees. However, person employed under the MGNREGS are often 
subject to payment delays, technological impositions, and paucity of funds, which affect 
their efficiency and morale. 


The need is to protect the persons employed under the MGNREGS from payment 
delays, technological imposition, and paucity of funds. It is the responsibility of the Central 
Government and the State Governments concerned to take necessary steps to ensure that 
the persons employed under the MGNREGS are paid their wages on time, technological 
changes and innovations are not imposed on the employees without proper consultation 
and training, and there is no paucity of funds for the implementation of MGNREGS. It is also 
required to have a requisite penalty for non-compliance for timely payment to the persons 
employed under the MGNREGS. 


The Bill therefore, seeks to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005 with a view to put an obligation on the Central Government and the 
State Governments for the timely payment of wages to the persons employed under the 
Scheme, etc. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; HIBI EDEN 
July 9, 2024. 


14 of 1981. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 123 


Bill No. 79 of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Amendment Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 2 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act,— 


(a) after clause (5), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ba) “Air Quality Index (AQID)” means a measure of air quality that takes 
into account various air pollutants and their concentrations;”; 


(b) after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ja) “green practices” means sustainable practices that minimize the 
negative impact of human activities on the environment;”; 
99 


(c) after clause (m), the following clause shall be inserted, 19116[५:--- 


“(ma) “polluting industries” means industries that emit air pollutants 
beyond the permissible limits set by the Central Board;”; and 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Insertion of 
new sections 
19A, 19B, 
19C, 19D and 
19E. 


National clean 
air plan. 


Air quality 
monitoring. 


Green 
practices in 
industries. 


Promotion of 
public 
transport. 


Promotion of 
non- 
motorized 
transport. 


Insertion of 
new section 
39A. 


Penalty for 
polluting 
industry. 


124 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(d) after clause (४), the following clause shall be inserted: — 


“(na) “public transport” means transport services provided by the 
Government or any other entity to the general public;”. 


3. After section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,— 


“19A. (1) The Central Government shall prepare a National Clean Air Plan to be 
implemented by the State Governments in a time-bound manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The National Clean Air Plan under sub-section (1), shall include the following 
measures, namely:— 


(a) measures to reduce emissions from polluting industries and transportation 
sector; 


(b) measures to promote the use of clean energy sources such as solar, wind, 
and hydropower; 


(c) measures to promote the use of electric vehicles and public transport; 


(d) measures to promote the use of non-motorized transport such as cycling 
and walking; and 


(e) measures to promote green practices in various sectors of the economy. 


19B. (/) The Central Board shall establish a network of air quality monitoring stations 
across the country in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2)The data from air quality monitoring stations established under sub-section (/) 
shall be made available to the public in real-time. 


(3)The State Governments shall take necessary measures to ensure that the air quality 
index meets the standards set by the Central Board. 


19C. (1) The State Governments shall encourage industries to adopt green practices 
by providing incentives as may be prescribed. 


(2) The State Governments shall also impose penalties on polluting industries that 
violate the permissible limits of air pollutants. 


19D. (J) The State Governments shall encourage the use of public transport by 
providing incentives such as reduced fares. 


(2) The State Governments shall also promote the use of electric vehicles in public 
transport. 


19E. (1) The State Governments shall promote the use of non-motorized transport 
such as cycling and walking by providing infrastructure such as cycle tracks and pedestrian 
walkways. 


(2) The State Governments shall also encourage citizens to use non-motorized 
transport by providing incentives as may be prescribed.”. 


4. After section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“39A. Ifany industry violates the provisions of section 19C of this Act, it shall 
be liable to pay a penalty as may be prescribed.”. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 125 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Air pollution is a growing concern across India, with the adverse effects of air pollution 
on human health and the environment becoming increasingly evident. The emission of 


greenhouse gases from various human activities is contributing to climate change, which 
poses a significant threat to the planet. 


The proposed Bill seeks to address these issues by promoting clean air, better air 
quality, and encouraging the adoption of green practices in various sectors of the economy. 
The need is also to establish a National Clean Air Plan, which will be implemented by the 
State Governments in a time-bound manner. The National Clean Air Plan shall include 
measures to reduce emissions from polluting industries and transportation sectors, promote 
the use of clean energy sources, electric vehicles, and public transport, and encourage the 
use of non- motorized transport such as cycling and walking. 


The proposed Bill also aims to establish a network of air quality monitoring stations 
across the country and the data from these stations will be made available to the public in 
real-time. The State Governments will be required to take necessary measures to ensure that 
the air quality meets the standards set by the Central Pollution Control Board. 


The Bill further encourages industries to adopt green practices by providing 
incentives such as tax breaks and subsidies. The State Governments will also be required to 
impose penalties on polluting industries that violate the permissible limits of air pollutants. 


The Bill seeks to promote the use of public transport by providing incentives such 
as reduced fares and promoting the use of electric vehicles in public transport. The State 
Governments will also be required to promote the use of non-motorized transport such as 
cycling and walking by providing infrastructure such as cycle tracks and pedestrian 
walkways. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 
1981 with a view to establish National Clean Air Plan and Air Quality monitoring Stations to 
promote clean air, better air quality, and encourage the adoption of green practices across 
various sectors of the economy. By doing so, it aims to contribute towards a healthier and 
more sustainable future for India. 


Hence this Bill. 


New Delhi; HIBI EDEN 
July 9, 2024. 


126 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed section 19B provides for the Central Pollution 
Control Board to establish a network of air quality monitoring stations across the country in 
such manner as may be prescribed. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about 
rupees eight thousand and five hundred crore is likely to be involved per annum from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees seven hundred crore is also likely to be involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 127 


Bill No. 101 of 2024 


A Bill to establish the Airlines Passenger Services Authority for the protection of passenger 
rights in airlines and to provide compensation for flight delay, cancellation, denied 
boarding, and baggage lost or damage and to regulate the rights of frequent travellers 
in India; 

Whereas, airlines passengers face various issues such as flight delay, cancellation, 
denied boarding, and baggage lost or damage, leading to inconvenience and financial loss; 


And Whereas, travellers shall be protected under regulations that guarantee their 
rights in case of any inconvenience or loss; 


And Whereas, it is necessary to establish the Airlines Passenger Services Authority 


to regulate and protect passenger rights and to provide compensation for any inconvenience 
or loss, 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Airlines Passenger Services Authority Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


128 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: — 


(a) “airline” means all commercial flights operating in the country either on 
domestic or international routes; 


(b) “Appellate Tribunal” means Appellate Tribunal established under 
section 6; 


(2) “Authority” means the Airlines Passenger Services Authority established 
under section 3; 


(d) “compensation” means the payment to be made to the passenger for any 
inconvenience, loss or damage caused to them while traveling in any airlines; 


(e) “frequent traveller” means a passenger who travels by any airlines at least 
twice a month for business or personal purposes; 


(f) “passenger” means any person who travels by any airlines for any purpose; and 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


Establishment 3. (J) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official gazette, establish 
कह Airlines an authority to be known as the Airlines Passenger Services Authority for carrying out the 
5106, . purpose of this Act. 
ay: (2) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of other members 
as the Central Government may deem fit. 
(3) The Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be appointed by the Central 
Government on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of,— 
(a) Union Cabinet Secretary — Chairperson, ex-officio; 
(0) Secretary, Union Ministry of Civil Aviation — Member, ex-officio; and 
(c) Chairperson, National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission — 
Member, ex-officio. 
(4) The Salary and allowances and other term of office of the Chairperson and Members 
of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 
Functions of 4. The Authority shall,— 
th 
An heHee (a) regulate and protect the rights of passengers traveling in any airline; 


(6) formulate policies, guidelines, and procedures for the protection of right 
of passenger; 


(c) monitor and enforce compliance with the policies, guidelines, and procedures 
formulated by the Authority; 


(d) conduct research, collect data, and publish reports on the status of 
passenger rights in the country; 


(e) promote awareness among passengers regarding their rights; 


(f) issue directions to any person, entity, or organization engaged in any airlines 
to comply with the policies, guidelines, and procedures formulated by the Authority; 


(g) impose penalties on any person, entity, or organization that violates the 
policies, guidelines and procedures formulated by the Authority; 


(h) adjudicate disputes arising out of any airline including but not limited to 
flight delay, cancellation, denied boarding, and baggage lost or damage; 


(i) order compensation to be paid to passengers for any inconvenience, loss or 
damage caused to them while traveling in any airlines; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 129 


(j) conduct investigations into any alleged violation of the policies, guidelines, 
and procedures formulated by the Authority; 


(k) collect and maintain data on passenger complaints and grievances and take 
appropriate action to resolve them. 


(2) make recommendations to the Central Government for the improvement of 
passenger rights in the country; and 


(m) undertake such other functions as may be prescribed. 


5. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Authority may prefer an appeal to the 
Appellate Tribunal established by the Central Government under section 6 in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 


6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official gazette, establish 
an Appellate Tribunal for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 


(2) The composition of, and other terms and conditions of the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 


7. The Appellate Tribunal shall have the powers ofa civil court while trying a suit 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and shall have the power to pass interim orders 
and directions pending the disposal of the appeal. 


8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide requisite funds to the Authority for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 


9. The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed. 


10. No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 


11. (/) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


12. (/) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Appeals. 


Establishment 
of Appellate 
Tribunal. 


Powers of the 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Accounts. 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


130 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The rapid growth of the transportation industry has led to an increase in the number 
of passengers who rely on various modes of transportation, such as airlines, railways, and 
roadways, to travel across the country. However, there have been numerous instances of 
passengers facing inconvenience and difficulties due to delays, cancellations, denied 
boarding, and loss or damage to baggage. Despite the existence of various laws and 
regulations, passengers often struggle to enforce their rights and receive proper 
compensation for such issues. 


Therefore, the purpose of this Private Members Bill is to establish an All India Passenger 
Services Authority to ensure the protection of the rights of passengers traveling through 
various modes of transportation. The proposed authority will serve as a regulatory body 
that will oversee the functioning of passenger services provided by airlines, railways, and 
roadways. 


The authority will have the power to enforce strict guidelines for the protection of 
passengers’ rights, including compensation for flight delay, cancellation, denied boarding, 
and baggage loss or damage. The authority will also ensure that passengers who frequently 
travel to different destinations feel protected under the regulations. 


The proposed bill aims to provide passengers with a sense of security and protection 
when traveling across the country. It is essential to establish a regulatory body that can 
safeguard passengers’ rights and enforce strict guidelines to ensure that transportation 
service providers comply with the regulations. 


Therefore, the proposed All India Passenger Services Authority Bill seeks to address 
the issue of protecting passengers’ rights and improving the quality of passenger services 
provided by transportation service providers in the country. 

New DELHI; HIBI EDEN 
July 9, 2024 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 131 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of a authority to be known as the 
Airlines Passenger Services Authority to carry out the purpose of this Act. Clause 6 provides 
for the establishment of Appellate Tribunal for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 
Clause 8 provides for Central Government to provide requisite funds to the Authority. The 
Bill, therefore if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It 
is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees hundred crore will be involved. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved. 


132 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 133 


Bill No. 70 of 2024 


A Bill to regulate the functioning of play schools and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. () This Act may be called the Play Schools (Regulation) Act, 2024. Short title, 
tent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. eae 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


134 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appointed day” means the date of the commencement of this Act; 


(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case ofa State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(c) “authority” means the Play Schools Education Authority constituted by 
appropriate Government under section 3; 


(d) “play school” means and elementary school or formal centre or institution 
including private schools imparting pre-school or nursery education to children before 
their enrolment in the first standard; and 


(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules under the Act. 


Constitution 3. (7) With effect from the appointed day, the appropriate Government shall, by 
of the Play notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an authority to be known as the Play Schools 
cane Education Authority to regulate within its territorial jurisdiction, the functioning of play 
Authority, schools and conditions of service for teachers working in such schools. 


(2)The authority shall consist of— 
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the appropriate Government; and 


(b) a maximum of twelve members to be appointed by the appropriate 
Government: 


Provided that the number of members shall, in no case, be less than six. 


(3) The Chairperson and other members referred to in sub-section (2) shall be chosen 
from amongst the persons who have special knowledge and at least twenty years of experience 
in the field of education. 


(4) The term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the other 
members shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(5)The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of officers and 
staff to assist the authority, as it considers necessary, for its efficient functioning. 


Functions of 4. (/) It shall be the duty of the authority to regulate the functioning of play schools 
the Authority. and conditions of service of teachers, under its jurisdiction. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (/), 
the authority may,— 


(a) fix the student-teacher ratio; 

(8) put a ceiling on the tuition fee and other charges; 
(c) fix the hours of duty of teachers; 

(d) monitor the funds collected by the schools; 


(e) suggest the type of infrastructure to be maintained and the safety conditions 
to be ensured; 


(f) prescribe curriculum; 
(g) require setting up of a grievance redressal mechanism; 


(A) recommend to the appropriate Government the mechanism for registration 
and recognition of play schools; and 


(i) perform such functions as may be prescribed. 


Power to 5. () The Authority may, with the previous approval of the appropriate Government, 
es ; make regulations consistent with this Act for regulating the minimum qualifications for 
regulations. 


recruitment and the conditions of service of teachers of play schools. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 135 


(2) Subject to any regulation that may be made in this behalf, no teacher of a play 
school shall be dismissed or removed nor shall his service be otherwise terminated except 
with the prior approval of the authority. 


6. The salary, allowances, medical facilities, pension, gratuity, provident fund and 
other benefits of the teachers of play school shall not be less than those of the teachers of 
the corresponding status in schools run by the appropriate Government. 


7. No play school shall charge a tuition fee or collect other charges or receive payments, 
in excess of the amounts specified by the authority: 


Provided that every play School shall obtain prior approval of the authority for charging 
tuition fee or collecting other charges or receiving payments, exceeding the amounts specified 
by the authority. 


8. If the appropriate Government, on receipt of a report from the authority, is satisfied 
that the managing committee of any play school has neglected to perform its duties imposed 
on it by or under this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder and it is expedient in 
the interest of the school education to close down such school, it may, after giving reasonable 
opportunity of being heard to the managing committee of the school, order closing down of 
such school for such period as it may consider appropriate: 


Provided that if the school is a recognized play school, the appropriate Government 
may also withdraw its recognition. 


9. The provisions of this act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law or rules made thereunder for the time being in force. 


10. (/) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this act, as may be necessary for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this sub-section after the expiry of the two 
years from the appointed day. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament. 


11. (/) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon 
asmay be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature. 


Salary, 
allowances 
and other 
benefits to 
teachers. 


Fee and other 
charges. 


Closing down 
of play 
schools. 


Act not to be 
in derogation 
of other laws. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


136 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The non-formal schooling and early childhood care is predominantly in private sector. 
The play schools have mushroomed all over the country, especially in urban areas. They 
are being governed by laws relating to Establishment of Shops of the concerned States. The 
early days of kids are spent in these schools as many parents are now putting their kids in 
these schools as early as one year of age. Foundation of mental and physical development 
of little children is laid in play schools. Play school now-a-days has become a big business 
opportunity. In the absence of any legislative check, complaints of parents and non- 
Governmental Organisations are not addressed by these schools. As play schools are 
laying foundation ofa child’s future, they should not be governed by any business Act but 
by an education Act. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to regulate the functioning of play schools in the country 
not only to ensure quality education and guidance in play schools, but also to protect the 
parents from unnecessary exploitation. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; JANARDAN SINGH ‘SIGRIWAL’ 
July 9,2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 137 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall, within its territorial 
jurisdiction, constitute Play Schools Education Authority to regulate the functioning of the 
play schools. The expenditure relating to the States shall be borne out of the Consolidated 
Funds of the respective States. However, the expenditure in respect of Union territories 
shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that sum of rupees 
one crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten lakh is also likely to be involved. 


138 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Authority to make regulations for regulating the 
minimum qualifications for recruitment and conditions of service of teachers of play schools. 
Clause 11 empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes 
of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are matters of 
administrative details and procedure and, as such, the delegation of legislative powers is of 
a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 139 


Bill No. 89 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for reservation of posts in Government Establishments and formulation of 
welfare schemes and programmes for orphans and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows :— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Orphans (Reservation of Posts in Government 
Establishments and Welfare) Act, 2024. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Reservation 
of posts for 
orphans 
appointment 
in civil 
services. 


No 
reservations 
in certain 
cases. 


140 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appointing authority’, means the authority empowered in an establishment 
to make appointment to service of post; 


(8) “appropriate Government’s means,— 


(z) in relation to the Central Government or any establishment wholly or 
substantially financed by that Government, the Central Government; and 


(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment, wholly or 
substantially financed by that Government, or any local authority, the State 
Government; 


(c) “establishment” means every body or authority founded, owned, controlled, 
managed or financed by the appropriate Government and includes the following,— 


(7) any body or authority established by or under a Central Act or a State 
Act or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided by the Government 
or a local authority, or a Government company as defined in section 2 of the 
Companies Act, 2013, and includes a Department of the Government; or 


(ii) any company or body corporate of association or body of individuals, 
firm, cooperative or other society, association, trust, agency or institution. 


(d) “Group ‘A’ post” means a post which is classified as such by the President 
in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to aricle 309 of the Constitution or 
by or under any Act of Parliament and includes an equivalent post in any establishment; 


(e) “orphan” means a persons below the age of eighteen years who has lost 
both parents due to death or disappearance, abandonment or desertation by, or 
separation; 


(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(g) “scientific or technical post” includes, post for which qualification in natural 
sciences or exact sciences or applied sciences or technology are essential and the 
incumbent of such post shall have to use his or her knowledge in such sciences for 
discharge of duties. 


CHAPTER II 
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR RESERVATIONS 


3. (1) The appropriate Government shall reserve such percentage of posts for persons 
who have been an orphan for appointment in civil services by direct recruitment and 
promotion, in such manner, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The vacancy reserved for orphans under sub-section (/) shall be filled in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


4. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, there shall be no reservation 
where appointments are made— 


(i) for a period of less than forty-five days; 
(ii) for any emergency relief work; and 


(iii) to posts higher than the lowest grade of Group ‘A’ posts and to posts 
classified as scientific or technical posts. 


(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, include or omit 
any institution of national importance and Indian Institutes of Management from the 


18 of 2013. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 141 


purview of this Act and on the publication of the notification, such institution shall 
be deemed to be included in or as the case may be, omitted under this Act. 


(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 


5. Notwithstanding the provision of section 3, appointment to an unreserved vacancy 
shall be open to all eligible persons including an orphan. 


6. (1) The maximum age limit fixed for direct recruitment to a service or post shall be 
increased by five years for the persons who have been an orphan. 


(2) The maximum age limit fixed for promotion to a post, ifany, shall be increased by 
five years for the orphans: 


Provided that no relaxation shall be available where the maximum age limit for 
promotion has been fixed above fifty years. 


7. The examination fee or application fee, determined for recruitment to a service or 
post through competitive examination or otherwise, may be reduced to such extent for the 
orphans, as may be prescribed. 


8. The vacancies reserved for the persons who have been an orphan shall be filled by 
the orphans exclusively. 


9. Where posts in an establishment are to be abolished and as a result thereof, the 
services of certain persons are required to be either surrendered or terminated, no such 
surrender or termination shall be made in respect of the orphans, ifit results in lowering their 
representation in relation to the percentage of reservation fixed for them. 


CHAPTER III 
MEASURES BY GOVERNMENT 


10. The appropriate Government shall take steps to secure full and effective 
participation of orphans and their inclusion in society which may include: 


(i) taking such measures as may be necessary to protect the rigths and 
interests of orphans, and facilitate their access to reservations as framed by that 
Government by issuing orphan certificate in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(ii) formulation of welfare schemes and programmes which are sensitive and 
non-discriminatory towards orphans. 


(iii) taking steps for the rescue, protection and rehabilitation of orphans to 
address the needs of such persons. 


(iv) developing and organizing training programmes to advance the competence 
of the orphans for appointment to services and posts. 


CHAPTERIV 
OBLIGATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS AND OTHER PERSONS 


11.(/) Every establishment shall designate an officer of such rank, as may be prescribed, 
to function as a liaison officer for the purpose of ensuring that the provisions of this Act or 
the rules made thereunder are not contravened. 


(2) The liaison officer shall, from time to time, inspect and verify the documents, records 
and reports with respect to appointments of the orphans made by the appointing authority 
by direct recruitment or promotion. 


Appointment 
to unreserved 
vacancy. 


Relaxation of 
age. 


Fees 
concession. 


Reserved 
vacancies to 
be filled by 
orphans only. 


Abolition of 
posts in an 
establishment. 


Measures to 
be taken by 
appropriate 
Government. 


Appointment 
of a Liasion 
officer. 


Maintenance 
of records by 
appointing 
authority. 


Penalties for 
false claim. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Protection 
against legal 
proceedings. 


Power to 
move rules. 


142 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(3) Where the liaision offier is satisifed that any establishment has contravened the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any direction or instruction issued, he 
shall submit a report of such contravention to the head of the establishment. 


(4) On receipt of the report of contravention under sub-section (3), the head of 
establishment shall take such disciplinary action against the person responsible for such 
contravention as may be prescribed. 


12. Every appointing authority, shall maintain documents and records, and furnish 
every year a report on the appointments of the orphans made by direct recruitment and 
promotion to the appropriate Government in such manner and at such time, as may be 
prescribed. 


CHAPTER V 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
13. Whoever intentionally,— 
(i) makes a false claim that he is an orphan; or 
(ii) issues a false orphans certificate, 


shall be liable for punishment for a term, which may extend to three years. 


14. Where any person responsible for implementing the provisions of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder, intentionally breaches any of such provisions, he shall be liable for 
disciplinary action under the service rules. 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
15. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not derogation of, any 


other law for the time being in force. 


16. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the appropriate 
Government or any local authority or any officer of the Government in respect of anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act 
and any rules made thereunder. 


17. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the percentage of posts for reservation and the manner of reservation 
under sub-section (/) of section 3; 


(8) the manner of filling vacancies under sub-section (2) of section 3; 


(c) the extent of reduction in examination fee and application fee under 
section 7; 


(d) the rank of the officer to be designated as the liaison officer under 
sub-section (/) of section 11; 


(e) the documents and records to be maintained and the time and manner of 
furnishing report under sub-section (/) of section 12; and 


(f) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 143 


(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State legislature. 


144 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
As of now, India did not have an official figure on the number of orphans in this 
country. The latest number is estimated around 20 million, based on a study carried out by 


the SOS Children’s Village Faridabad based NGO by analyzing data from the National Family 
Health Survey-3, in 2011. This vacuum is itself'a testament to the treatment orphans face. 


Though orphans have an identity while staying at orphanages, once they turn 18, 
society renders them useless. Without government identification, birth certificates, or 
residential proofs, it is almost impossible for them to access higher opportunities for 
education or employment. Therefore, it is important for the Government to recognize orphans 
as socially and economically deprived groups and provide them with reservations. 
Additionally, given that India has the world’s largest youth population it is imperative that 
the Government, through Job reservation, brings orphans one step close towards 
empowerment and the youth of our country towards a brighter future. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHt; JANARDAN SINGH ‘SIGRIWAL’ 
July 9, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 145 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 10 of the Bill, inter alia, provides for formulation of welfare schemes and 
programmes for the orphans, rehabilitation of orphans and developing and organizing 
training programmes to advance the competence of the orphans for appointment to services 
and posts. Clause 12 provides for the maintenance of records by the appointing authority. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. However, it is not possible at this stage as to the exact amount which is likely to be 
incurred towards recurring and non-recurring expenditure for the purpose. 


146 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of the Bill. As the matters in respect of which rules may be made under 
the aforesaid provisions are matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not 
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 147 


Bill No. 84 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for the constitution of a Rural Labour Welfare Fund for the welfare of the 
rural labour employed in the agriculture and other rural occupations and for matters 
connected therewith. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Rural Labour Welfare Fund Act, 2024. Short title, 
extent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commencement. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Constitution 
of Rural 
Labour 
Welfare Fund. 


Utilisation of 
Fund. 


State Advisory 


Committees. 


148 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “employer” means the cultivator, orchard owner, poultry farm owner, agency, 
society including cooperative society or any establishment in a rural area which 
employs rural labour; 


(6) “Fund” means the Rural Labour Welfare Fund established under section 3; 
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(d) “rural labour” means any person engaged in agriculture, sericulture, poultry, 
horticulture, handicrafts or any related occupation in rural areas as a wage earner, 
whether in cash or kind, for his livelihood and includes a person engaged through a 
contractor or engaged as a self employed person. 


3. (7) With effect from such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be constituted for the purposes of this 
Act, a Fund to be called the Rural Labour Welfare Fund. 


(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf, credit to the Fund in each financial year such sums of money as it considers 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


4. The Fund shall be utilized by the Central Government to meet the expenditure in 
connection with measures which in the opinion of the Central Government, after consulting 
the Governments of the States and Union territories Administrations, are necessary or 
expedient to promote the welfare of the rural labour and in particular:— 


(a) to defray the cost of measures to be carried out for the benefit of rural labour 
towards— 


(i) providing water supply for drinking and other purposes; 
(ii) providing educational facilities; 

(iii) the improvement of standard of living and nutrition; 
(iv) amelioration of the social conditions; 

(v) providing housing and recreational facilities; 


(vi) rendering financial assistance in case of infirmity or disability due to 
accident, old age, or any other reason; and 


(vii) providing such other welfare measures as may be prescribed. 


(6) to grant loan, assistance or subsidy to Government of any State, Union 
territory Administration, local authority or any organisation for any scheme approved 
by the Central Government for the purposes connected with the welfare of rural 
labour; 


(c) to pay annually grant-in-aid to Government of any State or Union territory 
administration, local authority or an employer or any other organisation which provides 
to the satisfaction of the Central Government such welfare measures and facilities of 
the prescribed standard for the benefit of rural labour; 


(d) to meet the cost of administering the Fund; and 


(e) any other expenditure which the Central Government may direct to be defrayed 
from the Fund. 


5. (1) The Central Government may constitute as many Advisory Committees as it 
deems fit to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the implementation 
of the provisions of this Act: 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 149 


Provided that atleast one Advisory Committee for each State and Union territory shall 
be constituted by the Central Government in consultation with the respective State 
Government and Union territory Administration. 


(2) The Central Government shall appoint Chairperson and such number of members, 
as may be prescribed, of each Advisory Committee. 


(3) The term of office and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and members 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 


6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Central Advisory Committee to 
coordinate the work of the Advisory Committees constituted under section 5 and to advise 
the Central Government on any matter arising out of the implementation of provisions of 
this Act. 


(2) The Central Government shall appoint Chairperson and such number of members, 
as may be prescribed, of the Central Advisory Committee. 


(3) The term of office and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and other 
members shall be such as may be prescribed. 


7.(1) The Central Government may appoint as many Rural Labour Welfare Fund 
Commissioners, Inspectors and such other officers and staff as it deems necessary for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every person appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of sub-section (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyay Sanhita, 2023. 


(3) Any officer or inspector appointed under this Act, may,— 


(a) with such assistance, if any, as he may deem fit, inspect at any reasonable 
time any place which he considers necessary for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act; 


(b) do within such place anything necessary for the proper discharge of his 
duties; and 


(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 


8. The Central Government may require a State Government or a Union territory 
Administration or a local authority or an employer to furnish for the purposes ofthis Act, 
such statistical and other information in such form and within such period as may be 
prescribed. 


9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for,— 


(a) the manner in which the fund may be applied; 
(0) the conditions governing the grant of loans or subsidy; 
(c) the conditions governing grant-in-aid; 


(d) the standard of welfare measures and facilities to be provided out of the 
fund; 


(e) the composition of the Advisory Committees and Central Advisory Committee 
constituted under sections 5 and 6 respectively and the manner in which the members 
thereof shall be appointed; 


Central 
Advisory 
Committee. 


Appointment 
of 

Commissioners, 
Inspectors and 
other officers. 


State 
Government 
to furnish 
requisite 
information. 


Power to 
make rules. 


150 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(f) the term of office of such members, the allowances, if any, payable to them 
and the manner in which the Advisory Committee and the Central Advisory 
Committee shall conduct their business; 


(g) the recruitment, conditions of service and duties of all persons appointed 
under section 7; and 


(A) the powers that may be exercised by an officer or inspector appointed under 
section 7. 


(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 151 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

India resides in villages and eighty-five per cent. ofits rural population earns its livelihood 
from agriculture. There are cultivators, orchard owners, poultry owners, agricultural workers 
and home based workers in the rural areas. Their number runs into crores. However, their 
wages and income are meagre and many of them do not get employment throughout the 
year. These rural labourers also become an easy prey to the debt trap of the landlords and 
moneylenders who force them to become bonded labourers. Most of them remain very poor 
throughout their lives and live in distress for generations. In a welfare State like ours, there 
are no welfare schemes or funds for these helpless rural labourers whereas in the industrial 
sector there are Labour Welfare Boards and cess is levied and collected through legislative 
measures in order to provide them various amenities including housing, education and 
medical care. But the rural labourers are unorganized, poverty stricken and neglected, even 
by the State. 


It is, therefore, necessary that the deteriorating plight ofrural workers be felt at national 
level and the Central Government should constitute a Rural Labour Welfare Fund for financing 
adequately and systematically the welfare measures to be carried out for the rural and 
agricultural labour throughout the country so as to achieve the goals of a welfare State in its 
true sense. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; JANARDAN SINGH ‘SIGRIWAL’ 
July 9, 2024. 


152 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY _ [Parr II—Sec. 2] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Rural Labour Welfare Fund. 
Clause 5 provides for the constitution of Advisory Committees. Clause 6 provides for 
constitution of a Central Advisory Committee. Clause 7 provides for appointment of Rural 
Labour Welfare Commissioners, Inspectors and officers and staff for carrying out the 
purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India but it is not possible at this stage to give the precise details of 
the expenditure that would be involved. It is, however, estimated that it will involve a 
recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore per annum. 


It will also involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty lakh. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


iti7 _ Digitally signed 
Kshitiz एड 
Date: 2024.08.29 

Mohan 11:14:48 +05'30" 


