रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल० -(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


प्यारत 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-28032025-262080 
CG-DL-E-28032025-262080 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — asl 
PART II — Section | 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


de 6] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, मार्च 28, 2025/85 7, 947 (शक) 
No. 6] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, MARCH 28, 2025/CHAITRA 7, 947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 28th March, 2025/Chaitra 7, \947 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
28th March, 2025 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE OILFIELDS (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) 
AMENDMENT ACT, 2025 


No. 6 oF 2025 
[28th March, 2025.] 


An Act further to amend the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 


948. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 

l. (J) This Act may be called the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) 
Amendment Act, 2025. 

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

53 of I948. 2. In the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 948 (hereinafter 

referred to as the principal Act), in section 3,— 


(7) clause (6) shall be omitted; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Amendment of 
section 4. 


Insertion of new 
section 4A. 


Prospecting, etc., 
of mineral oils. 


Amendment of 
section 5. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(ii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(c) “mineral oils” means any naturally occurring hydrocarbon, 
whether in the form of natural gas or in a liquid, viscous or solid form, or a 
mixture thereof, and includes crude oil, natural gas, petroleum, condensate, 
coal bed methane, oil shale, shale gas, shale oil, tight gas, tight oil, gas 
hydrate in their usual industrial connotation and other gases occurring in 
association with mineral oils, but does not include coal, lignite and helium 
occurring in association with petroleum or coal or shale;’; 


(iii) in clause (d), after the word “license”, the words, brackets and 
figures “granted before the commencement of the Oilfields (Regulation and 
Development) Amendment Act, 2025” shall be inserted; 


(iv) in clause (e), for the words “natural gas and petroleum, crude oil”, 
the words “mineral oils” shall be substituted; 


(v) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(f) “petroleum lease” means a lease granted on or after the 
commencement of the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) 
Amendment Act, 2025, for the purpose of prospecting, exploration, 
development, production, making merchantable, carrying away or 
disposing of mineral oils or for purposes connected therewith, and includes 
a mining lease granted before the commencement of the said Act.’. 


3. In section 4 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “mining lease”, the words 
“petroleum lease” shall be substituted; 


(5) for the words “mining lease” at both the places where they occur, the 
words “petroleum lease” shall be substituted. 


4. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“4A. No person shall undertake any operation in any part of India or in 
its territorial waters, continental shelf and exclusive economic zone for the 
purposes of prospecting, exploration, development or production, making 
merchantable, carrying away or disposing of mineral oils, except under a valid 
lease granted under this Act and the rules made thereunder: 


Provided that nothing in this section shall affect any operation 
undertaken in any area in accordance with the terms and conditions ofa license 
or lease granted before the commencement of the Oilfields (Regulation 
and Development) Amendment Act, 2025.”. 


5. In section 5 of the principal Act,— 


(A) in the marginal heading, for the words “mining leases”, the words 
““netroleum leases” shall be substituted; 


(B) in sub-section (/), for the words “grant of mining leases or for 
prohibiting the grant”, the words “grant or extension or renewal of petroleum 
leases or for prohibiting the grant or extension or renewal” shall be substituted; 


(C) in sub-section (2),— 


(7) in clause (a), for the words “mining leases”, the words “petroleum 
leases” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (6), for the words “mining leases may be granted”, the 
words “petroleum leases may be granted or extended or renewed” shall be 
substituted; 


[Part II— 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(iii) for clause (2), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(c) the maximum or minimum area of the petroleum leases; 


(ca) the period for which any petroleum lease may be granted 
or extended or renewed; 


(cb) the terms on which petroleum leases may be merged or 
combined;”; 


(iv) in clause (d), for the word “mine”, the word “oilfield” shall be 
substituted; 


(v) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(e) the mechanism to enable resolution of disputes arising out 
of, or in relation to the petroleum leases or any authorisation granted 
by the Central Government for working of an oilfield through 
alternative dispute resolution methods under any law for the time 
being in force, in a place within India or outside India; 


(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be made by 
rules or in respect of which provision is to be made under this 
section.” 


(D) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The terms and conditions of a petroleum lease shall remain 
stable during the period of the lease for expeditious and efficient 
development of oilfields or production of mineral oils and shall not be 


altered to the disadvantage of the lessee during the period of the lease.”. 
6. In section 6 of the principal Act,— 


(A) in the marginal heading, for the word “mineral”, the words 
“mineral oils” shall be substituted; 


(B) in sub-section (/), for the words “conservation and development”, 
the words “exploration, development, production and conservation” shall be 
substituted; 


(C) in sub-section (2),— 
(४) in clause (d),— 


(a) for the words “oil wells”, the words “mineral oil wells and 
decommissioning and site restoration activities” shall be substituted; 


(6) for the word “oil”, the words “mineral oils” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) in clause (e), for the word “oil”, the words “mineral oils” shall be 
substituted; 


(iii) in clause (g), for the word “mines”, the word “oilfields” shall be 
substituted; 


(iv) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ga) the collection, aggregation, dissemination, use or sharing 
of the data and samples related to mineral oils with the Central 
Government or any other party nominated by the Central 
Government, for the purposes of economic development, academic 
research and public welfare;”; 


Amendment of 
section 6. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(v) in clause (0), for the words “mined, quarried, excavated or 
collected”, the word “produced” shall be substituted; 


(v7) in clause (7), for the words “owners or lessees of mines of special 
or periodical returns and reports, and the forms”, the words “lessees of 
oilfields of special or periodical returns and reports, and the formats” shall 
be substituted; 


(vii) after clause (/), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(k) the sharing of production and processing facilities and other 
infrastructure, both on land and offshore, by two or more lessees for 
more efficient development of oilfields or production of mineral oils; 


(/) the safety at oilfields including safety mechanisms, standards 
and protocols for conduct of mineral oil operations, protection of 
persons and infrastructure such as terminals, installations, other 
structures and devices, and mineral oils; 


(m) the sound management of mineral oils in accordance with 
good international petroleum industry practices including obligations 
of lessees towards protection of environment during operations and 
while abandoning, decommissioning and undertaking site restoration 
activities; 


(n) the unitisation of leases across States, Union territories and 
offshore leases, where there is reservoir continuity or connectivity, or 
for efficient exploration, development or production of mineral oils; 


(०) promote and facilitate adoption of measures for reducing 
carbon and greenhouse gas emissions and decarbonising operations 
including but not limited to use of oilfields for other purposes, such 
as, production of hydrogen, carbon capture utilisation and storage or 
coal gasification; 


(p) reporting of carbon and greenhouse gas emissions related to, 
arising out of, or resulting from, mineral oil operations; 


(q) promote and facilitate development of comprehensive 
energy projects at oilfields, including planning, development, 
installation, sharing and use of infrastructure for carrying out mineral 
oil operations and solar, wind or other form of renewable energy 
projects; 


(r) any other matter which is required to be, or may be made by 
rules, or in respect of which provision is to be made under this 
section.”. 


Amendment of 7. In section 6A of the principal Act,— 
section 6A. ; ; 
(a) for the words “mined, quarried, excavated” wherever they occur, the 


word “produced” shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (2), after the words “mining lease”, the words “or 
petroleum lease” shall be inserted; 


(c) in sub-section (3),— 


(7) for the words “crude oil, casing-head condensate or natural 
2957, the words “mineral oils” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words “petroleum or natural gas, or both”, the words 
“mineral oils” shall be substituted; 


[Part II— 


Sec. |] 


9 of 2006. 


9 of 2006. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(व) in sub-section (4), for the words “mining leases”, the words 
“petroleum leases” shall be substituted. 


8. For section 9 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted, 


namely:— 


“9. (/) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 4A or 
sub-section (/) or sub-section (2) of section 6A shall be liable to a penalty of 
twenty-five lakh rupees. 


(2) Any rule made under any of the provisions of this Act may provide 
that any contravention thereof shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five lakh 
rupees. 


(3) Whoever, after having been punished with penalty as referred to in 
sub-section (/) or sub-section (2), continues to contravene any of the 
provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder, shall be liable to pay a further 
penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees per day for the entire duration 
during which the contravention continues commencing from the date of 
imposition of the first penalty. 


9A. (J) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for providing eligibility criteria for designating an 
adjudicating authority and for the manner of conducting inquiry and imposing 
penalty under the provisions of this Act: 


Provided that no officer below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India shall be designated as an adjudicating authority. 


(2) The adjudicating authority may summon and enforce the attendance 
of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give 
evidence or to produce any document, which in his opinion may be useful for 
or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is 
satisfied that the person concerned has contravened the provisions of this Act 
or the rules made thereunder, he may determine such penalty in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act. 


(3) No penalty shall be imposed on any person under this section or any 
rules made thereunder without affording an opportunity of being heard. 


9B. (/) Every appeal against the order of the adjudicating authority 
under this section shall lie with the Appellate Tribunal referred to in 
section 30 of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 and 
the provisions contained in sections 33, 34, 35 and 36 of that Act, shall, 
mutatis mutandis apply, in relation to every such appeal. 


(2) The provisions contained in section 37 of the Petroleum and Natural 
Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006, shall mutatis mutandis apply, in relation to 


every appeal against the order of the Appellate Tribunal referred to in 
sub-section (/).”. 


9. In section 0 of the principal Act, after the words, figure and letter “of 


section 6A”, the words and figure “or section 8” shall be inserted. 


0. In section |! of the principal Act, for the word “mine” wherever it occurs, 


the word “oilfield” shall be substituted. 


II. In section 2 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the words “mining lease”, the words “petroleum lease” shall be 
substituted; 


(b) for the word “mine”, the word “oilfield” shall be substituted. 


Substitution of 
new sections 9, 
9A and 9B for 

section 9. 


Penalties. 


Adjudication. 


Appeal. 


Amendment of 
section l0. 


Amendment of 
section II. 


Amendment of 
section |2. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—Sec. | | 


Insertion of new 2. After section l3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
section l3A. : rt : 
inserted, namely: 


Validity of “_]3३ 0, All mining leases and licenses granted before commencement of 

leases and the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 2025, 

2: shall continue to be valid for their respective tenure subject to the 
terms and conditions governing the grant of such leases and licenses.”. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-I0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054, 
MGIPMRND—763GI($4)—28-3-2025. KSHITIZ byes 
MOHAN bate: 2025.03.28 


9:55:20 +05'30" 


