रजिस्ट्री सं" डी" were 


The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-05082023-247872 
CG-DL-E-05082023-247872 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग I— खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


(एन)04/0007/2003---23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


सं" 9] नई दिल्ली, शुक्रवार, अगस्त 4, 2023/ श्रावण 3, 945 (शक) 
No. 9] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, AUGUST 4, 2023/SRAVANA 3, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके | 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2023:— 


BILL No. 5 oF 2023 


A Bill to establish the Anusandhan National Research Foundation to provide high level 


strategic direction for research, innovation and entrepreneurship in the fields of 


natural sciences including mathematical sciences, engineering and technology, 
environmental and earth sciences, health and agriculture, and scientific and 
technological interfaces of humanities and social sciences, to promote, monitor and 
provide support as required for such research and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Anusandhan National Research Foundation 
Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions 
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall 
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Establishment 
of 
Foundation. 


Objectives of 
Foundation. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appointed date" means such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint under sub-section (2) of section |; 


(b) "Chief Executive Officer" means the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Foundation; 


(c) "Committees" means the Committees of the Executive Council referred to in 
section |2; 


(d) "Executive Council" means the Council constituted under sub-section (/) 
of section 7; 


(e) "Foundation" means the Anusandhan National Research Foundation 
established under section 3; 


(f) "Funds" means the Funds referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3; 


(g) "Governing Board" means the Governing Board of the Foundation 
constituted under section 5; 


(h) "Member" means a Member of the Governing Board or the Executive Council 
and includes the President, Vice-President and Chairperson, as the case may be; 


(i) "notification" means the notification published in the Official Gazette and 
the expression "notified" shall be construed accordingly; 


(j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(k) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Executive Council under 
this Act. 


CHAPTER II 
AANUSANDHAN NATIONAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION 


3. (7) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 
appoint, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act, a Foundation to be known 
as the Anusandhan National Research Foundation. 


(2) The Foundation, referred to in sub-section (7), shall be a body corporate, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power subject to the provisions of this Act, 
to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and 
shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


4. (/) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Foundation shall serve as the apex 
body to provide high level strategic direction for research, innovation and entrepreneurship 
in the fields of natural sciences including mathematical sciences, engineering and technology, 
environmental and earth sciences, health and agriculture, and scientific and technological 
interfaces of humanities and social sciences. 


(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (/), the Foundation 
shall undertake suitable initiatives including the following, namely:— 


(a) preparing the roadmap for short, medium and long term research and 
development; 


(b) seeding, growing and facilitating research at academic and research 
institutions, particularly at universities and colleges where research capacity is at a 
nascent stage, through programmes such as research and development projects, 
fellowships, academic chairs, and creation of centres of excellence; 


(c) funding competitive peer-reviewed grant proposals to eligible persons; 


(d) assisting in setting up research infrastructure and environment that is 
conducive for scientific pursuit with specific focus on matters of national priorities, 
emerging frontiers and strategic research; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(e) increasing India's role and participation in key areas of national and global 
importance; 


(f) supporting translation of research undertaken into capital intensive 
technologies; 


(g) evolving nationally coordinated programmes to identify scientific and 
practical solutions for societal, developmental, financial and techno-economic 
challenges; 


(h) coordinating across the Central Government, State Governments, public 
authorities, industries, and research institutions, to document and analyse the 
expenditure on scientific research and their outcomes during each financial year, and 
report the same to the Central Government; 


(i) evolving participation in international collaborative projects and fostering 
exchange of scientific information; 


(j) encouraging collaboration with scientists from within and outside India, 
including scientists of Indian origin, with a view to enrich the Indian scientific 
ecosystem; and 


(k) encouraging the Public Sector Enterprises as well as the private sector 
entities to invest in the activities of the Foundation. 


(3) In addition to the objectives referred to in sub-section (2), the Foundation shall 
also, to the extent practicable, either by itself, or through a suitable agency identified in this 
behalf, undertake an annual survey of outcomes of scientific research in India, with a view 
to create a central repository, for the collection, interpretation and analysis of information 
and data surrounding such research, and the aim of such a repository would include providing 
information for policy formulation and advising the Central Government and State 
Governments as well as the private sector: 


Provided that the survey referred to in this sub-section shall exclude any strategic 
areas of research as determined by the Governing Board. 


(4) The Foundation shall perform the aforesaid objectives through a Governing Board 
constituted under section 5. 


5. (/) There shall be constituted a Governing Board, which shall provide high level 
strategic direction, perform and monitor the implementation of the objectives of the Foundation. 


(2) The Governing Board referred to in sub-section (/) shall consist of the following, 
namely:— 


(a) the Prime Minister of India, ex officio—President; 
(b) the Union Minister of Science and Technology, ex officio—Vice-President; 
(c) the Union Minister of Education, ex officio—Vice-President; 


(d) a Member from the NITI Aayog dealing with science and technology, 
ex officio—Member; 

(e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Science and 
Technology, ex officio—Member; 


(f) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, ex officio—Member; 


(g) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Biotechnology, 
ex officio—Member; 


(A) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Higher Education, 
ex officio—Member; and 


Governing 
Board. 


Meetings of 
Governing 
Board. 


Executive 
Council. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


(i) the Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government of India, ex officio— 
Member-Secretary. 


(3) The President of the Governing Board may nominate or appoint the following 
Members to the Governing Board, namely:— 


(a) not exceeding two Members from the Prime Minister's Science, Technology 
and Innovation Council; 


(9) not exceeding five Members from business organisation or industry; 
(c) one Member from the field of humanities and social sciences; 


(d) not exceeding two Members from institutions engaged in scientific and 
technological research and development; and 


(e) not exceeding six experts who have specialised knowledge in the areas of 
health, mathematical and physical sciences, biological sciences, engineering and 
technology, innovation and partnership, computer and information sciences, and 
engineering. 

(4) The qualifications, experience, honorarium and allowances payable to and the 
other terms and conditions of service of the Members and experts of the Governing Board 
referred to in sub-section (3) shall be such as may be prescribed. 


6. (/) The Governing Board shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings including 
quorum at such meetings, as may be specified by the regulations. 


(2) If the President for any reason is unable to attend a meeting of the Governing 
Board, any of the Vice-Presidents shall preside over the meeting. 


7. (7) The President of the Governing Board shall constitute an Executive Council to 
implement the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Executive Council referred to in sub-section (/) shall consist of the following, 
nominated by the President of the Governing Board, namely:— 


(a) the Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government of India, ex officio— 
Chairperson; 

(b) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Science and 
Technology, ex officio—Member; 

(c) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Biotechnology, 
ex officio—Member; 

(d) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of scientific and 
Industrial Research, ex officio—Member; 

(e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Earth Sciences, 
ex officio—Member; 

(f) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Higher Education, 
ex officio—Member; 

(g) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Health Research, 
ex officio—Member; 

(A) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Defence Research 
and Development, ex officio—Member; 

(i) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Atomic Energy, 
ex officio—Member; 

(j) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Space, 
ex officio—Member; 


(k) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education, ex officio—Member; and 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY के 


(J) the Chief Executive Officer of the Foundation appointed under section I], 
ex officio—Member-Secretary. 


(3) The President of the Governing Board may also nominate or appoint the following 
Members to the Executive Council, namely:— 


(a) not exceeding two ex officio Members amongst Secretaries of such 
other Departments or Ministries of the Government of India, not referred to in 
sub-section (2), as may be notified by the Central Government; and 


(b) not exceeding three Members amongst distinguished experts who have 
specialised knowledge in the areas of science and technology in academia, 
philanthropic sector, research laboratories and industries. 


(4) The qualifications, experience, honorarium and allowances payable to and the 
other terms and conditions of service of the Members of the Executive Council referred to 
in clause (b) of sub-section (3) shall be such as may be prescribed. 


8. (/) The Executive Council shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings including 
quorum at such meetings, as may be specified by the regulations. 


(2) If the Chairperson for any reason is unable to attend a meeting of the Executive 
Council, the Member chosen by other Members shall preside over the meeting. 


(3) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Executive 
Council, exercise and discharge such powers and duties, as may be delegated by the 
Governing Board. 


9. No act or proceeding of the Governing Board or the Executive Council shall be 
invalidated merely by reason of— 


(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Governing Board or 
the Executive Council; 


(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the 
Governing Board or the Executive Council; and 


(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Governing Board or the Executive 
Council not affecting the merits of the case. 


0. The Executive Council shall implement the objectives of the Foundation based on 
the policy direction and guidance provided by the Governing Board, including the following 
functions, namely:— 


(a) to consider applications for the grant of financial assistance in accordance 
with the eligibility criteria as determined necessary for such grants; 


(b) to determine through regulations,— 


(7) the requirements for registration, the form and manner for making of 
applications for financial assistance; 


(ii) reports and certification to be furnished pursuant to availing the 
financial assistance; 


(iii) the requirements of extension of financial assistance; and 
(iv) the grounds for revocation of financial assistance; 


(c) to facilitate and provide any assistance as may be required to ensure filing of 
applications for intellectual property rights pursuant to the research undertaken 
through financial assistance under this Act; and 


(d) any other function as may be delegated to it from time to time by the 
Governing Board. 


Meetings of 
Executive 
Council. 


Vacancies, 
etc., not to 
invalidate 
proceedings 
of Governing 
Board or 
Executive 
Council. 


Functions of 
Executive 
Council. 


Chief 
Executive 
Officer and 
other officers 
and 
employees of 
Foundation. 


Constitution 
of 
Committees. 


Funds of 
Foundation. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


Il. () The President of the Governing Board may appoint a Chief Executive Officer, 
not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India, for efficient 
administration of the Foundation. 


(2) The qualifications, experience, salary and allowances payable to and the other 
terms and conditions of service of the Chief Executive Officer shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The Executive Council may appoint such other officers and employees as it 
considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(4) The qualifications, experience, salary and allowances payable to and the other 
terms and conditions of service of the other officers and employees of the Foundation shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Executive Council may engage the services of such persons, both from within 
and outside India, as consultants and visiting scientists to the Foundation. 


(6) The eligibility criteria and honorarium payable to the consultants and visiting 
scientists, referred to in sub-section (5), shall be such as may be specified by the regulations. 


2. (/) The Executive Council may constitute such Committees as it may deem 
necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under 
this Act. 


(2) The Executive Council may also co-opt persons, other than Members of the 
Governing Board or the Executive Council, as members of any Committees constituted 
under sub-section (/). 


(3) The co-opted members shall have the right to attend the meetings of the Committees 
and take part in the proceedings of the Committees, but shall not have right to participate in 
decision making. 


CHAPTER III 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
3. (/) The Foundation shall receive monies from the following sources, namely: — 


(a) grants and loans of such sums of money as the Central Government may 
consider necessary, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf; 


(b) any sums received for research and development, including through 
donations from any other source, including from public sector enterprises, the private 
sector, philanthropist organisations, foundations or international bodies; 


(c) recoveries made of the amounts granted to the Foundation; 
(d) any income from investment of the amounts received by the Foundation; 


(e) all amounts with the Fund for Science and Engineering Research under the 
Science and Engineering Research Board Act, 2008 as on the appointed date; and 


(f) such other sources as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Governing Board shall constitute the following Funds, into which it shall 
allocate, in the manner as it determines fit, the amounts received from clauses (a), (0), (८), (४) 
and (f) of sub-section (/), namely:— 


(a) the Anusandhan National Research Foundation Fund, which shall be used 
for the financing of activities under the Act, including expenses, salaries, allowances 
and other administrative exigencies for achieving the objectives of the Foundation; 


(b) the Innovation Fund for supporting outstanding creativity in the areas 
supported by the Foundation; 


9 of 2009. 


9 of 2009. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(c) the Science and Engineering Research Fund for continuation of the projects 
and programmes initiated under the Science and Engineering Research Board 
Act, 2008; and 


(d) one or more Special Purpose Funds for any specific project or research. 


(3) The Governing Board shall maintain the Science and Engineering Research Fund 
referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (2) for such time as it may determine necessary, and 
allocate to such Fund, the following amounts, namely:— 


(a) all amounts under clause (e) of sub-section (/); and 


(b) any further amounts from any of the other sources of Funds received by the 
Foundation, as may be determined to be necessary for the implementation of such 
projects and programmes, based on a review and assessment by the Executive Council. 


(4) The Central Government shall frame such financial rules for the utilisation of the 
amounts in the Funds established under this Act. 


4. The Executive Council shall prepare a budget, maintain proper accounts in such 
form and manner at such time and at such intervals as may be prescribed for the next 
financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Foundation, as approved 
by the Governing Board, and forward the same to the Central Government. 


5. The Executive Council shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such time in 
every financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of the 
Foundation's activities during the previous financial year and submit a copy of the same to 
the Central Government. 


6. (४) The Executive Council shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed in 
connection with the auditing of the accounts of the Foundation under this Act shall have 
the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the auditing of the 
Government account and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any 
of the office of the Foundation under this Act. 


(3) The accounts of the Foundation shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India annually and any expenditure incurred in connection with such 
audit shall be payable by the Foundation to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(4) The Executive Council shall furnish to the Central Government, before such date 
as may be prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with auditor's report. 


7. The Central Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's report to be 
laid, as soon as may be after they have received, before each House of Parliament. 


CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 


8. (/) Any person receiving financial assistance from the Foundation shall furnish 
certification and report to the Executive Council, in such form and manner and at such time 
as may be specified by the regulations. 


(2) The Executive Council may authorise an officer to visit any academic institutions, 
research and development laboratories, industries and other organisations with which the 


Budget. 


Annual 
report. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


Annual report 
and Auditor's 
report to be 
laid before 
Parliament. 


Certification 
and report to 
be furnished. 


Power of 
Governing 
Board to 
delegate. 


Power of 
Governing 
Board to issue 
directions. 


Application 
of other laws 
not barred. 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 


Power to 
make rules. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


person referred to in sub-section (/) is associated, at any time to verify the accuracy of the 
certification or report made under this section. 


9. The Governing Board may, by general or special order in writing, published in the 
Official Gazette, delegate to the Executive Council, the Chairperson of the Executive Council 
or the Chief Executive Officer, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be 
specified in the order, such of its powers and functions including, but not limited to 
administrative and financial matters, as it may deem necessary. 


20. (7) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Executive 
Council shall, in discharge of its powers and performance of its functions under this Act, be 
bound by such directions as the Governing Board may give in writing to it from time to time. 


(2) The Executive Council shall furnish to the Governing Board such information with 
respect to its activities as the Governing Board may, from time to time, require. 


2l. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 


22. No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government 
or the Governing Board or Executive Council or any Member of the Governing Board or 
Executive Council, or any Committee, officer or employee of the Foundation, or any other 
person authorised by the Central Government or the Foundation, for anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder. 


23. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, and subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, to carry 
out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the qualifications, experience, honorarium and allowances payable to and 
the other terms and conditions of service of the Members and experts of the Governing 
Board under sub-section (4) of section 5; 


(b) the qualifications, experience, honorarium and allowances payable to and 
the other terms and conditions of service of the Members of the Executive Council 
under sub-section (4) of section 7; 


(c) the qualifications, experience, salary and allowances payable to and the 
other terms and conditions of service of the Chief Executive Officer under sub-section (2) 
of section |]; 


(d) the qualifications, experience, salary and allowances payable to and the 
other terms and conditions of service of the other officers and employees under 
sub-section (4) of section |]; 


(e) the other sources from where the Foundation receive monies under 
clause (f) of sub-section (/) of section 3; 


(f) the financial rules for the utilisation of the amounts in the funds under 
sub-section (4) of section 3; 


(g) the form, manner, time and interval for preparation of budget for the next 
financial year under section 4; 


(h) the form, manner and time for preparation of annual report by the Executive 
Council under section 5; 


(i) the form and manner of preparation of annual statement of accounts by the 
Executive Council under sub-section (/) of section 6; 


9 of 2009. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(7) the date of submission of audited copy of accounts together with the auditor's 
report under sub-section (4) of section 6; 


(k) the manner of dealing with the monies transferred by the Board to the 
Foundation under second proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 27; and 


(J) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by rules. 


24. (/) The Executive Council may, by notification and with the prior approval of the 
Central Government, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and 
any rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 


(a) the time, place and the rules of procedure in regard to transaction of 
business at the meetings and quorum of the Governing Board under sub-section (/) 
of section 6; 


(b) the time, place and the rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business 
at the meetings and quorum of Executive Council under sub-section (/) of section 8; 


(c) the requirements for registration, form and manner for making applications 
for financial assistance, reports and certification to be furnished for the financial 
assistance, extension of financial assistance and grounds for revocation of financial 
assistance under clause (9) of section 0; 


(d) the eligibility criteria and honorarium payable to the consultants and visiting 
scientists under sub-section (6) of section |]; 


(e) the form, manner and time for furnishing certification and report to the 
Foundation under sub-section (/) of section 8; and 


(f) any other matter which is required to be or may be specified by regulations or 
in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations. 


25. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation 
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 


26. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, on the recommendations of the Foundation, by an order published in the 
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or 
the rules or regulations made thereunder, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient 
for removing such difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of 
two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


27. (7) The Science and Engineering Research Board Act, 2008 is hereby repealed 
and the Science and Engineering Research Board constituted under section 3 of the said 
Act (hereinafter referred to as the repealed Act) shall stand dissolved. 


Power of 
Executive 
Council to 
make 
regulations. 


Rules and 
regulations to 
be laid before 
Parliament. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


(2) The repeal of the Science and Engineering Research Board Act, 2008 shall, however, 9 of 2009. 
not affect:— 


(a) any action taken pursuant to sub-section (3) of section 3; 
(b) previous operation or anything duly done under the repealed Act; 


(c) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired or accrued or incurred 
under the repealed Act; and 


(d) any proceeding pending or ongoing under the repealed Act. 
(3) On the dissolution of the Science and Engineering Research Board— 


(a) all assets, liabilities and other facilities forming part of or used in connection 
with the Science and Engineering Research Board, shall be deemed to be the assets of 
the Foundation; and 


(b) any officer or employee who has been, immediately before the dissolution of 
the Science and Engineering Research Board, employed on regular basis by the 
Science and Engineering Research Board, shall become, on and from such dissolution, 
the officer and employee, respectively, of the Foundation in such manner as may be 
notified by the Central Government, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, 
gratuity and other like matters as would have been admissible to him if the rights in 
relation to the Science and Engineering Research Board had not been transferred to, 
and vested in, the Foundation, and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment in the Foundation, is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms 
and conditions of employment are duly altered by the Foundation: 


Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, |947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the servicesof —4 of 947. 
any officer or other employee, employed in the Science and Engineering Research 
Board, to the Foundation shall not entitle such officer or other employee, any 
compensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such 
claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority: 


Provided further that where the Science and Engineering Research Board has 
established a provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of 
officers and other employees employed in the Science and Engineering Research 
Board, the monies relatable to the officers and other employees whose services have 
been transferred by or under this Act to the Foundation shall, out of the monies 
standing, on the dissolution of the Science and Engineering Research Board, to the 
credit of such provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferred 
to, and vest in, the Foundation, and such monies which stand so transferred shall be 
dealt with by the said Foundation, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The mention of the particular matters referred to in sub-section (3) shall not be 
held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses 
Act, |897 with regard to the effect of repeal. 0 of 897. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 8 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Research and development are the foundation for scientific discoveries, new 
technologies, and innovative applications. This is of crucial importance for India's success 
in a competitive global economy and in addressing challenges and opportunities across the 
various dimensions of science and technology. Development of a robust ecosystem is 
required in all fields of sciences. This includes mathematical sciences, engineering and 
technology, environmental and earth sciences, health and agriculture, as well as scientific 
and technological interfaces of humanities and social sciences. 


2. The Science and Engineering Research Board Act, 2008 (the Science Act), has so 
far provided a good basis for promoting basic science and engineering research, through 
financial assistance to persons engaged in such research. However, the scale and scope of 
the Science and Engineering Research Board which was constituted through the Science 
Act are limited and it has not been able to bring decisive changes in the science and 
technology ecosystem of the country. 


3. There is a need for integrated planning and coordination, through a more holistic 
approach to research and innovation. Our country has a vast pool of human resources 
trained in science and technology, many of whom may seek opportunities for scientific 
research in Universities and institutions outside India. 


4. It is important to develop a robust and self-sustaining ecosystem, with an aim to 
give full expression to opportunities for all, and engender cutting-edge scientific research 
within India. This necessitates enhancing the ability of government institutions, Universities, 
higher educational institutions, as well as private sector organisations, to undertake such 
research. To ensure a financially viable research ecosystem, it is also necessary to tap into 
the financial resources of the private sector. 


5. In the light of above, it is proposed to enact a new Legislation, namely, the 
Anusandhan National Research Foundation Bill, 2023 with a view to establish the 
Anusandhan National Research Foundation (Foundation) to provide high level strategic 
direction for research, innovation and entrepreneurship in the fields of natural sciences 
including mathematical sciences, engineering and technology, environmental and earth 
sciences, health and agriculture, as well as scientific and technological interfaces of 
humanities and social sciences, and to repeal the Science Act. The proposed new Legislation 
intends to enhance India's national research infrastructure, knowledge enterprise, and 
innovation potential, for scientific pursuit. 


6. The salient features of the Anusandhan National Research Foundation Bill, 2023 
seeks to create a very vibrant globally competent scientific ecosystem. 


7. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill. 


8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; DR. JITENDRA SINGH. 
The 29th July, 2023. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


Notes on Clauses 
Clause | of the Bill relates "Short title and commencement". 


This clause seeks to provide for short title and commencement of the proposed 
Legislation. 


Clause 2 of the Bill relates to "Definitions". 


This clause seeks to provide for definition of certain expressions used in the proposed 
Legislation. 


Clause 3 of the Bill relates to "Establishment of Anusandhan National Research 
Foundation". 


This clause seeks to provide for establishment of a Foundation to be known as the 
Anusandhan National Research Foundation to carry out the objectives specified in 
clause 4 of the proposed Legislation. 


Clause 4 of the Bill relates to "Objectives of Foundation". 


This clause seeks to provide that the Foundation shall serve as the apex body to 
provide high-level strategic directions for research, innovation and entrepreneurship in the 
country. 


Clause 5 of the Bill relates to "Governing Board". 


This clause seeks to provide for the composition of the Governing Board of the 
Foundation to be headed by the Prime Minister which shall provide high-level strategic 
directions and monitor the implementation of objectives of Foundation. 


Clause 6 of the Bill relates to "Meetings of Governing Board". 


This clause seeks to provide for transactions of business at meetings of the Governing 
Board. 


Clause 7 of the Bill relates to "Executive Council". 


This clause seeks to provide for constitution of the Executive Council to implement 
the provisions of the proposed Legislation. 


Clause 8 of the Bill relates to "Meetings of Executive Council". 


This clause seeks to provide for transactions of business at meetings of the Executive 
Council. 


Clause 9 of the Bill relates to "vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the 
Governing Board or the Executive Council". 


This clause seeks to provide for the grounds under which the vacancies, etc., not to 
invalidate proceedings of the Governing Board or the Executive Council. 


Clause 0 of the Bill relates to the "Functions of the Executive Council". 


This clause seeks to provide the various functions to be performed by the Executive 
Council specified in the said clause. 


Clause | of the Bill relates to "Chief Executive Officer and other officers and employees 
of Foundation". 


This clause seeks to provide for appointment of Chief Executive Officer, other officers 
and employees of the Executive Council and engaging services of consultants and visiting 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


scientists and to provide for their qualifications, experience, terms and conditions of services 
and salary and allowances payable to them. 


Clause |2 of the Bill relates to "Constitution of Committees". 


This clause seeks to empower the Executive Council to constitute committees for 
efficient discharge of its duties and performance of functions and to co-opt expert persons 
to such committees. 


Clause (3 of the Bill relates to "Funds of Foundation". 


This clause seeks to provide for the constitution of Funds of the Foundation including 
the Anusandhan National Research Foundation Fund, Innovation Fund, Science and 
Engineering Research Fund and some Special Purpose Funds. 


Clause 4 of the Bill relates to "Budget". 


This clause seeks to enable the Executive Council to prepare the annual Budget of the 
Foundation for the ensuing financial year. 


Clause |5 of the Bill relates to "Annual report". 


This clause seeks to empower the Executive Council to prepare the Annual Report of 
the Foundation giving full account of the activities of the Foundation during the previous 
financial year. 


Clause 6 of the Bill relates to "Accounts and audit". 


This clause seeks to provide for maintenance of proper accounts and audit of the 
same annually by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


Clause |7 of the Bill relates to "Annual report and Auditor's report to be laid before 
Parliament". 


This clause seeks to provide that the Annual Report and Auditor's Report shall be 
required to be laid every year before both Houses of Parliament. 


Clause |8 of the Bill relates to "Certification and report to be furnished". 


This clause seeks to provide that any person getting any financial assistance from 
the Foundation shall be bound to submit to the Executive Council the utilisation certificate 
regarding such financial assistance and the report in respect of the research work done 
through the same. 


Clause 9 of the Bill relates to "Power of Governing Board to delegate". 


This clause seeks to provide that the Governing Board may delegate its certain powers 
and functions, subject to certain conditions and limitations, to the Executive Council, the 
Chairperson of the Council or Chief Executive Officer. 


Clause 20 of the Bill relates to "Power of Governing Board to issue directions". 


This clause seeks to empower the Governing Board to issue directions to the Executive 
Council. 


Clause 2| of the Bill relates to "Application of other laws not barred". 


This clause seeks to provide that the provisions of the proposed legislation shall be 
in addition to the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 


Clause 22 of the Bill relates to "Protection of action taken in good faith". 


This clause seeks to provide that no prosecution or legal action shall be taken under 
the provisions of the proposed Legislation against the Central Government, Members of 
the Governing Board, Executive Council or any Committee and officers and employees of 
the Foundation for anything done in good faith. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


Clause 23 of the Bill relates to "Power to make rules”. 


This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the proposed Legislation. 


Clause 24 of the Bill relates to "Power of Executive Council to make regulations". 


This clause seeks to empower the Executive Council to make regulations for carrying 
out the purposes of the proposed Legislation. 


Clause 25 of the Bill relates to "Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament". 


This clause seeks to provide for the rules and regulations made under the proposed 
Legislation to be laid before each House of Parliament. 


Clause 26 of the Bill relates to "Power to remove difficulties". 


This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to remove, within a period of 
two years, any difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of the Act. 


Clause 27 of the Bill relates to "Repeal and savings". 


This clause seeks to provide for repeal of the Science and Engineering Research 
Board Act, 2008 and for saving of actions taken thereunder. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for objectives of the Anusandhan National Research 
Foundation which include funding of matters related to implementation of its objectives. 


Sub-clause (4) of clause 5 of the Bill makes provision for honorarium and allowances 
of nominated Members of the Governing Board. 


Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to establish the Executive Council. Sub-clause (4) of the said 
clause provides for honorarium and allowances of the expert Members of the Executive 
Council. 


Clause |! of the Bill seeks to appoint the Chief Executive Officer and other officers 
and employees. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause makes provision for salary and allowances 
payable to the Chief Executive Officer. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause makes provision for 
salary and allowances payable to other officers and employees of the Executive Council. 
Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides for engagement of consultants and visiting 
scientists. Sub-clause (6) of said clause makes provision for honorarium payable to the 
consultants and visiting scientists. 


Clause |3 of the Bill provides that after the appropriation made by Parliament, by law, 
the Central Government may make to the Foundation by way of grants and loans, of such 
sums of money as that Government may consider necessary, for being utilised for the 
purposes of the proposed Legislation. The said clause further provides that the Foundation 
may receive sums through donations, recoveries, investment and the amounts with the 
‘Fund for Science and Engineering Research’ constituted under the Science and Engineering 
Research Board Act, 2008. 


Clause |6 of the Bill seeks to provide for maintenance of accounts and other records 
of the Foundation. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that any expenditure incurred 
in connection with the audit of the Foundation shall be payable to the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 


2. The provisions of the proposed Legislation, if enacted, would involve recurring 
and non-recurring expenditure of fourteen thousand crore rupees for over a five year period 
from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 23 of the Anusandhan National Research Foundation Bill, 2023 (the Bill) 
empowers the Central Government to make rules. These matters, inter alia, include: 


(a) the qualifications, experience, honorarium and allowances payable to 
and other terms and conditions of the Members of the Governing Board under 
sub-section (4) of section 5; 


(9) the qualifications, experience, honorarium and allowances payable to and 
the other terms and conditions of the Members of the Executive Council under 
sub-section (4) of section 7; 


(c) the qualifications, experience, salary and allowances payable to and the 
other terms and conditions of the Chief Executive Officer under sub-section (2) of 
section |]; 


(d) the qualifications, experience, salary and allowances payable to and the 
other terms and conditions of the other oflicers and employees under sub-section (4) 
of section |]; 


(e) the other sources from where the Foundation receive monies under 
clause (f) of sub-section (/) of section 3; 


(f) the financial rules for the utilisation of the amounts in the funds under 
sub-section (4) of section 3; 


(g) the form, manner, time and interval for preparation of budget for the next 
financial year under section 4; 


(h) the form, manner and time for preparation of annual report by the Executive 
Council under section 5; 


(i) the form and manner of preparation of annual statement of accounts by the 
Executive Council under sub-section (/) of section 6; 


(j) the date of submission of audited copy of accounts together with the auditor's 
report under sub-section (4) of section 6; 


(k) the manner of dealing with the monies transferred by the Board to the 
Foundation under second proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 27; and 


(J) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by rules. 


2. Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Executive Council to make regulations. The 
matters in respect of which the Executive Council may make regulations, inter alia, include: 


(a) the time, place and the procedure in regard to transaction of business at the 
meetings of the Governing Board under sub-section (/) of section 6; 


(b) the time, place and the procedure in regard to transaction of business at the 
meetings of Executive Council under sub-section (/) of section 8; 


(c) the requirements for registration, form and manner for making applications 
for financial assistance, as well as reports and certification to be furnished under 
clause (b) of section 0; 


(d) the eligibility criteria and honorarium payable to the consultants and visiting 
scientists under sub-section (6) of section |]; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(e) the form, manner and time for furnishing certification and report to the 
Foundation under sub-section (/) of section 8; and 


(f) any other matter which is required to be or may be specified by regulations or 
in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations. 


3. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made under the 
aforesaid provisions are matters of detail and it is not practicable to provide them in the Bill 
itself. The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH, 


Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!l0054. 


Kshitiz Mohan: 


