रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल" -(एन)04/0007/2003--24 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—24 


RNa क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-30092024-257603 
CG-DL-E-30092024-257603 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं" 19] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, सितम्बर 30, 2024/आश्विन 8, 1946 (शक) 
No. 19] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 30, 2024/ASVINA 8, 1946 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 30th September, 2024/Asvina 8, 1946 (Saka) 


THE DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI AND DAMAN AND DIU 
CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES REGULATION, 2024 
No. 1 oF 2024 


Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India. 


A Regulation for registration, incorporation and management of Co-operative 
Societies in the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and 
Diu and to repeal the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 as 
applicable to the erstwhile Union territory of Daman and Diu and the Gujarat 
Co-operative Societies Act, 1961 as applicable to the erstwhile Union territory 
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


In exercise of the powers conferred by article 240 of the Constitution, the 
President is pleased to promulgate the following Regulation made by her:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (J) This Regulation may be called the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman 
and Diu Co-operative Societies Regulation, 2024. 


(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of the Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
and Daman and Diu. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, extent 
and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In this Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Administration” means the Administration of the Union territory of 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu; 


(b) “Administrator” means the Administrator of the Union territory of 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, appointed by the President under 
article 239 of the Constitution; 


(c) “auditor” means a certified auditor authorised and appointed by the 
Registrar to audit the accounts of the society. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “certified 
auditor” means a person who is authorised by the Registrar under section 90; 


(d) “authorised person” means any person duly authorised by the 
Registrar to take action under the provisions of this Regulation; 


(e) “Board” means the Board of Directors or the governing body of a 
co-operative society, by whatever name called, to which the superintendence, 
direction and control of the management of the affairs of a society has been 
entrusted; 


(f) “bye-laws” means the registered bye-laws for the time being in force 
in the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, and 
includes amendment of such bye laws; 


(g) “central bank” means a co-operative bank, the objects of which 
include the creation of funds to be loaned to other societies, but does not 
include the urban co-operative bank; 


(A) “Chief Executive Officer” means a Chief Executive Officer or a 
Manager or a Secretary or any other paid employee of a society appointed 
under section 70; 


(i) “Committee” means the Managing Committee or other governing 
body of a society to which the direction and control of the management of the 
affairs of a society is entrusted; 


() “company" means a company as defined in the Companies Act, 2013 
and includes a banking company, any board, corporation or other corporate 
body, constituted or established by any Central Act, State Act or Provincial 
Act for the purpose of development of any industry; 


(k) “co-operative bank” means a society registered under this Regulation 
and carrying on the business of banking as defined in clause (6) of sub-section (/) 
of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; 


(J) “co-operative election authority” means an authority constituted by 
the Administrator under section 74; 


(m) “co-operative information officer” means an officer appointed by a 
society under sub-section (3) of section 37; 


(n) “co-operative society” means a society registered or deemed to be 
registered under the regulations and rules or any other law relating to 
co-operative societies for the time being in force in the Union territory of 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu; 


(0) “custodian” means the custodian of a society to be appointed by the 
Registrar under section 72; 


(p) “Deposit Insurance Corporation” means the Deposit Insurance and 
Credit Guarantee Corporation established under section 3 of the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961; 


18 of 2013. 


10 of 1949. 


47 of 1961. 


9 of 1932. 


61 of 1981. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(q) “dividend” means the amount paid, out of the profit of a society, to 
a member in proportion to the shares held by such member; 


(r) “federal society” means a society— 


(7) of which not less than five members are themselves societies; 
and 


(i) in which the voting rights are so regulated that the members 
which are societies have not less than four-fifths of the total number of 
votes in the general meeting of such society; 


(s) “firm” means a firm registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932; 


(t) “General Body” means the individuals or institutions having 
membership of respective societies; 


(u) “legal heir” means any person, male or female, who is entitled to 
succeed to the property of an intestate as per the relevant personal succession 
law for the time being in force in the Union territory; 


(v) “Liquidator” means a person appointed as Liquidator under section 115; 


(w) “member” means a person joining in an application for the 
registration of a co-operative society which is subsequently registered or a 
person duly admitted to membership of a society after registration and 
includes a nominal, associate or sympathiser member; 


(x) “National Bank” means the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development established under section 3 of the National Bank for Agriculture 
and Rural Development Act, 1981; 


(v) “notification” means the notification published in the Official 
Gazette and the expression “notified” shall be construed accordingly; 


(z) “officer” means a person elected or appointed by a society to any 
office of such society according to its bye-laws and includes a Chairperson, 
Vice-chairperson, President, Vice-President, Managing Director, General 
Manager, Manager, Secretary, Treasurer, Member of the Committee, and any 
other person elected or appointed under this Regulation, the rules or the 
bye-laws, to give directions in regard to the business of such society; 


(za) “office bearer” means a President, Vice-President, Secretary or 
Treasurer of a co-operative society and includes any other person to be elected 
by the Board of any co-operative society; 


(zb) “official assignee” means a person or body of persons appointed 
under sub-section (2) of section 22; 


(zc) “Official Gazette” means the Official Gazette of the Union territory 
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu; 


(zd) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Administrator 
under this Regulation; 


(ze) “rebate” means any payment made in cash or kind, out of the profits 
of a society, to a member or any other person, on the basis of his contribution 
to the business of the society; 


(zf) “Registrar” means a person to be appointed as the Registrar of 
co-operative societies under this Regulation, and includes— 


(7) to the extent of the powers of the Registrar conferred on any 
other person under this Regulation; 


(ii) an Additional Registrar, Joint Registrar, Deputy Registrar and 
Assistant Registrar; 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(zg) “Reserve Bank” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under 
sub-section (/) of section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 2 of 1934. 


(zh) “reserve fund” means a fund to be maintained by the society under 
section 59; 


(zi) “rules” means the rules made under this Regulation; 
(zj) “Schedule” means the Schedule annexed to this Regulation; 


(zk) “society” means a co-operative society registered, or deemed to be 
registered, under this Regulation; 


(zl) “society with limited liability” means a society having the liability 
of its members limited by its bye-laws; 


(zm) “Tribunal” means the Union territory Co-operative Tribunal 
constituted under section 132; 


(zn) “Union territory” means the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and Daman and Diu. 


CHAPTER II 
REGISTRAR AND REGISTRATION 
Registrar and 3. (/) For carrying out the purposes of this Regulation, the Administrator shall 
aca and appoint a person to be called the Registrar of co-operative societies for the Union 
cir powers. . 
territory. 


(2) To assist the Registrar in his functions under this Regulation, the 
Administrator may appoint such number of Additional Registrars, Joint Registrars, 
Deputy Registrars, Assistant Registrars and other persons with such designations as 
it may think fit. 


(3) The Administrator may, by general or special order in writing and for the 
reasons mentioned therein, confer on a person or persons appointed under 
sub-section (2) all or any of the powers of the Registrar under this Regulation. 


(4) Every person appointed under sub-section (2) shall work under the general 
guidance, superintendence and control of the Registrar. 


Societies which 4. A society established for,— 
may be 
registered. (7) promotion of the economic interests or general welfare of its 


members, or of the public, in accordance with such co-operative principles as 
specified in the Schedule; or 


(ii) facilitating the operations of any such society, 
may be registered under this Regulation: 


Provided that, no society shall be registered, if it is likely to be economically 
unsound, or the registration of which may have an adverse effect upon any other 
society, or it is opposed to, or its working is likely to be in contravention of public 
policy or which may have an adverse effect on development of the co-operative 
movement, or the registration of which may be contrary to the policy directives 
which the Union territory Administration may, from time to time, issue. 


Registration 5. A society to be registered under this Regulation may be registered with 
with limited limited liability. 
liability. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the expression “limited 
liability” shall denote the same as is referred to in the Companies Act, 2013. 18 of 2013. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


6. (1) No society, other than a federal society, shall be registered under this 
Regulation, unless it consists of at least ten persons or such higher number of 
persons as the Registrar may, having regard to the objects and economic liability of 
a society and development of the co-operative movement, determine from time to 
time for a class of societies (each of such persons being a member of a different 
family), who are qualified to be members under this Regulation, and who reside in 
the area of operation of such society: 


Provided that the Registrar may specify the norms and conditions for 
registration of societies or class of societies. 


(2) No federal society shall be registered, unless it has at least five societies as 
its members. 


(3) Nothing in this Regulation shall be deemed to affect the registration of any 
society made before the commencement of this Regulation. 


(4) The word “limited” shall be placed at the end of the name of every society 
which is registered or deemed to be registered under this Regulation. 


Explanation— For the purposes of this section, the expression “member of a 
family” means a wife, husband, father, mother, grand-father, grand-mother, step-father, 
step-mother, son, daughter, step-son, step-daughter, grand-son, grand-daughter, brother, 
sister, half-brother, half-sister and wife of brother or half-brother. 


7. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation, the Administrator 
may, by special order in writing in each case and for the reasons mentioned therein, 
exempt subject to such conditions, if any, as it may impose, any society from any of 
the requirements of this Regulation as to registration of such society. 


8. (/) For the purposes of registration of society, an application shall be made 
to the Registrar in the prescribed form and shall be accompanied by four copies of 
the proposed bye-laws of the society and the person by whom, or on whose behalf, 
such application is made, shall furnish such information in regard to the society, as 
the Registrar may require. 


(2) The application shall be signed— 


(a) in the case of a society other than a federal society, by at least ten 
persons (each of such persons being a member of a different family) who are 
qualified under this Regulation; and 


(b) in the case of a federal society, by at least five societies. 


(3) No signature to an application on behalf of a society shall be valid unless 
the person signing it is a member of the Committee of such society, and is authorised 
by such Committee by resolution to sign on its behalf the application for registration 
of the society and its bye-laws; and a copy of such resolution is appended to the 
application. 


9. (Z) On receipt of an application for registration from a society,— 


(a) if the Registrar is satisfied that the society has complied with the 
provisions of this Regulation and the rules as to registration and that its 
bye-laws are not contrary to this Regulation and the rules, he shall register the 
society and its bye-laws; and 


(6) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (a), the Registrar may 
register a society if the aggregate value of the paid-up capital and provision of 
reserves alongwith liquidity, exposure and other prudential norms specified in 
the bye-laws of the proposed society in the business of thrift and credit are in 
accordance with such guidelines as may be prescribed: 


Conditions of 
registration. 


Power to exempt 
societies from 
conditions as to 
registration. 


Application for 
registration. 


Registration and 
provisional 
registration. 


Register of 
societies. 


Power of 
Registrar to 
decide certain 
questions. 


Classification 
of societies. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Provided that the societies registered before the commencement of this 
Regulation shall meet such norms within a period of five years from the date 
of commencement of this Regulation: 


Provided further that if the liquidity, exposure, prudential and other 
parameters of the credit society do not meet such norms within the period 
mentioned above, the Registrar shall have powers to issue such directions as 
it deems appropriate to such society to take relevant action: 


Provided also that in the case of bank, the aggregate value of the 
paid-up capital and provision of reserves alongwith liquidity norms provided 
in the bye-laws shall be such as may be laid down by the Reserve Bank from 
time to time; 


(c) if the Registrar is of the opinion that the application complies with 
the requirements of section 8, but that its bye-laws are not in conformity with 
the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder, 


he may provisionally register the society and by an order in writing permit the 
society to perform such functions subject to such conditions as he may specify in 
the order and may also by an order in writing direct the society to amend, within the 
period prescribed in this behalf, its bye-laws so as to bring them in conformity with 
this Regulation and the rules made thereunder. 


(2) When a society has been provisionally registered, the Registrar shall, on 
its compliance with the order made under clause (8) of sub-section (/), finally 
register it and its bye-laws and on its failure to comply with the order, cancel its 
provisional registration: 


Provided that the provisional registration of a society shall not be cancelled 
unless such society has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 


(3) A provisionally registered society shall not be deemed to be a society 
registered under this Regulation. 


(4) On the registration of a society, the Registrar shall issue to it a certificate 
of registration signed by him within a period of fifteen days from the date of 
registration. 


(5) A certificate of registration issued under sub-section (4) shall be the 
conclusive evidence that the society mentioned therein is duly registered, unless it 
is proved that the registration has been cancelled. 


(6) If the Registrar refuses to register the society, he shall forthwith 
communicate his decision with reasons therefor, to the person who has signed first 
on the application. 


(7) The application for registration of a society may be disposed of within a 
period of three months from the date of its receipt. 


10. The Registrar shall maintain a register in the prescribed form of all 
societies registered or deemed to be registered under this Regulation. 


11. For the purposes of the formation or registration or continuance of a 
society or the admission of a person as a member of a society under this Regulation, 
when any question arises whether, a person is an agriculturist or non-agriculturist, 
or whether any person is a resident in an island or group of islands, or whether two 
or more islands shall be considered to form a group, or whether any person belongs 
to any particular tribe, class or occupation, such question shall be decided by the 
Registrar. 


12. The Registrar may classify all societies into such classes and in such 
manner as he thinks fit and the classification thereof shall be final on the societies. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


13. (J) No amendment of the bye-laws of a society shall be valid until 
registered under this Regulation. 


(2) For the purposes of registration of an amendment of the bye-laws, a copy 
of the amendment passed, in the manner prescribed, at a general meeting of a 
society, shall be forwarded to the Registrar. 


(3) If the Registrar is satisfied that the amendment so forwarded is not contrary 
to this Regulation or the rules, he may register the amendment: 


Provided that no order refusing to register the amendment shall be passed 
except after giving the society an opportunity of being heard in the matter: 


Provided further that the application for registration of amendment of 
bye-laws of a society shall be disposed of within a period of two months from the 
date of its receipt. 


(4) When the Registrar registers an amendment of the bye-laws of a society, 
he shall issue to the society, the copy of the amendment certified by him within a 
period of fifteen days from the date of registration of the amendment, which shall 
be conclusive evidence of its registration. 


(5) Where the Registrar refuses to register an amendment of the bye-laws of a 
society, he shall communicate the order of refusal, together with his reasons therefor 
within a period of fifteen days, to the society. 


14. (J) If it appears to the Registrar that an amendment of the bye-laws of a 
society is necessary or desirable in the interest of such society or any bye-laws of 
the society are inconsistent with the provisions of this Regulation or rules made 
thereunder and that amendment is necessary in such bye-laws, he may call upon the 
society, in the manner prescribed, to make the amendment within such time as he 
may specify. 


(2) If the society fails to make the amendment within the time so specified, the 
Registrar after giving the society an opportunity of being heard and with the prior 
approval of the Administrator, may register the amendment, and shall thereupon 
issue to the society a copy thereof certified by him. 


(3) With effect from the date of the registration of the amendment in the 
manner aforesaid, the bye-laws shall be deemed to have been duly amended 
accordingly and the bye-laws as amended shall be binding on the society and its 
members. 


15. (J) Subject to the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made 
thereunder, a society may, by resolution passed at a general meeting, and with the 
approval of the Registrar, change its name but such change shall not affect any right 
or obligation of the society, or of any of its members, or of any of the persons who 
have ceased to be members and any legal proceedings pending before any person, 
authority or court may be continued by or against the society, under its new name. 


(2) When a society changes its name, the Registrar shall enter the new name 
in its place in the register of societies, and shall also amend the certificate of 
registration accordingly. 


16. (J) Subject to the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made 
thereunder, a society may, by passing a resolution and by amending its bye-laws, 
change the form or extent of its liability. 


(2) When a society has passed a resolution to change the form or extent of its 
liability, it shall give notice thereof in writing to all its members and creditors and, 
notwithstanding anything in any bye-laws or contract to the contrary, any member 
or creditor shall, during a period of thirty days from the date of service of such notice 
upon him, have the option of withdrawing his investment in its shares, and his 
deposits and loans, and of demanding the payment of his other dues, if any: 


Amendment of 
bye-laws of 
society. 


Power to direct 
amendment of 
bye-laws. 


Change of name. 


Change of 
liability. 


Amalgamation, 
transfer, 
division or 
conversion of 
societies. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Provided that conversion of society from limited to unlimited liability shall 
not be permitted in any circumstances. 


(3) Any member or creditor who does not exercise his option within the period 
specified in sub-section (2), shall be deemed to have assented to the change. 


(4) An amendment of the bye-laws of a society, changing the form or extent 
of its liability, shall not be registered or take effect until, either— 


(a) all members and creditors have assented, or deemed to have assented, 
thereto as aforesaid; or 


(b) all claims of members and creditors exercising the option, under 
sub-section (2) have been complied in toto. 


17. (J) Subject to the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made 
thereunder and the previous sanction of the Registrar, a society may, by resolution 
passed by two-thirds majority of the members present and voting at a special general 
meeting held for the purpose, decide— 


(a) to amalgamate with another society or a society registered under the 
Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act 2002; 


(b) to transfer its assets and liabilities, in whole or in part, to any other society; 
(c) to divide itself into two or more societies; 

(d) to convert itself into another class of society; or 

(e) to change its objects. 


(2) Where the amalgamation, transfer, division or conversion referred to in 
sub-section (/) involves a transfer of the liabilities of a society to any other society, 
the Registrar shall not sanction the resolution of the society unless he is satisfied that— 


(7) the society, after passing such resolution, has given notice thereof in 
writing to all its members, creditors and other persons whose interests are 
likely to be affected (hereafter, in this section referred to as “other interested 
persons”), giving them the option to exercise within one month from the date 
of the receipt of such notice, of becoming members of any of the new societies, 
or continuing their membership in the amalgamated or converted society, or 
of withdrawing their investments in its shares, their deposits and loans and 
demanding payment of their other dues, if any; 


(ii) all the members and creditors and other interested persons have 
assented to the decision, or are deemed to have assented thereto by having 
failed to exercise the option within the period specified in clause (४); and 


(iii) all claims of members and creditors and other interested persons, who 
exercise the option within the period specified, have been complied in toto. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, 
or the Registration Act, 1908, in the event of division or conversion, the registration 
of the new societies or, as the case may be, of the converted society, and in the event 
of amalgamation, on the amalgamation the resolution of the societies concerned 
with amalgamation, shall in each case be sufficient conveyance to vest the assets 
and liabilities of the original society or amalgamating societies in the new societies 
or converted or amalgamated society, as the case may be. 


(4) The amalgamation, transfer, division or conversion made under this section 
shall not affect any right or obligation of the societies so amalgamated, or of the 
society so divided or converted, or of the transferee, or render defective, any legal 
proceedings which might have been continued or commenced by or against the 
societies which have been amalgamated or divided or converted and accordingly such 
legal proceedings may be continued or commenced by or against the amalgamated 
society, the converted society, the new societies or the transferee, as the case may be. 


39 of 2002. 


4 of 1882. 
16 of 1908. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


18. () Where the Registrar is satisfied that it is essential in the public interest or 
in the interest of co-operative movement, or for the purpose of securing proper 
management of any society that two or more societies should be amalgamated or that 
any society should be re-organised, then, notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 17 and subject to the provisions of this section, the Registrar may, after 
consulting such federal society as may be notified in this behalf by the Administrator, 
by order published in the Official Gazette, provide for the amalgamation of these 
societies into a single society or, as the case may be, for the re-organisation of that 
society, with such constitution, property rights, interests and authorities, and such 
liabilities, duties and obligations as may be specified in the order: 


Provided that in case of a co-operative society carrying on the business of 
banking, the amalgamation and re-organisation, shall be subject to the guidelines 
issued by the Reserve Bank in this regard from time to time. 


(2) The order referred to in sub-section (/) may also provide for— 


(a) the constitution of the Committee of Management or any other 
Committees of the new amalgamated or re-organised society; 


(b) the persons who shall be, or continue to be, the officers of such 
society; and 


(c) the period after which such Committee or Committees may be 
re-constituted. 


(3) No order shall be made under this section unless,— 


(a) a copy of the draft of the proposed order has been sent to the society 
or each of the societies concerned; 


(b) the Registrar has considered suggestions and objections if any received 
either from the society or from any member or class of members thereof or from 
any creditor or class of creditors within such period (not being less than one 
month from the date on which the copy of the order as aforesaid was received 
by the society) as the Registrar may fix in that behalf, and has, if necessary, 
modified the same in the light of such suggestions and objections. 


(4) The order referred to in sub-section (/) may contain such incidental, 
consequential and supplemental provisions as may, in the opinion of the Registrar, be 
necessary to give effect to the amalgamation or re-organisation. 


(5) Every member of the societies so amalgamated, shall be deemed to be a 
member of the new amalgamated society, and every member of the society so 
re-organised shall be deemed to be a member of the new re-organised society and such 
members shall have all rights, privileges and liabilities of the members of the 
concerned new societies: 


Provided that any member of the new society so amalgamated, or re-organised 
may, within such period and in such manner as may be prescribed, resign his 
membership of the new society and on such resignation, he shall be entitled to 
withdraw his share and any other dues and interest in the society. 


(6) On the issue of an order under sub-section (/) in respect of any societies or 
society, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force in the Union territory, all the assets, rights and liabilities of the amalgamating 
societies, or, as the case may be, the original society which is re-organised shall stand 
transferred to, and vest in, the new amalgamated society, or, as the case may be, the 
new re-organised society. 


Power to direct 
amalgamation 
and re-organisation 
of societies in 
public interest, 
etc. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(7) The provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 17 and section 19 shall 
apply in relation to the amalgamation or re-organisation of the societies under this 
section as if— 


(z) the order of amalgamation was a resolution of societies concerned with 
amalgamation; and 


(zi) the original society was re-organised under section 17. 


Cancellation of 19. Where two or more societies have been amalgamated, or a society has been 
registration of divided or converted, the registration of such societies or society, as the case may be, 
amalgamated, हि है ८ ee 

divided a shall be cancelled on the date of registration of the new society or societies so formed. 
converted 

societies. 

Re-construction 20. Where a compromise or arrangement is proposed— 

of societies. 


(a) between a society and its creditors; or 
(b) between a society and its members, 


the Registrar may, on the application of the society or of any member or of any creditor 
of the society, or in the case of a society which is being wound up, of the Liquidator, 
order reconstruction of the society in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Cancellation of 21. (/) The Registrar shall make an order cancelling the registration of a society, 

१७४०७ if it transfers the whole of its assets and liabilities to another society, or amalgamates 
with another society, or divides itself into two or more societies, or if its affairs are 
wound up or it has not commenced business within a reasonable time of its registration 
or has ceased to function: 


Provided that the registration of a society shall not be cancelled, unless such 
society has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 


(2) An order made under sub-section (/) shall be published in the Official 
Gazette. 


(3) The society shall, from the date of such order of cancellation, be deemed to 
be dissolved and shall cease to exist as a corporate body. 


De-registration 22. (/) If the Registrar is satisfied that any society is registered on 

01 कट mis-representation made by applicants, or where the work of the society is completed 
or exhausted or the purposes for which the society has been registered are not served, 
or any primary agricultural co-operative credit society using the word “bank”, 
“banking”, “banker” or any other derivative of the word “bank” in its name, he may, 
after giving an opportunity of being heard to the society, de-register the society. 


(2) When a society is de-registered under the provisions of sub-section (/), the 
Registrar may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation or any other law 
for the time being in force in the Union territory, make such incidental and 
consequential orders including appointment of Official Assignee as the circumstances 
may require. 


(3) Subject to the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder, 
the Official Assignee shall realise the assets and liquidate the liabilities within a period 
of one year from the date he takes over the charge of property, assets, books, records 
and other documents, which period may, at the discretion of the Registrar, be extended 
from time to time, so however, that the total period does not exceed three years in the 
aggregate. 


(4) The Official Assignee shall be paid such remuneration and allowances as 
may be prescribed and he shall not be entitled to any remuneration whatever beyond 
the prescribed remuneration or allowances. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


23. (1) Any two or more societies may, with the prior approval of the Registrar, 
by resolution passed by three-fourths majority of the members present and voting at a 
general meeting of each such society, enter into partnership for carrying out any 
specific business or businesses: 


Provided that each member of each society has had clear ten days written notice 
of the resolution, and the date of the meeting. 


9 of 1932. (2) Nothing contained in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 and Companies 
18 of 2013. Act, 2013 shall apply to such partnership. 


24. (J) Any society or societies may, with the prior approval of the 
Administrator and subject to such terms and conditions as the Administrator may 
impose, and in such manner as may be prescribed, enter into collaboration with any 
undertaking or any other undertaking approved by the Administrator for carrying on 
any specific business or businesses, including industrial investment, financial aid or 
marketing and management expertise. 


(2) Before approving any such scheme of collaboration by any society or 
societies under sub-section (/), the Administrator shall have due regard to the 
following matters, namely:— 


(a) that the scheme is economically viable; 


(b) that it can be implemented without, in any way, eroding the 
co-operative character of the society or the societies concerned; and 


(c) that the scheme is in furtherance of the interests of the members of the 
society or societies concerned, or is in the public interest, and in the interest of 
the co-operative movement in general. 


CHAPTER III 
MEMBERS AND THEIR RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES 


25. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 28, no person shall be admitted as a 
member of a society unless such person is,— 


(a) an individual, who is competent to contract under the provisions of the 
9 of 1872. Indian Contract Act, 1872; 


(b) a firm, company, any Government company as defined in clause (45) 
18 of 2013. of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013, or any other body corporate constituted 
under any law for the time being in force in the Union territory; 


(c) a society registered, or deemed to be registered, under this Regulation; 
(d) the Central Government; 

(e) the Administrator; 

(f) a local authority; 


(g) a public trust registered or deemed to have been registered under any 
other law for the time being in force in the Union territory; 


(A) the depositor or the financial service user; 


(0) a group of the individuals eligible under clause (a), whether 
incorporated or not and whether established or not by or under any law for the 
time being in force in the Union territory: 


Provided that the provisions of clause (a) shall not apply to an individual seeking 
admission to a society exclusively formed for the benefit of students of a school or a 
college: 


Partnership of 
societies. 


Collaboration by 
societies. 


Person who may 
become member. 


Removal from 
membership in 
certain 

circumstances. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Provided further that subject to such terms and conditions as may be laid down 
by the Administrator by general or special order in writing, a firm or company may 
be admitted as a member only of a society which is a federal or urban society or which 
conducts or intends to conduct an industrial undertaking: 


Provided also that any firm or company, which is immediately before the 
commencement of this Regulation a member of a society deemed to be registered 
under this Regulation, shall have, subject to the other provisions of this Regulation, 
the right to continue to be such member on and after such commencement. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the expression an “urban 
society” means a society the business of which mainly falls within the limits of a 
municipal corporation, municipality, cantonment or notified area committee. 


(2) Every person seeking admission as a member of a society, if duly qualified 
for membership of such society under the provisions of this Regulation, the rules and 
the bye-laws of the society may make an application to the society for membership 
and the society shall take decision on the application and shall communicate the 
decision within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of the application. 


(3) If the society does not communicate any decision to the applicant within 
three months from the date of receipt of such application, the applicant shall be 
deemed to have been admitted as a member of the society. 


(4) If any question arises whether a person has become a deemed member or 
otherwise, the same shall be decided by the Registrar after giving a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard to all the concerned parties. 


(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), the Administrator 
may, having regard to the fact that the interest of any person or class of persons 
engaged in or carrying on any profession, business or employment conflicts or is likely 
to conflict with the objects of any society or class of societies, by general or special 
order published in the Official Gazette, declare that such person or such class of 
persons shall be disqualified from being admitted, or for continuing, as members or 
shall be eligible for membership only to a limited extent, of any society or class of 
societies, so long as such person or persons are engaged in or carry on that profession, 
business, or employment, and the question whether a person is or is not so engaged in 
or carrying on any profession, business or employment or whether a person belongs 
or does not belong to such class of person as declared under this sub-section and has 
or has not incurred a disqualification under this sub-section shall be decided by the 
Registrar under section 11. 


(6) Where the Registrar has decided under section 11 that a person has incurred 
a disqualification, he may, after conducting enquiry, by order, remove such person 
from the membership of the society and such person shall cease to be a member of the 
society. 


26. (1) Where a person becomes a member of any society on his making a 
declaration as required by the bye-laws of the society or otherwise and such 
declaration is found to be false, then such person shall be disqualified to continue as a 
member of the society. 


(2) Where a person continues as a member of the society notwithstanding the 
disqualification incurred by him under sub-section (5) of section 25 or under 
sub-section (/), he shall be removed from the society by the Registrar: 


Provided that the Registrar shall, before making an order of removal give the 
person an opportunity of being heard. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


27. (1) No society shall without a sufficient cause, refuse admission to Open | 
membership to any person duly qualified under the provisions of this Regulation and a 
its bye-laws. 


(2) Where a society refuses to issue or accept the application for membership 
from an eligible person for admission as a member, or the payment made by him in 
respect of membership, such person may tender an application in such form as may 
be prescribed together with payment in respect of membership, if any, to the Registrar, 
who shall forward the application and the amount, if any, so paid, to the society 
concemed within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such application 
and the amount and thereupon, if the society fails to communicate any decision to the 
applicant within a period of three months from the date of receipt of such application 
and the amount by the society, the applicant shall be deemed to have become a 
member of such society. 


(3) If any question arises whether a person has become a deemed member or 
otherwise, the same shall be decided by the Registrar after giving him an opportunity 
of being heard. 


(4) Any person aggrieved by the decision of a society, refusing him admission 
to its membership, may prefer an appeal to the Registrar within a period of two months 
from the date of the decision of the society and every such appeal, as far as possible, 
be disposed of by the Registrar within a period of three months from the date of its 
receipt and the decision of the Registrar in appeal shall be final. 


28. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 25, a society of such class Nominal, 
as may be prescribed may admit any person as a nominal, associate, or sympathiser eres 
member: member. 
Provided that the total number of associate and sympathiser members in a 


society shall not exceed ten per cent. of the total number of members thereof. 


(2) A nominal, associate or sympathiser member shall not be entitled to any 
share, in any form whatsoever, in the assets or profits of the society: 


Provided that subject to the provisions of sub-section (7) of section 32, a 
nominal, associate or sympathiser member shall have such rights and privileges of a 
member and be subject to such liabilities of a member, as may be specified in the 
bye-laws of the society: 


Provided further that the nominal or associate or sympathiser member may be 
issued non-voting shares which may not confer any interest in the management of the 
society including right to vote, to be elected as a member of the Managing Committee 
or participate in the general body meetings: 


Provided also that in case of co-operative bank, such shares shall be issued in 
accordance with the instructions issued by the Reserve Bank in this regard from time 
to time. 


29. A person shall cease to be a member of a society on his resignation from the Cessation of 
membership thereof being tendered in writing to the society and accepted by the een 
society or on the transfer of the whole of his share or interest in the society to another 
member, or on his death, or removal or expulsion from the society: 


Provided that, the resignation of a person from the membership of a society, if 
such member is not in debt to the society or is not a surety for an unpaid debt due to 
the society, shall unless it is accepted earlier be deemed to have been accepted on the 
expiry of one month from the date of tendering his resignation in writing to the society. 


30. A member shall be entitled to exercise such rights as provided in this No rights of 


Regulation and rules made thereunder and bye-laws: 009 0010 
be exercised till 
due payments 


are made. 


Duties of 
member. 


Voting powers 
of member. 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Provided that, no member shall exercise the rights, until he has made such 
payment to the society in respect of membership, or acquired such interest in the 
society, as may be prescribed and specified under the bye-laws of the society, from 
time to time: 


Provided further that, in case of increase in minimum contribution of member 
in share capital to exercise right of membership, the society shall give due notice of 
demand to the members and reasonable period to comply with. 


31. It shall be the duty of every member of a society,— 


(a) to attend at least, one general body meeting within a consecutive period 
of five years: 


Provided that, nothing in this clause shall apply to the member whose 
absence has been condoned by the general body of the society; 


(b) to utilise minimum level of services at least once in a period of five 
consecutive years as specified in the bye-laws of the society: 


Provided that a member who does not attend at least one meeting of the general 
body and does not utilise minimum level of services at least once in a period of five 
consecutive years, as specified in the bye-laws of such society shall be classified as a 
non-active member: 


Provided further that when a society classifies a member as a non-active 
member, the society shall communicate such classification in such manner as may be 
prescribed to the concerned member within a period of thirty days from the date of 
close of the financial year: 


Provided also that a non-active member who does not attend at least one meeting 
of the general body and does not utilise minimum level of services as specified in the 
bye-laws, in next five years from the date of classification as a non-active member, 
shall have no right to vote: 


Provided also that a member classified as a non-active member shall, on 
fulfilment of the eligibility criteria as provided in this section be entitled to be 
re-classified as an active member: 


Provided also that, if a question of a member being active or non-active arises, 
an appeal shall lie to the Registrar within a period of sixty days from the date of 
communication of such classification and his decision shall be final. 


32. (1) No member of any society shall have more than one vote and the right 
to vote shall be exercised personally, and not by proxy: 


Provided that in the case of an equality of votes, the Chairperson shall have a 
casting vote. 


(2) Where a share of a society is held jointly by more than one person, each such 
person shall have, in the absence of preceding person or persons, a right to vote: 


Provided that such person shall be present and not be a minor: 


Provided further that where the manner of voting is by ballot, all the joint holders 
of the share may appoint one of them to vote on their behalf in the affairs of the society. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


(3) A society which has invested any part of its funds in the shares of another 
society, may appoint one of its members to vote on its behalf in the affairs of that other 
society, and accordingly such member shall have the right to vote on behalf of the first 
society: 


Provided that the first society shall not appoint any of its members who is also 
its paid employee. 


(4) A company or any other body corporate constituted under any law for the 
time being in force in the Union territory which has invested any part of its funds in 
the shares of a society may appoint any one of its directors or officers to vote on its 
behalf in the affairs of such society and accordingly such director or officer shall have 
the right to vote on behalf of the company or the body corporate, as the case may be. 


(5) Where a firm has invested any part of its funds in the shares of a society, any 
of its partners appointed by the firm shall be entitled to vote in the affairs of the society 
on behalf of the firm. 


(6) A local authority or public trust which has invested any part of its funds in 
the shares of a society may appoint any of its members or trustees to vote on its behalf 
in the affairs of that society and accordingly, such person shall have the right to vote 
on behalf of the local authority or the public trust, as the case may be. 


(7) No nominal or sympathiser member shall have the right to vote and shall not 
be eligible to be a member of a Committee or being appointed as a representative of 
the society on any other society. 


(8) The person who has committed a default and remains as such defaulter for a 
period of one year from the due date of repayment of such loan or interest or instalment 
shall not be entitled to vote as a member of a society till all repayments are made. 


(9) No person shall exercise the right to vote at an election of a member of a 
Committee in a financial year, unless he is a member of the society for the whole of 
the financial year preceding the financial year in which the election is being held: 


Provided that no member society of a federal society shall exercise the right to 
vote at an election of a member of a Committee unless such society has its last 
accounts audited in class A, B or C. 


(10) Nothing in sub-section (9) shall apply to the first election of a Committee 
to be held immediately after the registration of a society. 


(11) The voting rights of individual members of a federal society shall be such 
as may be regulated by the rules and bye-laws of the society. 


33. No member of any society, other than the Administrator of a society shall 
hold more than such portion, not exceeding one-fifth of the total share capital of the 
society: 

Provided that the Administrator may, by notification, specify in respect of any 


class of societies, a higher maximum than one-fifth of the share capital. 


34. (/) Subject to the provisions of section 33 and sub-section (2), a transfer of, 
or charge on, the share or interest of a member in the capital of a society shall be 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 


(2) A member shall not transfer any share held by him, or his interest in the 
capital or property of any society, or any part thereof, unless,— 


Restrictions on 
holding of 
shares. 


Restrictions on 
transfer of 
shares or 
interest. 


Transfer of 
interest on death 
of member. 


16 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(a) he has held such share or interest for not less than one year; 


(b) the transfer or charge is made to the society, or to a member of 
the society, or to a person whose application for membership has been 
accepted by the society; and 


(c) the Committee has approved such transfer. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (/) and (2), where 
a member is allowed to resign, or is expelled, or ceases to be a member on 
account of his being disqualified by this Regulation or by the rules made 
thereunder or by the bye-laws of the society, the society may acquire the share 
or interest of such member in the share capital by paying for it at the value 
determined in the manner prescribed: 


Provided that the total payment of share capital of a society in any 
financial year for such purposes does not exceed ten per cent. of the paid-up 
share capital of the society on the last day of the immediately preceding 
financial year. 


Explanation—F¥or the purposes of this sub-section, the expression 
“financial year” means the year ending on the 31st day of March or, in the case 
of any society or class of societies the accounts of which are with the previous 
sanction of the Registrar balanced on any other day, the year ending on such day. 


(4) Where the Administrator is a member of a society, the restrictions 
contained in this section shall not apply and that Administrator may, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation, withdraw from the 
society its share capital at any time, after giving to the society notice thereof of 
not less than three months. 


35. (/) On the death of a member of a society, the society shall subject to 
the provisions of sub-section (2), transfer his share or interest in the society to a 
person or persons nominated by such member in accordance with the rules or, in 
the absence of such nomination to such person as may appear to the Committee 
to be the heir or legal representative of such member. 


(2) No such transfer shall be made unless such nominee, heir or legal 
representative, as the case may be, is duly admitted as a member of the society. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), any such 
nominee, heir or legal representative, as the case may be, may require the 
society to pay to him the amount equivalent to the value of the share or interest 
of the deceased member, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) A society may pay all other monies due to the deceased member from 
the society to such nominee, heir or legal representative, as the case may be. 


(5) All transfers and payments duly made by a society in accordance with 
the provisions of this section, shall be valid and effectual against any demand 
made upon the society by any other person. 


(6) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this section or section 25 shall 
be construed to prevent a minor or a person of unsound mind from acquiring by 
inheritance or otherwise, any share or interest of a deceased member of a 
society, but his liability in consequence of such acquisition shall be limited to 
his interest in the shares of the society and the unpaid dividends as also the loan, 
stock, bonds, if any, and the interest earned on them which is unpaid and he 
shall not have the right of voting. 


31 of 2016. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


(7) A person under any such disability referred to in sub-section (6) shall, 
on his disability ceasing, furnish to the society a declaration of his willingness to 
become a member and on receipt of such declaration, the society, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this section may, and if it is a 
co-operative housing society, admit him as a member, if he is not otherwise 
disqualified and a person so admitted shall become entitled to all the rights and 
privileges of a member subject to liabilities like any other member of the 
society. 


36. The share or interest of a member in the capital of a society, or in the 
loan stock issued by a housing society, or in the funds raised by a society from 
its members by way of savings deposits shall not be liable to attachment or sale 
under any decree or order of a court for or in respect of any debt or liability 
incurred by the member and accordingly, neither a Receiver under the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, nor any such person or authority under 
any corresponding law for the time being in force in the Union territory, shall be 
entitled to or have any claim on, such share or interest. 


37. (1) Every member of a society shall be entitled to inspect, free of cost, 
at the society's office during office hours, or any time fixed for the purpose by 
the society, the Regulation, the rules, and the bye-laws, the last audited annual 
balance sheet, annual audit report, the profit and loss account, a list of the 
members of the Committee, a register of members, the minutes of general 
meetings, and those portions of the books and records in which his transactions 
with the society have been recorded. 


(2) A society shall furnish to a member, on request in writing and on 
payment of such fees as may be prescribed therefore, a copy of any of the 
documents mentioned in sub-section (/). 


(3) A society shall appoint any officer or officers as it deems fit as 
Co-operative Information Officer, for the purpose of discharging the functions 
as provided under sub-sections (/) and (2). 


(4) The Co-operative Information Officer shall, within a period of thirty 
days from the date of receipt of application, either provide the information or 
reject the application specifying the reason therefor. 


(5) Any member of the society whose application has been rejected may 
prefer an appeal to the Co-operative Ombudsman within a period of one month 
from the date of such rejection and his decision shall be final. 


38. (1) Where a person has ceased to be a member of a society under 
section 29,— 


(a) his liability in respect of any debt due by him to the society and 
in respect of any outstanding demand owing to the society by him shall 
continue as if he had not ceased to be a member; and 


(0) his liability for the debts of the society as they stood immediately 
before the date of such cessation shall, save as otherwise provided in 
sub-section (2), continue for a period of three years from such date, as if he 
had not ceased to be a member: 


Provided that the liability shall be attached to the estate of such person, if 
such cessation was due to his death or such person dies after his ceasing to be a 
member. 


Share or interest 
not liable to 
attachment. 


Rights of 
members to see 
books, etc. 


Liability of 
person who has 
ceased to be 
member. 


Insolvency of 
members. 


Expulsion of 
members. 


Incorporation of 
society. 


Address of 
society. 


Register of 
members. 


18 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(2) Where a society is ordered to be wound up under any provisions of this 
Regulation, then the liability of a person under clause (0) of sub-section (/), who 
has ceased to be a member thereof within three years immediately preceding the 
date of order of winding up, shall continue, until the entire liquidation 
proceedings are completed. 


39. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2016, or any corresponding law for the time being in force in the Union 
territory, the dues of a society from a member, in insolvency proceedings against 
him, shall rank in order of priority next to his dues to the Administration or to a 
local authority. 


40. (1) A society may, by resolution passed by three-fourths majority of all 
the members present and voting at a general meeting of members held for the 
purpose, expel a member for acts which are detrimental to the society: 


Provided that no resolution shall be,— 


(7) valid, unless the member concerned is given an opportunity of 
representing his case to the general body; 


(ii) effective, unless it is submitted to the Registrar for his approval 
and approved by him: 


Provided further that the approval or disapproval of the Registrar shall be 
communicated to the society within a period of three months from the date of 
such submission, and in absence of such communication, the resolution shall be 
effective. 


(2) No member of a society who has been expelled under sub-section (/) 
shall be eligible for re-admission as a member of that society, or for admission as a 
member of any other society, for a period of two years from the date of such 
expulsion: 


Provided that the Registrar may, in special circumstances, sanction the 
re-admission or admission, within the said period, of any such member as a 
member of the said society or of any other society, as the case may be. 


CHAPTER IV 
INCORPORATION, DUTIES AND PRIVILEGES OF SOCIETIES 


41. A society on its registration shall be a body corporate by the name 
under which it is registered, with perpetual succession and a common seal, and 
with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both moveable and 
immoveable, to enter into contracts, to institute and defend suits and other legal 
proceedings, and to do all such things as are necessary for the purpose for which 
it is incorporated. 


42. Every society shall have an address, registered in accordance with the 
rules, to which all notices and communications may be sent and the society shall 
send notice in writing to the Registrar of any change in the said address, within a 
period of thirty days thereof. 


43. (1) Every society shall keep a register of members, and enter therein 
the following particulars, namely: — 


(a) the name, address and occupation of each member; 


(8) in the case of a society having share capital, the share held by each 
member; 


31 of 2016. 


16 of 1908. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


(c) the date on which each person was admitted as a member; 
(d) the date on which any person ceased to be a member; and 
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed: 


Provided that where a society has by or under this Regulation, permitted a 
member to transfer his share or interest on death to any person, the register shall 
also show against the member concerned the name of the person entitled to the 
share or interest of the member, and the date on which the nomination was recorded. 


(2) The register shall be prima facie evidence of the date on which any person 
was admitted to membership, and of the date on which he ceased to be a member. 


44. Every society shall keep, at the registered address of the society, a 
copy of this Regulation, the rules and bye-laws, and a list of members open to 
inspection to the public, free of cost, during office hours or any hours fixed by 
the society therefor. 


45. (1) A copy of any entry in any book, register or list, regularly kept in 
the course of business and in the possession of a society shall, if duly certified in 
such manner as may be prescribed, be admissible in evidence of the existence of 
the entry, the matters and transactions therein recorded in every case where, and 
to the same extent to which, the original entry would, if produced, have been 
admissible to prove such matter. 


(2) In the case of such societies as the Administrator may by general or 
special order in writing direct, no officer of a society shall in any legal 
proceedings to which the society is not a party, be compelled to produce any of 
the society’s books, the contents of which may be proved under sub-section (/) 
or to appear as a witness to prove the matters, transactions and accounts therein 
recorded, except by order of the court or a Judge made for special cause. 


46. Nothing contained in clauses (0) and (c) of sub-section (/) of section 17 of 
the Registration Act, 1908 shall, apply— 


(a) to any instrument relating to shares in a society not being a 
housing society notwithstanding that the assets of the society consist in 
whole or in part of immovable property; or 


(0) to any debenture issued by any society and not creating, 
declaring, assigning, limiting or extinguishing any right, title or interest to 
or in immovable property, except in so far as it entitles the holder to the 
security afforded by a registered instrument whereby the society has 
mortgaged, conveyed or otherwise transferred the whole or part of its 
immovable property, or any interest therein to trustees for the benefit of 
the holders of such debentures; or 


(c) to any endorsement upon, or transfer of, any debenture issued by 
any society. 


47. The Administrator may, by notification and for the reasons specified 
therein, exempt any society or class of societies from— 


(a) the stamp duty with which, under any law relating to stamp duty for 
the time being in force, instruments executed by or on behalf of a society or by 
an officer or member thereof, and relating to the business of the society, or any 
class of such instruments, or awards of the Registrar or his nominee or Board 
of nominees under this Regulation, are respectively chargeable; 


Copy of 
Regulation, etc., 
to be open to 
inspection. 


Admissibility of 
copy of entry as 
evidence. 


Exemption from 
compulsory 
registration of 
instruments 
relating to 
shares and 
debentures of 
society. 


Power to 
exempt from 
taxation. 


Restrictions on 
borrowing. 


Restrictions on 
giving loans. 


Restriction on 
other 
transactions with 
non-members. 


20 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(b) any fee payable by or on behalf of a society under the law 
relating to the registration of documents and to court-fees, for the time 
being in force; and 


(c) any other tax or fee or duty (or any portion thereof) payable by or 
on behalf of a society under any law for the time being in force in the 
Union territory, which the Administrator is competent to levy: 


Provided that no exemption shall be given in respect of any duty or tax for 
which the Administrator is not competent to levy. 


48. (1) A society shall receive deposits and loans from members and other 
persons, only to such extent, and under such conditions, as may be prescribed, or 
specified by the bye-laws of the society: 


Provided that the total amount of deposits and loans received during any 
financial year shall not exceed such multiples as may be determined by the 
Administrator of the sum of subscribed share capital and accumulated reserves 
minus accumulated losses. 


(2) If in the opinion of the Registrar, it is necessary so to do for ensuring 
safety of the funds obtained under sub-section (/), for proper utilisation of such 
funds in furtherance of the objects of the society or societies concerned and for 
keeping them within the borrowing limits as laid down in the rules and 
bye-laws, the Registrar may, by general or special order in writing, impose 
additional conditions on any society or class of societies, subject to which and 
the extent up to which such society or such class of societies may 
receive deposits, issue debentures or raise loans from any creditor other than a 
Central Bank. 


49. (1) No society shall give a loan to any person other than a member, or 
on the security of its own shares, or on the security of any person who is not a 
member: 


Provided that subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, a society 
may give loans to another society. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), a society may 
give a loan to a depositor on the security of his deposit. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation, no person or 
group of persons other than a member or members shall be eligible to borrow 
from or make deposit in a Primary Agricultural Credit Co-operative Society. 


(4) If in the opinion of the Administrator, it is necessary or expedient so to 
do in the interest of the society or societies concerned, the Administrator may, 
by general or special order in writing, prohibit, restrict or regulate the lending of 
money by any society or class of societies on the security of any property: 


Provided that the Registrar may, for ensuring safety of the funds of the 
society or societies concemed, for proper utilisation of such funds in furtherance 
of their objects and for keeping them within the loan making limits laid down in 
the rules and bye-laws, by general or special order in writing, regulate further 
the extent, conditions and manner of making loans by any society or class of 
societies to its members or other societies. 


50. Save as provided in this Regulation, the transactions of a society with 
persons other than members, shall be subject to such restrictions, if any, as may 
be prescribed. 


5 of 1908. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


51. In respect of any debt due to a society by any member thereof, the 
society shall have a charge upon the share or interest of such member in the 
capital of the society, upon the deposits of such member with the society and 
upon any dividend, rebate or profits payable to such member and the society 
may set off any sum credited or payable to such member in or towards the 
payment of any such debt: 


Provided that no co-operative bank shall have a charge upon any sum 
invested with it by a society out of the provident fund referred to in section 64, 
and no co-operative bank shall be entitled to set off any such sum towards any 
debts due from the society. 


52. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force in the Union territory, but subject to any prior claim of the 
Administration in respect of land revenue or any money recoverable as land 
revenue and subject to the provisions of sections 60 and 61 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908,— 


(a) any debt or outstanding demand, owing to a society by any 
member or a person who has ceased to be a member shall be a first charge 
upon— 


(7) the crops or other agricultural produce raised in whole or in 
part whether with or without a loan taken from the society by him; 


(ii) cattle, fodder for cattle, agricultural or industrial 
implements or machinery, or raw materials for manufacture, or 
workshop, godown or place of business, supplied to, or purchased by 
him in whole or in part, from any loan whether in money or goods 
made to him by the society; and 


(iii) any movable property which has been hypothecated, 
pledged or otherwise mortgaged by him with the society, and 
remaining in his custody; 


(b) any outstanding demands or dues payable to a society by any 
member or a person who has ceased to be a member, in respect of rent, 
shares, loans or purchase, money or any other rights or amounts payable to 
such society, shall be a first charge upon his interest in the immovable 
property of the society: 


Provided that the prior claim of the Administration in respect of dues other 
than land revenue, shall be restricted for the purpose of this sub-section to the 
assets created by a member out of the funds in respect of which the 
Administration has a claim. 


(2) No property or interest in property, which is subject to a charge under 
sub-section (/) shall be transferred in any manner without the previous 
permission of the society and such transfer shall be subject to such conditions, if 
any, as the society may impose. 


(3) Any transfer made in contravention of sub-section (2) shall be void. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (2) and (3), a 
society, while disposal of the produce of its members, may provide in its 
bye-laws, or may otherwise contract with its members,— 


(a) that every such member shall dispose of his produce through the 
society; and 


Charge and set 
off in respect of 
share or interest 
of member. 


Prior claim of 
society. 


Charge on 
immovable 
property of 
members 
borrowing from 


certain societies. 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(6) that any member, who is found guilty of a breach of the bye-laws 
or of any such contract, shall reimburse the society for any resultant loss, 
determined in such manner as may be provided in the bye-laws. 


53. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation or in any 


other law for the time being in force in the Union territory,— 


(a) any person who makes an application to a society of which he is 
a member, for a loan shall, if he owns any land or has interest in any land 
as a tenant, make a declaration in the prescribed form, which shall state 
that the applicant thereby creates a charge on such land or interest 
specified in the declaration for the payment of the amount of the loan 
which the society may make to the member in pursuance of the 
application, and for all future advances, if any, required by him which the 
society may make to him as such member, subject to such maximum as 
may be determined by the society, together with interest on such amount 
of the loan and advances; 


(6) any person who has taken a loan from a society of which he is a 
member, before the date of the coming into force of this Regulation, and 
who owns any land or has interest in land as a tenant, and who has not 
already made such a declaration before the aforesaid date shall, as soon as 
possible thereafter, make a declaration in the form and to the effect 
referred to in clause (a) and no such person shall, unless and until he has 
made such declaration, be entitled to exercise any right as a member of the 
society; 


(c) a declaration made under clause (a) or clause (b) may be varied at 
any time by a member, with the consent of the society in favour of which 
such charge is created; 


(d) no member shall alienate the whole or any part of the land or 
interest therein, specified in the declaration made under clause (a) or 
clause (5) until the whole amount borrowed by the member together with 
interest thereon, is repaid in full: 


Provided that it shall be lawful for a member to execute a mortgage 
bond in favour of the Administration in respect of such land or any part 
thereof, under the law for the time being in force in the Union territory, for 
the supply of water from a canal to such land: 


Provided further that if a part of the amount borrowed by a member 
is paid, the society may, on an application from the member, release from 
the charge created under the declaration made under clause (a) or 
clause (5) such part of the movable or immovable property specified in the 
declaration, as it may deem proper, with due regard to the adequacy of the 
security for the balance of the amount remaining due from or outstanding 
against the member; 


(e) any alienation made in contravention of the provisions of clause (d) 
shall be void; 


(f) subject to the prior claims of the Administration in respect of land 
revenue or any money recoverable as land revenue, and to the charge, if 
any created under an award made under the law for the time being in force 
in any part of the Union territory: 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in the Land Revenue 
Code or any other law for the time being in force in the Union territory, the 
Record of Rights maintained thereunder shall also include the particulars of 
every charge on land or interest created under a declaration under clause (a) or 
clause (5). 


(2) For the purposes of this section, the expression “society” means— 


(7) any society, the majority of which are agriculturists and the 
primary object of which is to obtain credit for its members; or 


(ii) any society, or any class of societies, specified in this behalf by 
the Administration by a general or special order. 


54. (1) A member of a society may execute an agreement in favour of the Deduction from 
society, providing that his employer shall be competent to deduct from the cand Es a 
salary or wages payable to him by the employer, such amount as may be incerta Gases. 
specified in the agreement, and to pay to the society the amount so deducted in 
satisfaction of any debt or other demand of the society against the member. 


(2) On the execution of the agreement referred to in sub-section (/), the 
employer shall, if by a requisition in writing so required by the society and so 
long as the society does not inform that the whole of such debt or demand has 
been paid, make the deduction in accordance with the agreement, 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the relevant law for the 
time being in force in the Union territory and pay the amount so deducted to the 
society, within a period of fourteen days from the date on which such deduction 
is made as if it were a part of the wages payable by him as required under the 
said Act on the day on which he makes payment and in making such deduction 
and payment, it shall not be open to the employer to question the validity or 
otherwise of such debt or demand. 


(3) If, after receipt of a requisition made under sub-section (2), the 
employer at any time fails to deduct the amount specified in the requisition from 
the salary or wages payable to the member concerned, or makes default in 
remitting the amount deducted to the society, such employer shall be personally 
liable for the payment thereof and the amount shall be recoverable on behalf of 
the society from him as an arrear of land revenue on a certificate being issued by 
the Registrar after holding such inquiry as he deems fit, and the amount so due 
shall rank in priority in respect of such liability of the employer as wages in arrears 
and a certificate so issued by the Registrar shall not be questioned in any court. 


(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to persons employed in 
any railway within the meaning of the Constitution and in mines and oil fields. 


CHAPTER V 


AID TO SOCIETIES 


55. (1) The Administration may subscribe directly to the share capital of a Direct 
society with limited liability. partnership of 
Administration 


(2) The share capital subscribed by the Administration under sub-section (/) in societies. 
shall not be returned to it by a society, except with the previous approval of the 
Administration. 


56. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in Other forms of 
force in the Union territory, but subject to such conditions as the Administration aid to societies. 
may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf, it may,— 


Fund not to be 
divided. 


Appropriation 
of profits. 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(a) give loans to a society; 


(b) guarantee the payment of the principal of debentures issued by a 
society, or of interest thereon, or both, or the repayment of the share 
capital of a society to its members, or the payment of dividends thereon at 
such rates as may be specified by the Administration; 


(c) guarantee the repayment of the principal of and the payment of 
interest on, means given by a co-operative bank to a society; 


(d) guarantee the repayment of the principal of and payment of 
interest on, loans and advances given by the Reserve Bank, National Bank 
for Agriculture and Rural Development or the Industrial Finance 
Corporation of India, or any other authority constituted under any other 
law for the time being in force in the Union territory; or 


(e) provide financial assistance, in any other form including 
subsidies, to a society. 


CHAPTER VI 
PROPERTY AND FUNDS OF SOCIETIES 


57. (1) No part of the funds or assets of a society, other than the dividend 
equalisation fund, if any, and the net profits thereof, shall be paid by way of 
rebate or dividend or otherwise distributed, to its members: 


Provided that in the case of a member, who is also a salaried servant of the 
society, payment on such scale as may be laid down by the bye-laws may be 
made to him for work done as such servant. 


(2) No honorarium shall be paid out of the funds and assets of a society 
other than the net profits and such honorarium shall not exceed the prescribed 
limit. 

58. (J) A society earning profit, shall calculate its annual net profits by 
deducting from the gross profits for the year, all accrued interest which is 
overdue for more than three months, establishment charges, contributions, if 
any, towards the provident fund and gratuity fund of its employees, interest 
payable on loan and deposits, audit fees, working expenses including repairs, 
rents, taxes and depreciation, and after providing for or writing off bad debts and 
losses not adjusted against any fund created out of profits. 


(2) A society may, however, add to the net profits for the year, interest 
accrued in the preceding years, but actually recovered during the year and the 
net profits thus arrived at together with the amount of profits brought forward 
from the previous year shall be available for appropriation. 


(3) A society may appropriate its profits to its reserve fund or any other 
fund created by it to payment of dividends to members on their shares, to 
contribution to the educational fund as the Administrator may, by notification, 
specify to the payment of rebate on the basis of support received from members 
and persons who are not members to its business and subject to the prescribed 
conditions to payment of honoraria, and to any other purpose which may be 
specified in the rules or bye-laws: 


Provided that no part of the profits shall be appropriated, except with the 
approval of the same in an annual general meeting and in conformity with the 
provisions of this Regulation, rules and bye-laws made thereunder. 


6 of 1890. 


2 of 1882. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


59. (/) Every society which does, or may, derive a profit from its transactions, 
shall maintain a reserve fund. 


(2) At least one-fourth of the net profits of the society each year, shall be 
carried to the reserve fund and such reserve fund may be used in the business of 
the society or may, subject to the provisions of section 63, be invested, as the 
Administrator may by general or special order in writing direct, or may, with the 
previous sanction of the Administrator, be used in part for public purpose likely 
to promote the objects of this Regulation, or for such other purpose of the Union 
territory or of local interest: 


Provided that if the Registrar is satisfied that the financial condition of the 
society is such that it is unable to carry to its reserve fund an amount up to the 
aforesaid limit of one-fourth of its net profits, he may by order in writing, for 
such period as he may specify in the order, fix for the society a limit lower than 
the aforesaid limit but not lower than one-tenth of its net profits. 


(3) Where the reserve fund of a society exceeds its authorised share 
capital, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), the society 
may, with the prior approval of the Registrar carry to its reserve fund each year 
an amount which may be less than one-fourth but not less than one-tenth of its 
net profit. 


60. No society shall pay dividend to its members at a rate exceeding fifteen 
per cent. except with the prior approval of the Registrar. 


61. (1) Every society which declares, out of the current year’s profit, dividend 
to its members, shall contribute towards the education fund at such rate as may 
be prescribed. 


(2) No society, liable to contribute towards the education fund, shall pay 
dividend to its members, unless the said contribution is made to the Registrar 
within a period of sixty days from the date on which its accounts are adopted by 
the general body of members at its annual general meeting. 


(3) An officer who wilfully fails to comply with the provisions of this 
section, shall be personally liable for making good the amount to the Registrar. 


62. After providing for the reserve fund and the education fund, a society 
may set aside a sum not exceeding twenty per cent. of its net profits, and utilise 
from time to time, with the approval of the Registrar, whole or part of such sum 
in contributing to any purpose as may be prescribed, or to any charitable purpose 
within the meaning of section 2 of the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890, or to 
any other public purpose. 


63. A society may invest or deposit its fund,— 
(a) in a Central Bank or the State Co-operative Bank; 
(8) in the State Bank of India or in any nationalised bank; 
(c) in the Postal Savings Bank; 


(d) in any of the securities specified in section 20 of the Indian Trusts 
Act, 1882; 


(e) in shares, or security bonds, or debentures, issued by any other 
society with limited liability; 


(f) in any land or building; 


Reserve fund. 


Restrictions on 
dividend. 


Contribution to 
education fund. 


Contribution to 
public purpose. 


Investment of 
funds. 


Employees 
Provident Fund. 


Funds not to be 
utilised for 
certain 
proceedings 
filed or taken by 
or against 
officers in 
personal 
capacities. 


Final authority 
of society. 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(g) in Employee’s Provident Fund; or 
(h) in such other manner as may be determined by Administration, 


with the prior approval of the Administrator subject to such terms and conditions 
as may be prescribed in this behalf: 


Provided that in case of a co-operative society carrying on the business of 
banking, the investments therein shall be in accordance with the guidelines 
issued by the Reserve Bank in this regard from time to time. 


Explanation —F or the purposes of this section, the expression “nationalised 
bank” means a corresponding new bank constituted under sub-section (/) of 
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1970 and Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1980. 


64. (J) Any society may establish for its employees a provident fund, into 
which, shall be paid the contributions made by its employees and the society and 
such provident fund shall not be used in the business of the society, nor shall it 
form part of the assets of the society, but shall be invested under the provisions of 
section 63 and shall be administered in the prescribed manner. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), a provident fund 
established by a society to which the provisions of the Employees Provident Funds 
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, is applicable, shall be governed by that 
Act. 


65. (1) No expenditure from the funds of a society shall be incurred for the 
purpose of defraying the costs of any proceedings filed or taken by or against any 
officer of the society in his personal capacity under this Regulation. 


(2) If any question arises whether any expenditure can be so incurred or not, 
such question shall be referred to and decided by the Registrar, and his decision 
shall be final. 


(3) If any person incurs expenditure in violation of sub-section (/), the 
Registrar shall direct the person to repay the amount to the society within one 
month and where such person fails to repay the amount as directed, such amount 
shall, on a certificate issued by the Registrar, be recoverable as arrears of land 
revenue. 


(4) The person against whom action is taken by the Registrar under 
sub-section (3) shall be disqualified to continue to be the officer of any society or 
to be officer of any society at any next election including any next bye-election 
held immediately after the expiration of a period of one month during which such 
person has failed to pay the amount referred to in sub-section (3). 


CHAPTER VII 
MANAGEMENT OF SOCIETIES 
66. Subject to the provisions in this Regulation and the rules made thereunder, 


the final authority of every society shall vest in the general body of members in 
general meeting, summoned in such a manner as may be specified in the bye-laws: 


Provided that where the bye-laws of a society provide for the election of 
delegates of such members, the final authority may vest in the delegates of such 
members elected in the prescribed manner, and assembled in the general meeting. 


5 of 1970. 
40 of 1980. 


19 of 1952. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


67. (1) The management of every society shall vest in a Committee constituted हक 
under this Regulation, which shall exercise such powers and perform such duties oe aes 
as may be conferred or imposed on it by this Regulation, the rules and the disqualifications 
bye-laws: of members of 

Committee. 


Provided that in case of co-operative society carrying on the business of 
banking, the fit and proper criteria framed by the Reserve Bank shall be followed. 


(2) Save as otherwise provided, the Managing Committee of a society, 
which is not an apex society, shall consist of, such number of elected members not 
exceeding twenty-one. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “apex 
society” means a society,— 


(a) the area of operation of which extends to the whole of the Union 
territory; 


(b) the main object of which is to promote the principal objects of the 
societies affiliated to it as members and to provide for the facilities and 
services to them; and 


(c) which has been classified as an apex society by the Registrar. 


(3) There shall be reserved one seat for the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes and two seats for women in the 
Managing Committee of every society consisting of individuals as members and 
having members from such class or category of persons as may be prescribed: 


Provided that one seat may be reserved for the persons who are small 
farmers and marginal farmers. 


(4) Every member of a society who is entitled to vote shall be eligible for 
appointment as a member of a Committee thereof, if— 


(a) he is continuously a member of the society for a period not less 
than three years and continues to be such member; 


(b) he is not in default in respect of any loan taken by him from any 
co-operative society, co-operative bank or any other financial institution; 


(c) he has any interest directly or indirectly in any subsisting contract 
made with the society or in any property sold or purchased by the society or 
any other transaction of the society except in any investment made in or any 
loan taken from the society; 


(d) he is not otherwise disqualified for being appointed as such member; 
(e) he is not held responsible under section 87; 


(f) no order for recovery of costs is made against him by a magistrate 
under section 97; 


(g) no order is made against him under sections 65 and 99; 


(A) he is not found guilty of any of the offences mentioned under 
section 156 or any offence under section 314 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
45 of 2023. Sanhita, 2023, in respect of the property of any society. 


28 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(5) A member of the Committee who incurs any of the disqualifications 
specified above shall vacate the office, and if he does not vacate such office, he 
shall be removed by the Registrar as such member: 


Provided that the Registrar shall before issuing the order of removal, give 
the person concerned an opportunity of being heard. 


(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (4) and (5),— 


(a) in case of societies dispensing with credit, no person who carries on 
the business of money lending, shall be eligible for appointment as a member 
of the Managing Committee of the society; 


(b) a member of a society, who carries on business of the kind carried 
on by the societies of which he is the member, shall not be eligible to be the 
member of any Committee of that society without the sanction of the 
Registrar. 


(7) Where any person becomes a member of a Committee of a society in 
contravention of sub-section (6), he shall be removed from office as a member of 
such Committee by the Registrar: 


Provided that the Registrar shall, before issuing the order of removal, give 
the person concerned an opportunity of being heard. 


(S) The term of the elected members of the Managing Committee and its 
office bearers shall be five years from the date of election for all co-operative 
societies including co-operative bank and federal societies: 


Provided that the Managing Committee shall fill up a casual vacancy in the 
Committee by nomination out of the same class or categories of members in 
respect of which the casual vacancy has arisen within sixty days from the date of 
such vacancy, if the remaining term of office of the Managing Committee is less 
than half of its original term. 


(9) The elected members of the Managing Committee and its office bearers 
shall cease to hold the office on the date of expiry of their term. 


(10) The office bearers of the Managing Committee of the societies shall be 
eligible for re-election. 


(11) The society shall co-opt persons having experience in the field of 
banking, management, finance or specialisation in any other field relating to the 
objects and activities undertaken by the society as the members of the Managing 
Committee: 


Provided that the number of such co-opted members shall not exceed two in 
addition to the twenty-one members as specified in sub-section (2). 


(12) The co-opted members as aforesaid shall not have the right to vote in 
any election of the society in their capacity as such members or to be eligible to be 
elected as office bearers of the Managing Committee. 


(73) In case, where there are functional directors of a society, they shall also 
be members of the Managing Committee and such members shall be excluded for 
the purpose of counting the total number of members of such Managing 
Committee. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression 
“functional director’ means and includes a Managing Director or a Chief 
Executive Officer, by whatever designation called, or any ex officio member or 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


any of the Head of the Department of the concerned society, nominated by the 
Committee. 


(14) No Committee member of a society shall, as a Committee member, be 
present in the discussion of, or vote on, any contract or arrangement entered into, 
or to be entered into, by or on behalf of such society, if he or his relative is directly 
or indirectly concerned or interested in such contract or arrangement and no 
relative of any of the sitting Managing Committee members of the society shall be 
recruited as employee including the Chief Executive Officer of that society. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this sub-section, the term “relative” with 
reference to an individual, includes— 


(a) spouse; 

(b) father (including step father); 
(c) mother (including step mother); 
(d) son (including step son); 

(e) son’s wife; 

(f) daughter (including step daughter); 
(g) daughter’s husband; 

(A) father’s father; 

(i) father’s mother; 

(7) mother’s father; 

(४0 mother’s mother; 

(2) son’s son; 

(m) son’s son’s wife; 

(n) son’s daughter; 

(०) son’s daughter’s husband; 

(p) daughter’s son; 

(4) daughter’s son’s wife; 

(r) daughter’s daughter; 

(s) daughter’s daughter’s husband; 
(t) brother (including step brother); 
(४) brother’s wife; 

(v) sister (including step sister); 
(w) sister’s husband; and 

(x) Hindu undivided family. 


(15) Any member of the Managing Committee who violates the provision of 
sub-section (/4), shall be disqualified for being a member of the Managing 
Committee and deemed to have vacated his office from the date of such meeting 
of the Managing Committee as is referred to in the said sub-section and such 
proceedings shall be deemed to be void. 


Powers and 
functions of 
Committee. 


Meetings of 
Committee. 


30 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


68. (/) The Committee may exercise all such powers as may be necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of carrying out its functions under this Regulation. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such powers 
shall include the following, namely:— 


(a) to admit members; 


(b) to interpret the organisational objectives and set up specific goals 
to be achieved towards these objectives; 


(c) to make periodic appraisal of operations; 


(d) to appoint and remove Chief Executive Officer and such other 
employees of the society as are not required to be appointed by the Chief 
Executive Officer: 


Provided that the Committee shall frame fair and transparent policy for 
recruitment of Chief Executive Officer or any other employee; 


(e) to make provisions for regulating the appointment of employees of 
the society and the scales of pay, allowances and other conditions of service 
of, including disciplinary action against such employees; 


(f) to place the annual report, annual financial statements, annual plan 
and budget for the approval of the general body; 


(g) to consider audit and compliance report and place the same before 
the general body; 


(A) to acquire or dispose of immovable property; 

(7) to review membership in other co-operative society; 
(7) to approve annual and supplementary budget; 

(४20 to raise funds; 


(J) to sanction loans to the members and determine the security to be 
taken; 


(m) to take measures relating to the recovery of loans; and 


(7) to take such other measures or to do such other acts as may be 
prescribed or required under this Regulation, rules or the bye-laws or as may 
be delegated by the general body of the society. 


69. (1) The Chief Executive Officer shall convene the meetings of the 
Managing Committee at the instance of the Chairperson or President of the society: 


Provided that where such Chairperson or President fails to direct the Chief 
Executive Officer to convene the meeting of the Board within the quarter, such 
Chief Executive Officer shall convene the meeting on the basis of requisition of 
the Vice-Chairperson or Vice-President or any other Member of the Committee: 


Provided further that notwithstanding anything contained in the first proviso, 
the Chief Executive Officer may also convene the meeting on the basis of 
requisition from at least fifty per cent. of Members of the Committee. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31 


(2) The total number of meetings of the Committee in a year and the venue 
of meetings shall be such as may be specified in the bye-laws: 


Provided that the Committee shall meet at least once in every quarter. 


(3) The Chairperson or President, if for any reason, is unable to attend a 
meeting of the Committee, the Vice-Chairperson or Vice-President and in the 
absence of both, any other Member of the Committee chosen by the Members of 
the Committee present from amongst themselves at the meeting, shall preside over 
the meeting. 


(4) The quorum for a meeting of the Managing Committee of a society shall 
be one-half of its total number of Committee members. 


70. (1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer, by whatever designation Chief Executive 
called, of every society to be appointed by the Committee and he shall be a Officer. 
full-time employee of such society. 


(2) No society shall appoint or continue the employment of any person as 
the Chief Executive officer who— 


(a) is below the age of twenty-one years or has attained the age of 
seventy years: 


Provided that any person above the age of seventy years may be 
appointed by a special resolution passed by three-fourths majority of the 
Committee members, in which case the explanatory statement annexed to 
the notice for such motion shall indicate the justification for appointing such 
person; 


(8) is an undischarged insolvent or has any time been adjudged as an 
insolvent; 


(c) has at any time been convicted by a court of an offence and 
sentenced for a period of more than six months; or 


(d) does not meet the criteria for “fit and proper’, as determined by the 
Registrar in case of credit societies or in case of non-credit societies, does 
not meet the criteria as the Registrar may prescribe in terms of educational 
qualifications and relevant experience. 


(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall be a member of the Managing 
Committee and of such other Committees or Sub-Committees as may be 
constituted. 


(4) Where the Central Government or the Administration holds fifty-one 
per cent. or more equity share capital or of total shares of the society, the salary 
and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service including 
pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits of the Chief Executive Officer shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 


71. The Chief Executive Officer shall, under the general superintendence, Power and 


direction and control of the Committee, exercise and discharge the following functions of 
: Chief Executive 
powers and functions, namely:— Officer. 


Appointment of 
custodian in 
certain 
circumstances. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(a) day-to-day management of the business of the society; 


(b) operate the account of the society and be responsible for making 
arrangements for safe custody of cash; 


(c) sign the documents for and on behalf of the society; 


(d) make arrangements for the proper maintenance of various books 
and records of the society and for the correct preparation, timely submission 
of periodical statements and returns in accordance with the provisions of 
this Regulation, the rules and the bye-laws; 


(e) convene meetings of the general body of the society, the Managing 
Committee and the other Committees or sub-Committees and maintain 
proper records of such meetings; 


(f) make appointments to the posts in the society in accordance with 
the bye-laws; 


(g) assist the Committee in the formulation of policies, objectives and 
planning; 


(A) furnish to the Committee periodical information necessary for 
appraising the operations and functions of the society; 


(7) appoint the person to sue or be sued on behalf of the society; 


(7) present the draft annual report and the financial statement for the 
approval of the Committee within thirty days of closure of the financial 
year; and 


(k) perform such other functions, and exercise such other powers, as 
may be specified in the bye-laws of the society, or delegated by the 
Committee or general body. 


72. (1) Where in respect of any society— 


(7) anew Committee of Management is, for any reason whatsoever, 
not elected before the expiry of the term of office of members of a 
Committee of Management of such society; 


(ii) a new Committee has been elected and not functioning within a 
period of fifteen days (not being a Committee referred to in section 85); 


(iii) there is a stalemate in the constitution of the Committee, and if 
such Committee has ceased to function, a vacuum is created in the 
Management; 


(iv) any Committee is prevented from entering upon office; 


(v) a new Committee has failed to enter upon office on the date on 
which the term of office of the existing Committee expired; or 


(vi) where more than one group of persons in a society is claiming to 
be elected as the Committee members and proceedings in respect thereof 
have been filed, 


the Registrar shall, by an order in writing, appoint a person or a Committee of 
persons to be the custodian of the society to manage the affairs of the society for 
a period of one year or until a new Committee of Management is elected or, as the 
case may be, starts functioning: 


Provided that before making such order, the Registrar shall display a notice 
on the notice board at the head office of the society, inviting objections and 
suggestions with respect to the proposed order within a period specified in the 
notice and consider all objections and suggestions received by him within that 
period: 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Provided further that it shall not be necessary to display such notice in any 
case where Registrar is satisfied that immediate action is required to be taken or 
that it is not reasonably practical to display such notice. 


(2) The custodian shall arrange to hold election of such society within a 
period of one year and the Committee shall be constituted before the expiration 
of that period. 


(3) The custodian so appointed shall, subject to the control of the Registrar 
and to such instructions as he may from time to time give, have powers to exercise 
all or any of the functions of the Committee and take all such actions as may be 
required in the interest of the society. 


(4) All acts done or purported to be done by the custodian during the period 
when the affairs of the society are carried on by such custodian, shall be binding 
on the new Committee of Management. 


73. (1) A President, Vice-President, Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, 
Secretary, Treasurer or any other officer by whatever designation called, who 
holds office by virtue of his election to that office, shall cease to be the President, 
Vice-President, Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary, Treasurer or such 
officer, as the case may be, if a motion of no-confidence is carried at a meeting of 
the Committee by the majority of not less than two-third of the total number of 
members present at the meeting and voting, and such office shall thereupon be 
deemed to be vacant. 


(2) The requisition for such special meeting shall be signed by not less than 
one-third of the total number of members of the Committee who are entitled to 
vote, shall be delivered to the Registrar in respect of a Committee of a society 
which has the Registrar as its member and also in any other cases to the Registrar: 


Provided that no such requisition for a special meeting shall be made within 
a period of six months from the date on which any of the officers referred to in 
sub-section (/) has entered upon his office. 


(3) The Registrar upon whom the requisition has been made under 
sub-section (2), shall convene a special meeting of the Committee within a period 
of thirty days from the date of receipt of such requisition. 


(4) The meeting shall be presided over by such officer as authorised by the 
Registrar and the officer shall, when presiding over such meeting, have the same 
powers as the President or Chairperson when presiding over such meeting, but 
shall not have the right to vote: 


Provided that the voting shall be by secret ballot. 


(5) The meeting called under this section shall not for any reason, be 
adjourned. 


(6) If a motion of no-confidence is rejected, no fresh motion of no-confidence 
shall be brought within a period of six months from the date of rejection of such 
motion. 


74. (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of the 
electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to a society shall vest in the 
authority to be called the “Co-operative Election Authority”, as may be 
constituted by the Administrator in that behalf. 


(2) Every general election of the members of the Committee and election of 
the office-bearers of a society including any casual vacancy, to the extent 
applicable, shall be held in accordance with the procedure prescribed. 


33 


Motion of no- 
confidence. 


Co-operative 
Election 
Authority. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(3) The Co-operative Election Authority shall consist of a Co-operative 
Election Officer, appointed by the Administrator from officers of the Union 
territory who fulfills such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Administrator may appoint any employee of the Union territory, 
not below the rank of Superintendent as Secretary to the Co-operative Election 
Authority. 


(5) The Administrator may, after consultation with the Co-operative 
Election Officer, provide such number of officers and employees for his 
office, to assist him in performing his functions under this Regulation. 


(6) The Administrator may, when requested by the Co-operative Election 
Officer, make available to the Co-operative Election Authority such staff as 
may be necessary for discharge of the functions conferred on the Co-operative 
Election Authority by sub-section (/). 


(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 
force in the Union territory, the election of the Committee of each society shall 
be conducted by the Co-operative Election Authority one month before the 
expiry of the term of the existing Committee so as to ensure that the newly 
elected members of the Committee assume office immediately on the expiry 
of the office of the members of the outgoing Committee. 


(8) The Co-operative Election Authority shall hold the elections of the 
society or class of societies as per the procedure, guidelines and the manner, 
including using the latest technology and expertise, as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the Administrator may, considering the objects of the 
society, class of societies, area of operation and norms of business and for 
proper management and interest of members, may by general or special order 
in writing, classify the societies in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(9) The Co-operative Election Authority shall conduct elections to the 
Committee and also to office of President or Chairperson, Vice-President or 
Vice-Chairperson and such other office bearers as are required to be elected 
as per the bye-laws of the society, within fifteen days from the date of 
constitution of the Committee after a general election. 


(10) There shall be an Election Fund maintained by the Co-operative 
Election Authority and every society shall deposit in advance, the estimated 
amount of expenditure on its election, as may be prescribed and required by 
the Co-operative Election Authority towards the Election Fund. 


(1/1) The Co-operative Election Authority shall incur the necessary 
expenses, for the conduct of the elections of the societies, including the election 
of the office bearers, from the said Fund contributed by the concerned society. 


(12) The expenses of holding of any election, including the payment of 
travelling allowances, daily allowances and remuneration, if any, to the 
persons appointed to exercise the powers and perform the duties in respect of 
the election, shall be incurred from the said Fund and the expenditure shall be 
made in the manner prescribed and the Registrar shall, on requisition by the 
Co-operative Election Authority, recover expenses of holding election from 
any such society or class of societies in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that if any society fails to pay the election expenses, the 
Registrar may issue the recovery certificate for recovery of the amount due 
and such amount shall be recovered as arrears of land revenue. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(13) The Committee of every co-operative society shall,— 


(a) inform the Registrar of co-operative societies about the expiry of 
its term of office at least six months before the date of expiry of such term; 


(0) inform any casual vacancy occurred in the Committee or its office 
bearers within fifteen days of the occurrence of such vacancy; 


(c) furnish such books, records and information as the Co-operative 
Election Authority may require as per the calendar specified by it; and 


(d) provide all necessary help, assistance and co-operation for the 
smooth preparation of electoral rolls for the conduct of elections. 


75. Where due to scarcity, drought, flood, fire or any other natural calamity 
or rainy season or any election programme of the Council of the States or House 
of the People or a local authority, coinciding with the election programme of any 
society or class of societies, in the opinion of the Administrator, it is not in the 
public interest to hold elections to any society or class of societies, the 
Administrator may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation or the 
rules or bye-laws made thereunder, or any other law for the time being in force in 
the Union territory, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by general or special 
order, postpone the election of any society or class of societies, for a period not 
exceeding six months at a time, which period may further be extended so, 
however, that, the total period shall not exceed one year in the aggregate. 


76. If a person is elected to more than one seat on the Committee then, unless, 
within a period of seven days from the date of declaration of the result of the election 
he resigns all but one of the seats by writing under his hand addressed to the Election 
Officer, or as the case may be, the officer authorised by the Co-operative Election 
Authority in this regard, all the seats shall become vacant and on receipt of such 
resignation or on the seats becoming so vacant the Election Officer, or as the case 
may be, the officer authorised by the Co-operative Election Authority in this regard 
shall cause to hold the election for filling the vacancy. 


77. (1) It shall be the duty of the Committee to inform the Co-operative 
Election Authority, for holding of election, before expiry of its term. 


(2) Where there is a wilful failure on the part of the Committee to inform 
the Co-operative Election Authority as required under sub-section (/) for holding 
of election, and for any reason whatsoever and election of the members of the 
Committee could not be held before the expiry of its term, then the members 
thereof shall cease to hold their office and in such a situation, the Registrar shall 
take action as contemplated under section 72. 


(3) On taking action under sub-section (2), the custodian so appointed shall 
inform the Co-operative Election Authority for holding of the election with 
immediate effect and assist to make necessary arrangement for holding such 
election within the period specified. 


78. (1) On the election of a new Committee, the retiring Chairperson in 
whose place the new Chairperson is elected shall hand over charge of the office 
of the Committee and all papers and property, if any, of the society in possession 
of the Committee or any officer thereof, to the new Chairperson of the Committee. 


(2) If the retiring Chairperson fails or refuses to hand over charge or to hand 
over the papers and property of the society as aforesaid, the Registrar, or any 
person empowered by him in this behalf, may by order in writing direct him to 
forthwith hand over such charge and property and the Registrar may, on the 
retiring Chairperson’s failure to comply with such direction, make order for 
seizing the records and property and handing them over to the new Chairperson, 
in the manner provided in section 89. 


35 


Power of 
Administrator to 
postpone 
election. 


Election to more 
than one seat on 
Committee of 
society. 


Duty to arrange 
for election 
before expiry of 
term. 


Handing over 
records and 
property to new 
Chairperson on 
election. 


Restriction on 
rates of sitting 
fees and 

travelling and 


daily allowances 


of members of 
Committee. 


Removal of 
officer. 


Annual general 
meeting. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


79. Notwithstanding anything contained in the bye-laws of a society— 


(i) no society shall prescribe nor a member of a Committee thereof 
shall be entitled to sitting fees, and travelling and daily allowances while 
touring on public business, at rates exceeding such rates as may be 
prescribed; and 


(ii) a member of a Committee of a society shall, in relation to touring 
on public business be subject to such conditions and limitations as may be 
prescribed and different rates, conditions and limitations may be prescribed 
in relation to members of Committees of different societies or class of 
societies. 


Explanation—F or the purposes of this section, the expression “touring on 
public business” includes— 


(a) a journey for attending any meeting of the Committee; 


(0) a journey in connection with the performance of any other functions 
of the Committee; 


(c) a journey for attending any conference sponsored by— 
(i) the Central Government; 
(ii) the State Government; 
(iii) the Administration; 
(iv) any co-operative institution; or 


(v) such other institutions recognised by the Administration in 
this behalf. 


80. (/) If, in the opinion of the Registrar, any officer makes persistent default 
or is negligent in performance of the duties imposed on him by this Regulation or 
the rules or the bye-laws made thereunder or does anything which is prejudicial 
to the interests of the society or where he stands disqualified by or under this 
Regulation, the Registrar may, after giving the officer an opportunity of being 
heard, by order remove such officer and direct the society to elect or appoint a 
person or a qualified member in the vacancy caused by such removal and the 
officer so elected or appointed shall hold office so long only as the officer in 
whose place he is elected or appointed would have held if the vacancy had not 
occurred. 


(2) The Registrar may, by order, direct that the officer so removed shall be 
disqualified to hold or to contest election for any office in the society from which 
he is removed and in any other society for a period not exceeding six years from 
the date of the order and such officer shall stand disqualified accordingly. 


81. (/) Every society shall convene the general meeting of its members 
within a period of six months of closure of the financial year to transact the 
business as provided under this Regulation: 


Provided that if such meeting is not called by the society within such period, 
the Registrar or any person authorised by him in that behalf may in the prescribed 
manner, call such meeting which shall be deemed to be a general meeting duly 
called by the society. 


(2) At every annual general meeting of a society, the Committee shall lay 
before the society a balance sheet and profit and loss account for the year in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Explanation —F or the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified that, in 
the case of a society not carrying on business for profit, an income and expenditure 
account shall be placed before the society at the annual general meeting instead 
of profit and loss account; and all references to profit and loss account, and to 
“profit” or loss in this Regulation, shall be construed in relation to such society as 
references respectively to the “excess of income over expenditure” and “excess 
of expenditure over income”. 


(3) There shall be attached to every balance sheet laid before the society in 
general meeting, a report by its Committee, with respect to— 


(a) the state of the society’s affairs; 


(6) the amounts, if any, which it proposes to carry to any reserve either 
in such balance sheet, or any specific balance sheet; and 


(c) the amounts, if any, which it recommends for payment by way of 
dividend, bonus, or honoraria to honorary workers. 


(4) The Committee’s report shall also deal in any changes in the nature of 
the society’s business which have occurred during the year for which the accounts 
are drawn up and such report shall be signed by its Chairperson, or any other 
member authorised to sign on behalf of the Committee. 


(5) At every annual general meeting, the balance sheet, the profit and loss 
account, the auditor’s report and the Committee’s report, shall be placed for 
adoption, and such other business shall be transacted as may be laid down in the 
bye-laws and of which due notice has been given. 


(6) Where any officer of the society, whose duty was to call a general meeting 
within the period specified in sub-section (/) or to comply with sub-sections (2), (3) 
or (4) fails without reasonable cause to call such meeting or to comply with such 
sub-sections, then— 


(7) if such officer is a servant of the society, the Registrar may by an order 
in writing impose on him such penalty as is referred to in section 127; and 


(ii) if such officer is not a servant of the society, the Registrar may by 
an order in writing impose such liability as is referred to in section 127. 


82. (1) A special general meeting may be called at any time by the 
Committee, within one month— 


(7) ona requisition in writing of one-fifth of the members of the society 
or of members the number of which is specified in the bye-laws for the 
purpose, whichever is lower; 


(ii) on a requisition from the Registrar; or 


(iii) in the case of a society, which is a member of a federal society, 
on a requisition from the Committee of such federal society. 


(2) Where any officer or a member of the Committee, whose duty was to 
call such meeting, without reasonable excuse, fails to call such meeting, the 
Registrar may by order declare such officer or member disqualified for being a 
member of the Committee for such period not exceeding six years, as he may 
specify in such order and if the officer is an employee of the society, he may 
impose on him a penalty not exceeding ten thousand rupees: 


Provided that before making an order under this sub-section, the Registrar 
shall give, or cause to be given, an opportunity to the person concerned of showing 
cause against the action proposed to be taken against him. 


37 


Special general 
meeting. 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(3) Ifa special general meeting of a society is not called in accordance with 
the requisition referred to in sub-section (/), the Registrar or any person 
authorised by him in that behalf, shall have power to call such meeting, which 
shall be deemed to be a meeting duly called by the Committee. 


(4) The Registrar shall have power to order that the expenditure incurred in 
calling a meeting under sub-section (3) shall be paid out of the funds of the society 
or by such person or persons who, in the opinion of the Registrar, were responsible 
for refusal or failure to convene the meeting. 


Acts of 83. (/) No act or proceeding of a society or a Committee or any officer, done 

societies, etc., in good faith in pursuance of the business of the society shall be deemed to be 

aa bi dite invalid by reason of some defect subsequently discovered in the organisation of 

certain defects. the society or in the constitution of the Committee or in the appointment or 
election of an officer or on the ground that such officer was disqualified from his 
office. 


(2) No act done in good faith by any person appointed under this Regulation, 
the rules or bye-laws made thereunder shall be invalid merely by reason of the 
fact that his appointment has been cancelled by or in consequence of any order 
subsequently passed thereunder. 


(3) The Registrar shall decide whether any act was done in good faith in 
pursuance of the business of the society and his decision thereon shall be final. 


Power to 84. (1) Where the Administration has subscribed to the share capital of a 

appoint nominee society, directly or through another society, or has guaranteed the repayment of the 

Dette. principal and payment of interest on, debentures issued or loans raised by a society, 
the Administration shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the bye-laws of 
such society, have the right to nominate three representatives on the Committee of 
such society, in such manner as may be determined by the Administration from 
time to time. 


(2) The members so nominated shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
Administration, or for such period as may be specified in the order by which they 
are appointed, and any such member on assuming office shall have all rights, 
duties, responsibilities and liabilities, as if, he were a member of the Committee 
duly elected. 


(3) Where the Administration is of the opinion that having regard to the 
public interest involved in the operation of a society it is necessary or expedient 
so to do, it may nominate its representatives on the Committee of such society, as 
if, the Administration had subscribed to the share capital of the society and the 
provisions of sub-sections (/) and (2) shall, so far as may be apply to such 
nomination. 


Explanation—F or the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified that any 
nomination of the Registrar or his nominee on the Committee of a society under 
the bye-laws of such society shall not be construed as nomination of the 
representative on that Committee in exercise of the right of the Administration 
under this section. 


Extension of 85. (7) Where on the expiry of the term of office of the members of any 
pete Fi Committee of Management nominated by the Administrator, or the Registrar, the 
nominat sos . . aie) “soe 

60158 Ce Administrator or, as the case may be, the Registrar is of the opinion that it is 
appointment of necessary or expedient so to do, it or he may, by an order published in the Official 


custodian. Gazette,— 


(a) extend the term of office of the members of the said Committee of 
the Management; or 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(6) appoint a person or a Committee of persons to be the custodian of 
the society for such period not exceeding two years in the aggregate or until 
a new Committee of Management is elected, whichever is earlier. 


(2) The custodian so appointed shall, subject to the control of the Registrar 
and to such instructions as he may, from time to time, give, have powers to 
exercise all or any of the functions of the Committee, and take all such actions as 
may be required in the interests of the society. 


86. (/) If, in respect of a Committee of a society having the Registrar as its 
member, the Administrator and in respect of a Committee of a society which does 
not have the Registrar as its member, the Registrar, is of the opinion that— 


(i) the Committee persistently makes default; 


(ii) the Committee is negligent in the performance of its duties 
imposed on it by or under this Regulation or the rules made thereunder or 
the bye-laws; or 


(iii) the Committee has committed any act prejudicial to the interest of 
the society or its members, 


the Administrator or, as the case may be, the Registrar, after giving the Committee 
an opportunity of being heard, within fifteen days from the date of issue of notice, 
by an order in writing, supersede the Committee and appoint— 


(a) a Committee, consisting of one or more members of the society, not 
being the members of the Committee superseded under this sub-section; or 


(b) a special officer from amongst the officers of the Administration, 


to manage the affairs of the society for a period not exceeding one year as may be 
specified in the order, which period may, at the discretion of the Administrator or 
the Registrar, as the case may be, be extended from time to time, so, however, the 
term of the Committee or the special officer shall be, two years in aggregate. 


(2) Before passing an order under sub-section (/), the Administrator or the 
Registrar, as the case may be, shall consult the co-operative financing institution, 
if such society is indebted to it. 


(3) The Committee or special officer so appointed shall, subject to such 
instructions and control of the Administrator or the Registrar, as the case may be, 
have power to exercise all or any of the functions of the Committee or of any 
officer of the society, and take all such action as may be required in the interests 
of the society. 


(4) The Committee or special officer appointed under sub-section (/) shall 
arrange to hold the election of the Committee of the society at such time as 
directed by the Administrator or the Registrar, as the case may be, but not later 
than the period as specified in sub-section (/). 


(5) All acts done or purported to be done by the Committee or special officer 
during the period during which the affairs of the society are carried on by the 
Committee or special officer appointed under sub-section (/), shall be binding on 
the new Committee. 


(6) The remuneration of members of the Committee or special officer 
appointed under sub-section (/) shall be such as may be prescribed and the same 
shall be paid from the fund of the society. 


(7) The members of the Committee which has been superseded under sub-section (/), 
shall not be eligible to become a member of the Committee of any society for a period of six 
years from the date of supersession of such Committee. 


39 


Supersession of 
a Committee 
and appointment 
of a Committee 
or Special 
Officer. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Registrar's 87. (2) It shall be the duty of every society to keep the prescribed books of 
power to : है & 

605 accounts with respect to all sums of money received and expended by the society, 
performance of and the matters in respect of which the receipt and expenditure take place, all sales 
obligation. and purchases of goods by the society, and the assets and liabilities of the society, 


and to furnish such statements and returns and such records to the Registrar as the 
Registrar may by order direct from time to time and the officer or officers of the 
society shall be bound to comply with the order within the period specified 
therein. 


(2) Where any society is required to take any action under this Regulation, 
the rules or the bye-laws made thereunder, or in compliance with an order made 
under sub-section (/) and such action is not taken— 


(a) within the time provided in this Regulation, the rules or the bye-laws, 
or the order, as the case may be; or 


(b) where no time is so provided, within such time, having regard to 
the nature and extent of the action to be taken, as the Registrar may specify 
by notice in writing, 


the Registrar may himself, or through a person authorised by him, take such 
action, at the expense of the society and such expense shall be recoverable from 
the society, as if it were an arrear of land revenue. 


(3) Where the Registrar takes action under sub-section (2), he may call upon 
any officer of the society whom he considers to be responsible for not complying 
with the provisions of this Regulation, the rules or the bye-laws made thereunder, 
or the order made under sub-section (/), and, after giving him an opportunity of 
being heard, may require him to pay to the society the expenses paid or payable 
by it to the Administration as a result of his failure to take action, and to pay to 
from the assets of the society, such sum not exceeding one hundred rupees for 
each day until the directions of the Registrar are carried out. 


Poweror: 88. (7) If the Administrator, on receipt of a report from the Registrar or 
Administration : : : : se fi f : 

0 20७ otherwise, is satisfied that in the public interest or for the purposes of securing 
directions in proper implementation of co-operative production and other development 
public interest, programmes approved or undertaken by the Administration or to secure the 


a proper management of the business of the society generally, or for preventing the 


affairs of the society being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests of 
the members or of the depositors or the creditors thereof, it is necessary to issue 
directions to any class of societies generally or to any society or societies in 
particular, the Administration may issue directions to them from time to time, 
and all societies or the society concerned, as the case may be, shall be bound to 
comply with such directions. 


(2) The Administrator may modify or cancel any directions issued under 
sub-section (/), and in modifying or cancelling such directions, it may impose 
such conditions as it may deem fit. 


(3) Where the Administrator is satisfied that any person was responsible 
for complying with directions or modified directions issued to a society under 
sub-sections (/) and (2) and he has failed, without any good reason or 
justification, to comply with the directions, the Administrator may by order,— 


(a) if the person is a member of the Committee of the society, declare 
him to be disqualified to continue as such member for a period of six years 
from the date of the order; 


(5) if the person is an employee of the society, direct the Committee 
to remove such person from employment of the society forthwith, and if any 
member or members of the Committee, without any good reason or 
justification, fail to comply with this order, declare them disqualified as 
provided in clause (a): 


10 of 1949. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Provided that, before making any order under this sub-section, the Registrar 
shall give a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the person or persons 
concerned and consult the federal society to which the society is affiliated: 


Provided further that, such federal society shall communicate its opinion to 
the Administrator within a period of forty-five days from the date of receipt of 
communication, failing which it shall be presumed that such federal society has 
no objection to take action under this section and the Administrator shall be at 
liberty to proceed further and take action accordingly. 


(4) Any order made by the Administrator under this section shall be final. 


Explanation—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 
above provisions shall only be applicable where there is a Central Government’s 
or Administration’s shareholding or loan or financial assistance or any guarantee 
by the Central Government or Administration, to the society. 


89. (1) Where the Registrar is satisfied that the books and records of a 
society are likely to be suppressed, tampered with or destroyed or the funds and 
property ofa society are likely to be mis-appropriated or mis-applied or the officer 
or the person in possession unreasonably refuses to give possession of the books, 
records, funds and property, he may issue an order in writing directing the person 
duly authorised by him to seize and take possession of such books, records, funds 
and property of the society, and the officer of the society responsible for the 
custody of such books, records, funds and property or person in possession of the 
same shall give delivery thereof forthwith to the person so authorised. 


(2) If the officer of the society or person in possession does not give the 
delivery, then, without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against 
such officer, person or society under the provisions of this Regulation, the 
Registrar or the person authorised by him may apply to the Executive Magistrate 
within whose jurisdiction the society is functioning for seizing and taking the 
possession of such books, records, funds and property of the society. 


(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (2), the Magistrate may 
authorise any police officer not below the rank of a Sub-Inspector to enter and 
search any place where the books, records, funds and property are kept or likely 
to be kept and to seize them and hand over possession thereof to the Registrar or 
the person authorised by him, as the case may be. 


CHAPTER VIII 
AUDIT, INQUIRY, INSPECTION AND SUPERVISION 


90. (1) The Registrar shall audit, or cause to be audited by a person possessing 
prescribed qualifications and authorised by the Registrar by general or special 
order in writing in this behalf, the accounts of every society at least once in each 
year and the person so authorised shall be an auditor for the purposes of this 
Regulation: 


Provided that in case of a co-operative society carrying on the business of 
banking, the guidelines and audit as provided by the Reserve Bank from time to 
time shall be followed: 


Provided further that the co-operative banks shall obtain permission from 
the Reserve Bank for the appointment, re-appointment and termination of auditors 
as per the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 


(2) The auditor shall for the purpose of audit, at all times have access to all 
the books, accounts, documents, papers, securities, cash and other properties 
belonging to, or in the custody of the society and may summon any person in 
possession or responsible for the custody of such books, accounts, documents, 
papers, securities, cash or other properties to be produced at the headquarters of 
the society or any branch thereof. 


41 


Registrar’s 
power to seize 
records, etc. 


Audit. 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(3) If, it appears to the Registrar on an application or otherwise that it is 
necessary or expedient to get any account of the society re-audited, the Registrar 
may, by an order, provide for re-audit and the provisions of this Regulation 
applicable to the audit of accounts of the society shall apply to such re-audit. 


(4) The Registrar shall, by an order, provide for a special audit of any society 
on its own motion or on the basis of the recommendation of the Reserve Bank or, 
as the case may be, the National Bank and the provisions relating to audit of 
accounts of the society under this section shall apply to such special audit. 


(5) For auditing the accounts of a society under this section, every society 
shall be liable to pay to the auditor such amount of audit fee as may be prescribed 
for different categories or class of societies. 


(6) The Registrar may, in consultation with the National Bank specify 
prudential norms including capital to risk weighted assets ratio for Primary 
Agricultural Credit Co-operative Societies: 


Provided that in the case of a co-operative society carrying on the business 
of banking, the guidelines on prudential norms issued by Reserve Bank from time 
to time shall apply. 


(7) The Administrator may, by rules, provide for the form and manner in 
which and the period within which the accounts of the society or the class of 
societies shall be prepared and submitted for the purpose of online audit. 


(8) The auditor’s report shall contain,— 


(i) all particulars of the defects or the irregularities observed in audit 
and in case of financial irregularities and misappropriation or embezzlement 
of funds or fraud, the auditor or the auditing firm shall investigate and report 
the modus operandi, the entrustment and amount involved; 


(ii) the accounting irregularities and their implications on the financial 
statements shall be indicated in detail in the report with the corresponding 
effects on the profit and loss; 


(iii) irregularities or violations observed or reported, the responsibilities 
for such irregularities or violations. 


(9) If, it is brought to the notice of the Registrar that the audit report 
submitted by the auditor does not disclose the true and correct picture of the 
accounts, the Registrar or the authorised person may carry out or cause to be 
carried out a test audit of accounts of such society and such test audit shall include 
the examination of such items as may be prescribed, and specified by the Registrar 
in such order. 


(0) If, during the course of audit of any society, the auditor is satisfied that 
some books of accounts or other documents contain any incriminatory evidence 
against past or present officer or employee of the society, the auditor shall 
immediately report the matter to the Registrar and with previous permission of 
the Registrar, may impound the books or documents and give a receipt thereof to 
the society. 


(11) The auditor shall submit his report within a period of one week from 
its completion to the society and to the Registrar in such form as may be specified 
by the Registrar, on the accounts examined by him and on the balance sheet and 
profit and loss account as on the date and for the period up to which the accounts 
have been audited, and shall state whether in his opinion and to the best of his 
information and according to the explanation given to him by the society the said 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


accounts give all information required by or under this Regulation and present the 
true and correct picture of the financial transactions of the society: 


Provided that where the auditor has come to a conclusion in his audit report 
that any person, is guilty of any offence relating to the accounts or any other 
offences, he shall file a specific report to the Registrar within a period of fifteen 
days from the date of submission of his audit report and the auditor concerned 
shall, after obtaining written permission of the Registrar, file a First Information 
Report of the offence and the auditor, who fails to file First Information Report, 
shall be liable for disqualification and his name removed from the panel of 
auditors and shall also be liable to any other action as the Registrar may think fit: 


Provided further that when it is brought to the notice of the Registrar that, 
the auditor has failed to initiate action, the Registrar shall cause a First Information 
Report to be filed by a person authorised by him in that behalf: 


Provided also that on conclusion of his audit, if the auditor finds that there 
are apparent instances of financial irregularities resulting into losses to the society 
caused by any member of the Committee or officers of the society or by any other 
person, he shall prepare a special report and submit the same to the Registrar along 
with his audit report; and failure to file such Special Report, would amount to 
negligence on his part and he shall be disqualified for appointment as an auditor 
or any other action, as the Registrar may think fit. 


91. If, the result of the audit under section 90 and inspection under sections 93 
and 94 discloses any defects in the working of the society, the society shall within a 
period of two months from the date of the audit and inspection report, clarify to the 
Registrar as regards the defects or the irregularities so pointed out in audit and 
inspection report, and if clarification in respect of any defect or irregularity is not 
accepted, take steps to rectify the defects and remedy irregularities within such period 
as may be specified by the Registrar and shall report to the Registrar, failing which 
the Registrar shall have power to impose a penalty of such amount not exceeding ten 
thousand rupees and where society concerned is a member of a federal society, such 
order shall be made after consulting the federal society. 


92. (1) The Registrar may, of his own motion, or— 


(a) on the requisition of a society duly authorised by rules made in this 
behalf to make such requisition, in respect of any of its members, such member 
being itself a society; 


(b) on the application of a majority of the Committee of a society; or 
(c) on the application of one-third of the members of a society, 


shall hold such an inquiry himself, or by a person duly authorised by him in writing 
in this behalf, hold an inquiry into the constitution, working and financial conditions 
of a society. 


(2) Every officer, member and previous member of the society in respect of 
whom an inquiry is held, and any other person who is in possession of information, 
books and papers relating to the society, shall on being so required furnish such 
information as is in his possession, and produce all books and papers relating to the 
society which are in his custody or power, and otherwise give to the officer holding 
the inquiry all assistance in connection with the inquiry which he may reasonably 
give. 


(3) If, any person referred to in sub-section (2) refuses to produce to the 
Registrar or any person authorised by him under sub-section (/), any book or 


43 


Rectification of 
defects or 
irregularities in 
accounts and 
inspection 
report of 
society. 


Inquiry by 
Registrar. 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


paper which it is his duty under sub-section (2) to produce or to answer any 
question which is put to him by the Registrar or the person authorised by him in 
pursuance of sub-section (2), the Registrar or the person authorised by him may 
certify the refusal and the Registrar may impose on the defaulter a penalty of an 
amount not exceeding five thousand rupees and before imposing such penalty, the 
Registrar shall give, or cause to be given an opportunity to the defaulter, of 
showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him. 


(4) If, at any stage of the inquiry under this section, the Registrar is satisfied 
that in the interest of the members of the society, it is necessary to take over all 
books and papers relating to the society during the period of inquiry, he may make 
an order in writing to that effect and direct the society to hand over all books and 
papers relating to the society to such officer as may be specified in the order and 
the Registrar may also issue a direction to the society to refrain from doing such 
acts or engaging in such activities as may be specified in the direction. 


(5) The society shall be bound to comply with any direction issued to it 
under sub-section (4). 


(6) The books and papers taken over under sub-section (4) shall be returned 
to the society on the completion of the inquiry. 


(7) When an inquiry is held under this section, the Registrar shall 
communicate the result of the inquiry— 


(i) in case the Administration has subscribed directly to the share 
capital of the society, to such society or to any officer appointed by it in this 
behalf; 


(ii) to the federal co-operative society concerned; and 
(iii) to the society concerned. 


(8) The Registrar may, by an order and for the reasons mentioned therein, 
withdraw the responsibility of inquiry from the officer to whom it is entrusted, 
and to hold the inquiry himself or entrust it to any other person as he deems fit. 


he of 93. (1) On the application of a creditor of a society who,— 
OOKS O 
imaeDied (a) satisfies the Registrar that there is a debt which is due, and that he 
society. » हि हु ता 5 
has demanded payment thereof and has not received satisfaction within 
reasonable time; and 
(8) deposits with the Registrar such sum as the Registrar may require 
as security for the costs of any inspection of the books of the society, 
the Registrar may, if he thinks it necessary or expedient, inspect or direct a person 
authorised by him by order in writing in this behalf to inspect the books of the 
society. 

(2) The Registrar shall communicate the result of any such inspection to the 
applicant, and to the society whose books have been inspected. 

(3) The Registrar may, by an order and for the reasons mentioned therein, 
withdraw any inspection from the officer to whom it is entrusted, and to carry out 
the inspection himself or entrust it to any other person as he deems fit. 

Inspection of 94. (1) The Registrar or the person authorised by him in this behalf shall 

Marne have the right to inspect the books of any society and shall have free access to the 
egistrar or & 7६ . . 

670ए 25 bank books, accounts, documents, securities, cash and other properties belonging to, or 

or federal in the custody of the society. 


society. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) Every person who is or has at any time been an officer or employee of 
the society and every member and previous member of the society shall furnish 
such information in regard to such transactions and working of the society as 
the Registrar or the person authorised by him may require. 


(3) Where a society is indebted to any co-operative financing bank, such 
bank shall have the right to inspect the books of that society and the inspection 
may be made either by an officer of the bank authorised by the Committee of 
such bank or by a member of its paid staff certified by the Registrar as competent 
to undertake such inspection. 


(4) The officer or member so inspecting shall at all reasonable times, have 
free access to the books, accounts, documents, securities, cash and other 
properties belonging to or in the custody of the society and may also call for 
such information, statements and returns, as may be necessary, to ascertain the 
financial condition of the society and the safety of the sums lent to it by the 
bank. 


(5) Where a society is a member of a federal society recognised by the 
Administration under section 101, such federal society shall have the right to 
inspect the books of that society and the inspection may be made either by an 
officer of the federal society authorised by the Committee of such federal 
society or by a paid employee of such federal society certified by the Registrar 
as competent to undertake such inspection. 


(6) The officer or employee referred to in sub-section (5), shall at all 
reasonable times have free access to the books, accounts, documents, securities, 
cash and other properties belonging to, or in the custody of the society and may 
also call for such information, statements, and returns as may be necessary. 


95. (1) Where, in the course of an audit under section 90 or an inquiry 
under section 92 or an inspection under section 93 or section 94, it is brought to 
the notice of the Registrar that a paid officer or servant of a society has 
committed or has been otherwise responsible for misappropriation, breach of 
trust or other offence, in relation to the society, the Registrar may, if he is of 
opinion that there is a prima facie evidence against such paid officer or servant 
and the suspension of such paid officer or servant is necessary in the interest of 
the society, direct the Committee of the society pending the investigation and 
disposal of the matter, to place or cause to be placed such paid officer or servant 
under suspension from such date and for such period as may be specified by 
him: 


Provided that no paid officer or servant shall be suspended, unless such 
officer or servant has been given an opportunity of hearing in the matter. 


(2) On receipt of a direction from the Registrar under sub-section (/), the 
Committee of the society shall, notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in 
the bye-laws, place or cause to be placed the paid officer or servant under 
suspension forthwith. 


(3) The Registrar may direct the Committee to extend from time to time, 
the period of suspension and the paid officer or servant suspended shall not be 
reinstated except with the previous sanction of the Registrar. 


(4) If the Committee fails to comply with the direction issued under 
sub-section (/), the Registrar may make an order placing such paid officer 
or servant under suspension from such date and for such period as he may 
specify in the order and thereupon the paid officer or servant, as the case 
may be, shall be under suspension. 


45 


Suspension of 
officer or 
servant of 
society. 


Cost of inquiry 
and inspection. 


Mode of 
recovery of 
sums imposed 
as penalty or 
awarded as 
costs. 


Registrar to 
bring defects 
disclosed in 
inquiry or 
inspection to 
notice of 
society. 


Power of 
Registrar to 
aSSess 
damages 
against 
delinquent, 
promoter, etc. 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


96. (1) Where an inquiry is held under section 92 or an inspection is made 
under section 94, the Registrar may apportion the costs, or such part of the costs, 
as he may think just, between the society, the members or creditors demanding the 
inquiry or inspection, the officers or former officers and the members or past 
members or the estates of the deceased members of the society and pass such order 
within a period of six months from the date of submission of inquiry report: 


Provided that— 


(a) no order of apportionment of the costs shall be made under this 
section, unless the society or persons or the legal representative of the 
deceased person liable to pay the costs thereunder, has or have been heard, or 
have had a reasonable opportunity of being heard; 


(b) the Registrar shall state in writing the grounds on which the costs 
are apportioned. 


(2) No expenditure from the funds of a society shall be incurred for the 
purpose of defraying any costs in support of any appeal preferred by any person 
other than the society against an order made under the foregoing sub-section. 


97. Any sum imposed as penalty under sections 81, 82, 91 or section 92 or 
awarded by way of costs under section 96 may, on an application by the Registrar 
or a person authorised by him in that behalf to a Magistrate having jurisdiction in 
the place where the person from whom the penalty or costs are recoverable resides 
or carries his business, be recovered by the Magistrate as if it were a fine imposed 
by himself and such Magistrate shall proceed to recover the same in the same 
manner as if it were a fine imposed by himself. 


98. (/) If, the result of any inquiry held under section 92 or inspection made 
under section 93 or 94, discloses any defect in the constitution, working or 
financial condition or the books of a society, the Registrar may bring such defects 
to the notice of the society and the Registrar may also make an order directing the 
society or its officers to take such action as may be specified in the order to 
remedy the defects, within the time specified therein. 


(2) The society concerned may make an appeal against an order made by the 
Registrar under sub-section (/) to the Administrator within a period of two months 
from the date of the communication of the order to the society. 


(3) The Administrator may, in deciding the appeal, annul, reverse, modify or 
confirm the order of the Registrar. 


(4) Where the society fails to rectify the defects as directed by the Registrar 
and where no appeal has been made to the Administrator under sub-section (2) or 
where on the appeal so made the Administrator has not annulled, reversed or 
modified the order, the Registrar may himself take steps to have the defects 
rectified, and may recover the cost from the officers of the society who, in his 
opinion, have failed to rectify the defects. 


99. (1) Where, in the course of or as a result of an audit under section 90, or 
an inquiry under section 92 or an inspection under section 93 or section 94, or the 
winding up of a society, the Registrar is satisfied on the basis of the report made 
by the auditor or the person authorised to make inquiry under section 92, or the 
person authorised to inspect the books under section 93 or 94 or the Liquidator 
under section 117, that any person who has taken any part in the organisation or 
management of the society or any deceased, or past or present officer of the 
society has, within a period of five years prior to the date of commencement of 


5 of 1908. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


such audit or date of order for inquiry, inspection or winding up, misapplied or 
retained, or become liable or accountable for, any money or property of the 
society, or has been guilty of misfeasance or breach of trust in relation to the 
society, the Registrar or a person authorised by him in that behalf may investigate 
the conduct of such person or persons and after framing charges against such 
person or persons, and after giving a reasonable opportunity to the person 
concerned and in the case of a deceased person to his representative who inherits 
his estate, to answer the charges, make an order requiring him to repay or restore 
the money or property or any part thereof, with interest at such rate as the 
Registrar or the person authorised under this section may determine, or to 
contribute such sum to the assets of the society by way of compensation in regard 
to the misapplication, retention, misfeasance or breach of trust, as he may 
determine: 


Provided that the proceedings under this sub-section, shall be completed by 
the authorised person within a period of two years from the date of issue of order 
by the Registrar: 


Provided further that the Registrar may, after recording the reasons therefor, 
extend the said period for a maximum period of six months: 


Provided also that the Administrator may, on the report of the Registrar or 
suo motu, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the said period as may 
be required, from time to time, to complete the proceedings under this sub-section. 


(2) The Registrar or the person authorised under sub-section (/) in making 
any order under this section, may provide therein for the payment of the costs or 
any part thereof of such investigation, as he thinks just, and he may direct that 
such costs or any part thereof shall be recovered from the person against whom the 
order has been issued. 


Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 
provisions of this section shall apply, notwithstanding that the act is one for which 
the person concerned may be criminally responsible. 


100. The Registrar or the person authorised by him, when acting under 
sections 92, 93, 94 or section 99 shall have the power to summon and enforce the 
attendance of any person to give evidence or to compel the production of any 
documents or other material object by the same means and in the same manner as 
is provided in the case of a civil suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 


101. (2) The Administration may constitute Committees or recognise one or 
more co-operative federal societies in such manner as may be prescribed and 
subject to such conditions as the Administration may determine, for the 
supervision of a society or a class of societies and may frame rules for making 
grants to such Committee or federal society. 


(2) The Administration may, by general or special order in writing, require a 
society or a class of societies to make contribution of such sum every year as may 
be fixed by the Registrar towards the recoupment of expenditure which the 
Administration or any person authorised or a Committee in that behalf has 
incurred or is likely to incur, in respect of the supervision of societies. 


(3) A society to which sub-section (2) is applicable shall pay to such 
authority such fee within such period as may be prescribed and, if it fails to pay 
such fee within the period, the authority may recover it as if it were an arrear of 
land revenue. 


Power to 
enforce 
attendance, 
etc. 


Constitution or 
recognition of 
federal society 
to supervise 
working of 
societies. 


Disputes. 


48 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


CHAPTER IX 
PROCEDURE FOR DECIDING DISPUTES 


102. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 


being in force in the Union territory, any dispute touching the constitution, 
management, business, election of the Committee or its officers or conduct of 
general meetings of a society shall be referred by any of the parties to the dispute, 
or by a federal society to which the society is affiliated, or by a creditor of the 
society, to the Registrar, if the parties thereto are amongst the following, 
namely:— 


(a) a society, its Committee, any past Committee, any past or present 
officer, any past or present agent, any past or present servant or nominee, 
legal heir or legal representative of any deceased officer, deceased agent or 
deceased servant of the society, or the Liquidator of the society; 


(b) a member, past member or a person claiming through a member, 
past member or a deceased member of a society, or a society which is a 
member of the society; 


(c) a person, other than a member of the society, who has been granted 
a loan by the society, or with whom the society has or had transactions under 
the provisions of section 50, and any person claiming through such a person; 


(d) a surety of a member, past member or a deceased member, or a 
person other than a member who has been granted a loan by the society 
under section 50, whether such a surety is or is not a member of the society; 


(e) any other society, official assignee or the Liquidator of such a 
society. 


(2) When any question arises a matter referred to for decision is a dispute or 


not, under sub-section (/), the question shall be considered by the Registrar, whose 
decision shall be final. 


Explanation.—F or the purposes of this sub-section, it is hereby clarified that— 
(a) the expression “dispute” shall include— 


(i) a claim by a society for any debt or demand due to it from a 
member, past member or the nominee, legal heir or legal representative 
of a deceased member, whether such a debt or demand be admitted or 
not; 


(ii) a claim by a surety for any sum or demand due to him from 
the principal borrower in respect of a loan by a society and recovered 
from the surety owing to the default of the principal borrower, whether 
such a sum or demand be admitted or not; 


(iii) a claim by a society for any loss caused to it by a member, 
past member, or deceased member, by any officer, past officer or 
deceased officer, by any agent, past agent or deceased agent, or by any 
servant, past servant or deceased servant, or by its Committee, past or 
present whether such loss be admitted or not; 


(iv) a refusal or failure by a member, a past member or a 
nominee, legal heir or legal representative of a deceased member, to 
deliver possession to a society of land or any other asset resumed by it 
for breach of conditions of the assignment; 


36 of 1963. 


36 of 1963. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


(b) the expression “agent” includes, in the case of a housing society, an 
architect, engineer or contractor engaged by the society. 


103. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limitation Act, 1963, but 
subject to the specific provisions made in this Regulation, the period of limitation 
in the case of a dispute referred to the Registrar under section 102 shall— 


(a) when the dispute relates to the recovery of any sum, including 
interest thereon due to a society by a member thereof, be computed from the 
date on which such member dies or ceases to be a member of the society; 


(b) when the dispute is between a society or its Committee, and any 
past Committee, any past or present officer, or past or present agent, or past 
or present servant or the nominee, heir or legal representative of a deceased 
officer, deceased agent or deceased servant of the society, or a member, or 
past member, or the nominee, heir or legal representative of a deceased 
member, and when the dispute relates to any act or omission on the part of 
either party to the dispute, be six years from the date on which the act or 
omission with reference to which the dispute arose, took place; 


(c) when the dispute is in respect of any matter relating to the 
constitution, management or business of a society which has been ordered to 
be wound up under section 114, or in respect of which a nominated 
Committee or special officer has been appointed under section 87, be six 
years from the date of the order issued under section 114, or section 87, as 
the case may be; 


(d) when the dispute is in respect of an election of any office bearer of 
a society, be two months from the date of the declaration of the result of such 
election. 


(2) The period of limitation in the case of any dispute other than those 
mentioned in sub-section (/) which are required to be referred to the Registrar 
under section 106 shall be regulated by the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963, 
as if the dispute were a suit, and the Registrar a civil court. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (/) and (2), the 
Registrar may admit dispute after the expiry of the period of limitation, if the 
applicant satisfies him that he had sufficient cause for not referring the dispute 
within such period, and the dispute so admitted shall not be barred on the ground 
that the period of limitation had expired. 


104. (/) If the Registrar is satisfied that any matter, referred to him is a 
dispute, within the meaning of section 102, the Registrar shall, subject to the rules 
to be made in this behalf, decide the dispute himself, or refer it for disposal to a 
nominee, or a board of nominees, appointed by the Registrar: 


Provided that no person who is connected with a dispute or with the society 
at any stage or has previously inspected the society or audited its accounts shall be 
appointed as a nominee or as a member of the board of nominees to settle the 
dispute. 


(2) Where any dispute is referred under sub-section (/) for decision to the 
Registrar’s nominee or board of nominees, the Registrar may at any time, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, withdraw such dispute from his nominee, or 
board of nominees, and may decide the dispute himself, or refer it again for 
decision to any other nominee, or board of nominees, appointed by him. 


Limitation. 


Settlement of 
disputes. 


Procedure for 
settlement of 
disputes and 
power of 
Registrar, his 
nominee or 
board of 
nominees. 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 102, the Registrar may, if 
he thinks fit, suspend proceedings in regard to any dispute, if the question at issue 
between a society and a claimant or between different claimants, is one involving 
complicated question of law or fact, until the question has been tried by a regular 
suit instituted by one of the parties or by the society, and, if any such suit is not 
instituted within a period of two months from the Registrar’s order suspending 
proceedings, the Registrar shall take action as is provided in sub-section (/). 


105. (/) The Registrar or his nominee or board of nominees, hearing a dispute 
under section 102 shall hear the dispute in the manner prescribed and shall have power 
to summon and enforce attendance of witnesses including the parties interested or any 
of them and to compel them to give evidence, and to compel the production of 
documents by the same means and as far as possible in the same manner as provided 
in the case of a civil suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 


(2) Except where a dispute involves complicated question of law or fact, no legal 
practitioner in his capacity as a legal practitioner or as a person holding a power of 
attorney shall be permitted to appear on behalf of any party at the hearing of a dispute. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expressions— 
(7) “attorney” means the attorney as referred to in the Advocates Act, 1961. 


(ii) “legal practitioner” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in 
clause (i) of sub-section (/) of section 2 of the Advocates Act, 1961; 


(3) If the Registrar or his nominee or board of nominees is satisfied that a 
person, whether he be a member of the society or not, has acquired any interest in 
the property of a person, who is a party to a dispute, he may order the person who 
has acquired the interest in the property to join as a party to the dispute and any 
decision that may be passed on the reference by the Registrar or his nominee or 
board of nominees, shall be binding on the party so joined, in the same manner, as 
if, he were an original party to the dispute. 


(4) Where a dispute has been instituted in the name of the wrong person or 
where all the defendants have not been included, the Registrar or his nominee or 
board of nominees may, at any stage of the hearing of the dispute, if satisfied that 
the mistake was bona fide, order any other person to be substituted or added as a 
plaintiff or a defendant, upon such terms as he thinks just. 


(5) The Registrar or his nominee or board of nominees may, at any stage of 
the proceedings, either upon or without the application of either party, and on such 
terms as may appear to the Registrar, his nominee or board of nominees to be just, 
order that the name of any party, joined whether as a plaintiff or defendant be 
struck out, and that the name of any person who ought to have been joined as 
plaintiff or defendant, or whose presence may be necessary in order to enable the 
Registrar, his nominee or board of nominees to effectually and completely 
adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in the dispute, be added. 


(6) Any person who is a party to the dispute and entitled to more than one relief 
in respect of the same cause of action may claim all or any of such reliefs, but if he 
omits to claim all such reliefs, he shall not forward a claim for any relief so omitted, 
except with the leave of the Registrar, his nominee or board of nominees. 


(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (/) to (6), the following 
disputes or class of disputes, if the plaintiff so desires, shall be decided summarily by 
the Registrar, or his nominee or board of nominees, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, namely:— 


5 of 1908. 


25 of 1961. 


25 of 1961. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 51 


(a) any dispute for recovery of debt upon Promissory Note, Hundi, Bill 
of Exchange or bond, with or without interest, whether agreed upon under 
such instrument or under the bye-laws; 


(6) any dispute for recovery of a fixed sum of money or, the nature of 
debt with or without interest, arising on a written contract; 


(c) any dispute for recovery of price of goods sold and delivered, where 
the rate, quality and quantity are admitted in writing; 


(d) any dispute for recovery of dues payable by a member of a housing 
society towards contribution for construction of the house or any dispute in 
respect of repayment of any loan, interest on loan, ground rent, local 
authority taxes, sinking fund, water charges, electrical charges, maintenance 
and upkeep charges or charges for other services rendered by the society and 
the interest on such arrears, payable under the written agreement or under the 
bye-laws. 


(8) The defendant shall not be entitled to defend the dispute unless he obtains 
leave from the Registrar, his nominee or board of nominees, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(9) The Registrar or his nominee or board of nominees may grant the leave 
under sub-section (8) on such conditions, as he or it thinks fit. 


(10) The Registrar or his nominee or board of nominees shall not refuse the 
leave to defend the dispute unless he or it is satisfied that the facts disclosed by the 
defendant do not indicate that he has substantial defence to raise or that the 
defence intended to be put up by him is frivolous or vexatious. 


(11) Where the defendant fails to obtain such leave or fails to appear or 
defend the dispute in pursuance of such leave, the averments made in the plaint 
and documents produced therewith shall be deemed to have been admitted by the 
defendant: 


Provided that the Registrar or his nominee or board of nominees in his or its 
discretion may require any fact so admitted to be proved otherwise than by such 
admission. 


(12) Where the conditions on which leave to defend is granted are not 
complied with by the defendant, the Registrar or his nominee or board of 
nominees, may pass an award against him, as if he has not been granted such 
leave. 


(13) The Registrar or his nominee or board of nominees, may under 
special circumstances set aside the award, passed by him or it and if necessary, 
stay or set aside the execution, and may grant leave to the defendant to appear 
and defend the dispute, if it seems reasonable so to do and, on such terms, as 
he or it thinks fit. 


106. (1) Where a dispute has been referred to the Registrar or his nominee or 
board of nominees under section 104 or under section 117, or where the Registrar 
or the person authorised under section 99 hears a person against whom charges are 
framed under that section, the Registrar or his nominee or board of nominees, or as 
the case may be, the person so authorised under section 99, if satisfied on enquiry 
or otherwise that a party to such dispute or against whom proceedings are pending 
under section 99 with intent to defeat, delay or obstruct the execution of any award 
or the carrying out of any order that may be made— 


Attachment 
before 
award. 


Decision of 
Registrar or 
his nominee or 
board of 
nominees. 


Appeal to 
tribunal. 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(a) is about to dispose of whole or any part of his property; or 


(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his property from the 
jurisdiction of the Registrar, 


may, unless adequate security is furnished, direct conditional attachment of the 
said property and such attachment shall have the same effect, as if made by a 
competent civil court. 


(2) Where a direction to attach property is issued under sub-section (/), the 
Registrar or his nominee or board of nominees or the person authorised under 
section 99 shall issue a notice calling upon the person whose property is so 
attached to furnish such security within such period as may be specified in the 
notice and if the person fails to provide the security so demanded, the Registrar or 
his nominee or board of nominees or, as the case may be, the person authorised 
under section 99 may confirm the order and, after the decision in the dispute or the 
completion of the proceedings referred to in sub-section (/) may direct the 
disposal of the property so attached towards the claim, if awarded. 


(3) The attachment made under this section shall not affect the rights 
subsisting prior to the attachment of the property of persons not parties to the 
proceedings in connection with which the attachment is made, or bar any person 
holding a decree prior to such attachment against the person whose property is so 
attached from applying for the sale of the property under attachment in execution 
of such decree. 


107. (7) When a dispute is referred to the Registrar for decision, he or his 
nominee or board of nominees may, after giving an opportunity to the parties to 
the dispute to be heard, make an award on the dispute, on the expenses incurred by 
the parties to the dispute in connection with the proceedings and the fees and 
expenses payable to the Registrar or his nominee or board of nominees, and such 
an award shall not be invalid merely on the ground that it was made after the 
expiry of the period fixed by the Registrar, for deciding the dispute and shall, 
subject to appeal or review or revision, be binding on the parties to the dispute. 


(2) The Registrar, his nominee or the board of nominees may, before hearing 
the parties, require any party or parties to such dispute to deposit such sum as may, 
in his or its opinion, be considered reasonable to meet the expenses including the 
payment of fees, that may be payable to the Registrar, his nominee or the board of 
nominees, in pursuance of the award to be made under sub-section (/). 


(3) The Registrar may, having regard to the nature of the cause of action or 
subject matter of dispute, the nature of relief that may be claimed in a dispute and 
such other matters, specify by a general or special order, the scale of fees and 
expenses that may be made payable to him or his nominee or the board of 
nominees, by or under an award made under sub-section (/). 


108. (7) Any party aggrieved by any decision of the Registrar or his nominee 
or board of nominees as the case may be, under section 107 or in an order passed 
under section 106 may, within a period of two months from the date of the 
decision or order, appeal to the Tribunal: 


Provided that the Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of two 
months, if it is satisfied that there was a sufficient cause for not filing it within that 
period. 


(2) The form and the manner of making an appeal to the Tribunal shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 


5 of 1908. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


109. Every order passed by the Registrar or a person authorised by him under 
section 99, or by the Registrar, his nominee or board of nominees under section 106 or 
107, every order passed by a Liquidator under section 117, every order passed by the 
Administrator in appeal against orders passed under section 136, and every order 
passed in revision under section 138, shall, if not carried out— 


(a) on a certificate signed by the Registrar or a Liquidator, be deemed 
to be a decree of a civil court, as defined in clause (2) of section 2 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and shall be executed in the same manner as a 
decree of such court; or 


(b) be executed according to the provisions of the Land Revenue Code 
or any corresponding law for the time being in force in the Union territory 
for the recovery of arrears of land revenue: 


Provided that any application for the recovery in such manner of any such 
sum shall be made to the Collector, and shall be accompanied by a certificate 
signed by the Registrar, or by any Assistant Registrar to whom the said power has 
been delegated by the Registrar within twelve years from the date fixed in the 
order and if no such date is fixed, from the date of the order. 


110. Any transfer or delivery of, or encumbrance or charge on property made 
or created after the issue of the certificate of the Registrar, Liquidator, or Assistant 
Registrar, as the case may be, under section 109 shall be null and void as against 
the society on whose application the said certificate was issued. 


111. (7) When in execution of an order sought to be executed under section 109 
any property cannot be sold for want of buyers, if such property is in occupancy of the 
defaulter, or of some person in his behalf, or of some person claiming a title created by 
the defaulter, subsequent to the issue of the certificate of the Registrar, Liquidator or 
the Assistant Registrar, under clause (a) or clause (6) of section 109, the court or the 
Collector or the Registrar, as the case may be, may direct that the said property or any 
portion thereof shall be transferred to the society which has applied for the execution 
of the said order in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Where property is transferred to the society under sub-section (/), or is 
sold under the provisions of section 109, the court, the Collector or the Registrar, 
as the case may be, may, in accordance with the rules, place the society or the 
purchaser, in possession of the property transferred or sold. 


(3) Subject to the rules made in this behalf, and to any rights, encumbrances, 
charges or equities lawfully subsisting in favour of any person, such property or 
portion thereof shall be held under sub-section (/) by the said society on such 
terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between the court, the Collector or 
the Registrar, as the case may be, and the said society subject to the general or 
special orders of the Administrator, the Collector or the Registrar may delegate to 
an officer, not below the rank of an Assistant or Deputy Collector or an Assistant 
Registrar, powers exercisable by the Collector or the Registrar under this section. 


112. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 102, 104 and 109, on an 
application made by a society undertaking the financing of crops and seasonal finance 
as defined under any law for the time being in force in the Union territory, or 
undertaking medium term finance for the recovery of arrears of any sum advanced by 
it to any of its members on account of the financing of crops, seasonal finance or 
medium term finance and on its furnishing a statement of accounts in respect of the 
arrears, the Registrar may, after making such inquiries as he deems fit, grant a 
certificate for the recovery of the amount stated therein to be due as arrears. 


Money how 
recovered. 


Transfer of 
property made 
after issue of 
certificate void 
against 
society. 
Transfer of 
property which 
cannot be sold. 


Recovery of 
crop loans. 


Co-operative 
Ombudsman. 


54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Explanation.—F or the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “medium 
term finance” means advancing of loans for any purpose of production relating to 
agriculture, fishery, animal husbandry, poultry, dairy and industry, being 
repayable otherwise than in the manner specified in the definitions of the 
expressions “financing of crops” and “seasonal finance” under any law for the 
time being in force in the Union territory. 


(2) If a society fails to make an application under sub-section (/), and such 
society is a member of any co-operative financing bank, such co-operative 
financing bank may direct such society to take such action, and if that society fails 
to take action in pursuance of such direction, the co-operative financing bank may 
itself make an application under sub-section (/) on behalf of the society. 


(3) Where the Registrar is satisfied that a society or the co-operative 
financing bank to which such society is affiliated has failed to make an application 
under sub-section (/) or, as the case may be, under sub-section (2) in respect of 
such arrears, the Registrar may, of his own motion, after making such inquiries as 
he deems fit, grant a certificate for the recovery of the amount stated therein to be 
due as such arrears, and such a certificate shall be deemed to have been issued as if 
on an application made by the society concerned. 


(4) A certificate granted by the Registrar under sub-section (/) or sub-section (3) 
shall be final and a conclusive proof of the arrears stated to be due therein, which shall 
be recoverable according to the provisions of the Land Revenue Code or any other law 
for the time being in force in the Union territory and of the rules made thereunder for 
the recovery of land revenue. 


(5) It shall be lawful for the Collector and the Registrar to take precautionary 
measures specified under Land Revenue Code or any other law for the time being in 
force in the Union territory, until the arrears due to the society together with interest 
and any incidental charges incurred in the recovery of such arrears, are paid, or 
security for payment of such arrears is furnished to the satisfaction of the Registrar. 


CHAPTER X 
REDRESSAL OF COMPLAINTS 


113. (J) The Administrator shall appoint, one or more Co-operative Ombudsman 
with territorial jurisdiction for inquiring into the complaints made by any member of 
the society regarding their deposits, equitable benefits of society’s functioning or any 
other issue affecting the individual rights of the concerned member, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(2) The Co-operative Ombudsman shall, on receipt of a complaint, complete 
the process of inquiry and adjudicate within a period of three months from the date 
of receipt of the complaint and may issue necessary directions to the society 
during the course of inquiry and the society shall be bound to comply with the 
same within a period of one month from the date of issuance of such directions. 


(3) Being aggrieved by the directions of the Co-operative Ombudsman, the 
society may file an appeal in such manner as may be prescribed, within a period of 
one month before the Registrar who shall decide the appeal within a period of 
forty-five days from the receipt of the appeal and the decision of the Registrar 
shall be final: 


Provided that the Registrar may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the 
said period of one month, if he is satisfied that the society was prevented by 
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in time. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 55 


(4) The Co-operative Ombudsman shall submit periodic reports to the Registrar. 


(5) The Co-operative Ombudsman while conducting the inquiry under 
sub-section (/), shall exercise the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
5 of 1908. under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,— 


(a) for summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons; 
(0) examining them on oath; 
(c) discovery and production of books of account and other documents; and 
(d) any other matter as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER XI 
LIQUIDATION 
114. (/) Except as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), if the Registrar,— Winding up. 


(a) after an inquiry has been held under section 92, or an inspection has 
been made under section 93 or section 94 on the report of the auditor; 


(6) on receipt of an application made upon a resolution carried by 
three-fourths of the members of a society present at a special general 
meeting called for the purpose; or 


(c) of his own motion, in the case of a society which— 
(7) has not commenced working; 
(ii) has ceased working; 


(iii) possesses shares or member’s deposits not exceeding five 
thousand rupees; 


(iv) has ceased to comply with any conditions as to registration and 
management as provided in this Regulation or the rules or the bye-laws, 


is of the opinion that a society ought to be wound up, he may make an interim 
order directing it to be wound up. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), in case where the 
members of the society, after having discharged liabilities towards the debt and 
assets of the society, upon a resolution carried by three-fourths majority of the 
members of the society present at a special general meeting called for the purpose, 
suo motu, resolve to wind up the society and convey such resolution to the 
Registrar and the Registrar shall, after disposing of the surplus assets in 
accordance with the provisions of section 122, cancel the registration of such 
society under section 21. 


(3) Where an interim order is made on a ground specified in clause (a) or 
sub-clause (iv) of clause (c) of sub-section (/), a copy thereof shall be 
communicated, in the prescribed manner, to the society calling upon it to submit 
its explanation to the Registrar within a period of one month from the date of issue 
of such order. 


(4) The Registrar, after giving an opportunity to the society of being heard, 
shall make a final order, vacating or confirming the interim order. 


115. (/) When an interim or final order is made under section 114 for the Appointment 
winding up of a society, the Registrar may, in accordance with the rules, appoint a OP amd aOr. 
person to be the Liquidator of the society and fix his remuneration. 


Appeal against 
order of 
winding up. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(2) Where an interim order is made, the officers of the society shall hand 
over to the Liquidator the custody and control of all the property, effects and 
actionable claims to which the society is or appears to be entitled, and of all books, 
records and other documents pertaining to the business of the society and, shall 
have no access to any of them. 


(3) When a final order is made confirming the interim order, the officers of 
the society— 


(a) shall hand over to the Liquidator the custody and control of any 
property, effects and actionable claims and any books, records, and other 
documents pertaining to the business of the society which for any reason are 
not handed over to the Liquidator under sub-section (2) at the time when an 
interim order was made; 


(b) shall vacate their offices and while winding up order remains in 
force, the general body of the society shall not exercise any powers. 


(4) The Liquidator shall, subject to the general control of the Registrar, 
exercise all or any of the powers mentioned in section 117 and the Registrar may 
remove him from his office and appoint another in his place, without assigning 
any reason. 


(5) The whole of the assets of the society shall on the appointment of the 
Liquidator vest in him and notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 
time being in force in the Union territory, if any immovable property is held by 
him on behalf of the society, the title over the land shall be complete as soon as the 
mutation of the name of his office is effected and no court shall question the title 
on the ground of dispossession, want of possession or physical delivery of 
possession. 


(6) In the event of the interim order being vacated, the Liquidator shall hand 
over the property, effects, actionable claims, books, records and other documents 
of the society to the officers who had delivered the same to him and the acts done, 
and the proceedings taken by the Liquidator, shall be binding on the society, and 
such proceedings shall, after the interim order has been vacated under section 114 
be continued by the officers of the society. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 117, the 
expression “actionable claims” means a claim to any debt, other than a debt 
secured by mortgage of immovable property or by hypothecation or pledge 
of movable property, or to any beneficial interest in movable property not in 
the possession, either actual or constructive, of the claimant, which the civil 
courts recognise as affording grounds for relief, whether such debt or 
beneficial interest by existent, accruing, conditional or contingent. 


116. (1) The Committee or any member of the society may, within a period 
of two months from the date of the communication of the order made under 
section 114 for winding up, appeal, if the order is made by the Registrar or 
Additional Registrar or Joint Registrar to the Administrator, or if the order is made 
by any other person on whom the powers of the Registrar are conferred, to the 
Registrar: 


Provided that no appeal shall lie against an order issued under sub-clauses (४), (ii) 
or (iii) of clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 114: 


Provided further that no appeal shall lie against an order passed by the 
Registrar. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 57 


(2) No appeal under this section shall be entertained from a member unless it 


is accompanied by such sum as security for the costs of hearing the appeal, as may 
be prescribed. 


117. Subject to the rules and the general supervision, control and direction of 


the Registrar, the Liquidator shall have the power,— 


(a) to institute and defend suits and other legal proceedings, civil or 
criminal, on behalf of the society, in the name of his office; 


(6) to carry on the business of the society, as may be necessary for the 
beneficial winding up of the same; 


(c) to sell the movable and immovable property and actionable claims of 
the society by public auction or private contract, with power to transfer the 
whole or part thereof to any person or body corporate, or sell the same in parcels; 


(d) to raise any money required on the security of the assets of the society; 


(e) to investigate all claims against the society and, subject to the 
provisions of this Regulation, to decide questions of priority arising out of 
such claims, and to pay any class or classes of creditor in full or rateable 
according to the amount of such debts, the surplus being applied in payment 
of interest from the date of liquidation at a rate to be approved by the 
Registrar, but not exceeding the contract rates; 


(f) to make any compromise or arrangement with creditors or persons 
claiming to be creditors, or having or alleging themselves to have any claim, 
present or future, whereby the society may be rendered liable; 


(g) to compromise all calls or liabilities to calls and debts and liabilities 
capable of resulting in debts, and all claims present or future, certain or 
contingent, subsisting or supposed to subsist between the society and a 
contributory or alleged contributory or other debtor or person apprehending 
liability to the society, and all questions in any way relating to or affecting 
the assets or the winding up of the society, on such terms as may be agreed, 
and take any security for the discharge of any such call, liability, debt, or 
claim, and give a complete discharge in respect thereof; 


(A) to determine, from time to time, after giving an opportunity to 
answer the claim, the contribution to be made or remaining to be made by 
the members or past members or by the estate, nominees, legal heirs or legal 
representatives of deceased members, or by any officer, past officer or the 
estate or nominees, legal heirs or legal representatives of a deceased officer 
to the assets of the society, such contribution being inclusive of debts due 
from such members or officers; 


(i) to make applications under section 109; 


(j) to get disputes referred to the Registrar or his nominee or board 
of nominees; 


(k) to determine by what persons and in what proportion the costs of 
the liquidation shall be borne; 


(0) to fix the time or times within which the creditors shall prove their 
debts and claims or be included for the benefits of any distribution made 
before those debts or claims are proved; 


Powers of 
Liquidator. 


Effect of 
winding up. 


Bar on suit in 
winding up 
and dissolution 
matters. 


Audit of 
Liquidator’s 
accounts. 


58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(m) to summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses and to compel 
the production of any books, accounts, documents, securities, cash or other 
properties belonging to or in the custody of the society by the same means 
and in the same manner as provided in the case of a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; 


(n) to do all acts, and to execute in the name and on behalf of the 
society, all deeds, receipts and other documents, as may be necessary to such 
winding up; 


(०) to take such action as may be necessary under section 20, with the 
prior approval of the Registrar, if there is reason to believe that the society 
may be reconstructed. 


118. (/) After the expiry of the period for appeal under section 116 against 
the order made under sub-section (3) of section 114, or where the appeal has been 
dismissed, the order for winding up shall be effective and shall operate in favour 
of all creditors and the contributories of the society, as if it has been made on the 
joint petition of creditors and contributories. 


(2) When a winding up order becomes effective, the Liquidator shall proceed 
to realise the assets of the society, by sale or otherwise, and no dispute shall be 
commenced, or if pending at the date of the winding up order, be proceeded with, 
against the society, except with leave of the Registrar and subject to such terms as 
the Registrar may impose and the Registrar may of his own motion, however, 
entertain or dispose of any dispute by or against the society. 


119. Save as expressly provided in this Regulation, no civil court shall have 
Jurisdiction on any matter connected with the winding up or dissolution of a society 
under this Regulation, and when a winding up order has been made, no suit or other 
legal proceedings shall lie or be proceeded with against the society or the Liquidator, 
except by leave of the Registrar, and subject to such terms as he may impose: 


Provided that where the winding up order is cancelled, the provisions of this 
section shall cease to operate so far as the liability of the society and of the 
members thereof to be sued is concerned, but they shall continue to apply to the 
person who acted as Liquidator. 


120. (7) The Liquidator shall, during his tenure of office, at such times as 
may be prescribed, but not less than twice each year, present to the Registrar an 
account in the prescribed form of his receipt and payments as Liquidator and the 
Registrar shall cause the accounts to be audited in such manner as he thinks fit and 
for the purpose of audit, the Liquidator shall furnish the Registrar with such 
vouchers and information as he, or the person appointed by him, may require. 


(2) The Liquidator shall cause a summary of audited accounts to be prepared, 
and send a copy of such summary to every contributory. 


(3) The Liquidator shall pay such fees as the Registrar may direct, for the 
audit of the accounts of books kept by him in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Liquidator shall be held liable for any irregularities which might be 
discovered in the course or as a result of audit in respect of transactions 
subsequent to his taking charge of the affairs of the society, and may be proceeded 
against, as if, it were an act against which action may be taken under section 99: 


5 of 1908. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


Provided that no such action shall be taken unless the irregularities have 
caused or are likely to cause loss to the society, and have occurred due to gross 
negligence or want on omission by the Liquidator, in carrying out the duties and 
functions. 


121. (1) The winding up proceedings of a society shall be closed within five 
years from the date of the order of the winding up, unless the period is extended by 
the Registrar: 


Provided that the Registrar shall not grant any extension for a period 
exceeding one year at a time and five years in the aggregate, and shall, 
immediately after the expiry of ten years from the date of the order for winding up 
of the society, the liquidation proceedings shall be deemed to have been 
terminated, and pass an order terminating the liquidation proceedings. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified that in 
the case of a society which is under liquidation at the date of the commencement 
of this Regulation, an order for the winding up of the society shall be deemed to 
have been passed for the purpose of this section on the said date. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), the Registrar 
shall terminate the liquidation proceedings on receipt of the final report from the 
Liquidator and the final report of the Liquidator shall state that the liquidation 
proceedings of the society have been closed, and also state how the winding up has 
been conducted and the property and claims of the society have been disposed of, 
and include a statement showing a summary of the account of the winding up 
including the cost of liquidation, the amount, if any, standing to the credit of the 
society, after paying off its liabilities including the share or interest of members, 
and suggest how the surplus may be utilised. 


(3) The Registrar, on receipt of the final report from the Liquidator, shall 
direct him to convene a general meeting of the members of the society for 
recording the report. 


122. Any surplus assets, shown in the final report of the Liquidator, shall 
not be divided, amongst its members but shall be devoted to any object or 
objects provided in the bye-laws of the society, if they specify that such a 
surplus shall be utilised for the particular purpose and where the society has no 
such bye-law, the surplus shall vest in the Registrar, who shall hold it in trust 
and shall transfer it to the reserve fund of a new society registered with a 
similar object, and serving more or less an area which the society to which the 
surplus belonged was serving: 


Provided that where no such society exists or is registered within three years 
of the cancellation of the registration of the society whose surplus is vested in the 
Registrar, the Registrar may distribute the surplus in the manner he thinks best, 
among any or all of the following, namely:— 


(a) an object of public utility and of local interest as may be 
recommended by the members in general meeting held under section 121 or 
where the society has ceased to function and its record is not available or 
none of its members is forth coming, as the Registrar thinks proper; 


Termination of 
liquidation 
proceedings. 


Disposal of 
surplus assets. 


Order for 
winding up, 
reconstruction, 
supersession of 
Committee 
etc., of insured 
co-operative 
bank not to be 
made without 
sanction or 
requisition of 
Reserve Bank. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(0) a federal society with similar objects to which the cancelled society 
was eligible for affiliation; and 


(c) any charitable purpose as defined in section 2 of the Charitable 
Endowments Act, 1890 or any other law for time being in force in the Union 
territory. 


CHAPTER XII 
INSURED CO-OPERATIVE BANK 


123. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation, in the case of an 


insured co-operative bank,— 


(a) an order for winding up or an order sanctioning a scheme of 
compromise or arrangement or of amalgamation or reconstruction (including 
division or reorganisation) of the bank may be made only with the prior 
approval in writing of the Reserve Bank; 


(6) an order for winding up the bank shall be made by the Registrar if 
so required by the Reserve Bank in the circumstances referred to in section 
13D of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 or 
any other law for the time being in force in the Union territory; 


(c) notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation or the rules 
made thereunder, the Registrar shall ensure the implementation of regulatory 
prescription given by the Reserve Bank including supersession and winding 
up of the co-operative bank and shall appoint a special officer or a Liquidator 
as the case may be within a period of one month of being so advised by the 
Reserve Bank; 


(d) if so required by the Reserve Bank in the public interest or for 
preventing the affairs of the bank being conducted in a manner detrimental to 
the interests of the depositors or for securing the proper management of the 
bank, an order shall be made by the Registrar for supersession of the 
Committee and the appointment of a special officer in place thereof for such 
period or periods not exceeding five years in the aggregate, as may from 
time to time be specified by the Reserve Bank, and the special officer so 
appointed shall, after the expiry of his term of office, continue in office until 
the day immediately preceding the date of the first meeting of the new 
Committee of such bank; 


(e) an order for winding up of the bank or an order sanctioning a 
scheme of compromise or arrangement or of amalgamation or reconstruction 
(including division or reorganisation) or an order for the supersession of the 
Committee of the bank and the appointment of a special officer in place 
thereof made with the previous sanction in writing or on the requisition of 
the Reserve Bank shall be final and shall not be liable to be called in 
question in any court; and 


(f) the Liquidator or such bank or the transferee bank, as the case may 
be, shall be under an obligation to pay the Deposit Insurance Corporation 
established under the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation 
Act, 1961 or any other law for time being in force in the Union territory, in 
the circumstances, to the extent and in the manner referred to in section 21 of 
that Act. 


6 of 1890. 


47 of 1961. 


47 of 1961. 


47 of 1961. 


47 of 1961. 


10 of 1949. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expressions— 


(i) “insured co-operative bank” means a society which is an 
insured bank under the provisions of the Deposit Insurance and Credit 
Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 or any other law for the time being in 
force in the Union territory; 


(ii) “transferee bank” in relation to an insured co-operative bank 
means a co-operative bank— 


(J) with which such insured co-operative bank is 
amalgamated; 


(77) to which the assets and liabilities of such insured 
co-operative bank are transferred; or 


(77) into which such insured co-operative bank is divided 
or converted under sub-section (/) of section 17. 


124. The provisions of this Regulation shall be in addition to and not in 
derogation of the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 or any law for 
the time being in force in the Union territory: 


Provided that in case of any conflict between the provisions of this 
Regulation and the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the provisions 
of the latter along with the rules, regulations, directions or instructions issued 
thereunder by the Reserve Bank from time to time shall apply. 


125. A Committee of co-operative bank shall ensure that— 


(a) the information is furnished every month to the Registrar in such 
form as may be prescribed, regarding the loans taken from the bank by each 
Committee member, members of the family and companies with which he is 
associated, in any manner; 


(b) the bank is registered as an insured bank under the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 or any other law for 
the time being in force in the Union territory; 


(c) the defects in the working of the bank are rectified and financial 
irregularities disclosed in the course of audit of the bank or otherwise 
remedied; 


(d) the action to recover loans given by the bank is taken within one 
year from the date when repayment of the same has become due; 


(e) no financial loss is caused to the bank and any debt due to the bank 
which is not recovered within a period of one year from the date when it has 
become due shall be recovered; 


(f) civil and criminal proceedings against a person who, in the 
opinion of the Committee, has misappropriated any fund of the bank are 
initiated; 

(g) the provisions of sections 18 and 24 of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949, as applicable to co-operative societies and section 63 of this 
Regulation are complied with, and, if in its opinion any of the said provisions 
are contravened, such contravention shall forthwith be reported to the 
Registrar. 


61 


Application of 
provisions of 
Act 10 of 1949 
and its 
overriding 
effect. 


Committee of 
co-operative 

bank to ensure 
certain things. 


Prohibition of 
use of word 
“co-operative”. 


Penalty for 
contravention of 
section 81. 


Offences. 


62 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


CHAPTER XIII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 


126. (1) No person, other than a society registered, or deemed to be 
registered, under this Regulation, and a person or his successor in interest of any 
name or title under word which he traded or carried on business at the date on 
which this Regulation comes into force, shall without the prior sanction of the 
Administrator, function, trade or carry on business under any name or title of 
which the word “co-operative” or its equivalent in any Indian language, forms 
part. 


(2) Any person contravening the provisions of the foregoing sub-section 
shall on conviction, be liable for penalty which may extend to twenty-five 
thousand rupees. 


127. For contravention of the provisions of section 81, an officer— 


(i) who is a servant of a society, shall be liable to pay a penalty not 
exceeding ten thousand rupees; 


(ii) who is not a servant of the society, the Registrar may by an order 
in writing declare such officer to be disqualified for being an officer or a 
member of the Committee of the society or for being elected or appointed 
to any office of the society, for such period not exceeding six years as he 
may specify in the order: 


Provided that before making an order under this section, the Registrar shall 
give or cause to be given, an opportunity to the officer to show cause against the 
act proposed to be taken against him. 


128. (/) It shall be an offence under this Regulation, if— 


(a) any person makes a declaration referred to in section 26 which he 
knows or has reason to believe to be false; 


(0) the officer or officers authorised under sub-section (3) of section 37 
fail to discharge the functions as provided in the said section; 


(c) any member of a society transfers any property or interest in 
property in contravention of sub-section (2) of section 52 or any person 
knowingly acquires or abets the acquisition of, such property; 


(d) any employer or director, manager, secretary or other officer or 
agent acting on behalf of such employer without sufficient cause, fails to 
comply with sub-section (2) of section 54; 


(e) a Committee of a society or an officer or member thereof fails to 
invest funds of such society in the manner required under section 63; 


(f) any person, collecting share money for a society in formation, does 
not within a reasonable period deposit the same in the State Co-operative 
Bank, or a Central Co-operative Bank, or in any Nationalised Bank, or a 
postal savings bank; 


(g) any person, collecting the share money for a society in formation, 
makes use of the funds so raised for conducting any business or trading in 
the name of a society to be registered or otherwise; 


(A) any person before, during or after the election of members of the 
Managing Committee or office bearers, adopts corrupt practice; 


(i) a retiring Chairperson to whom a direction has been issued under 
sub-section (2) of section 78, fails to comply with such direction; 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(j) a Committee of a society or a member thereof fails to comply with 
the provisions of section 79; 


(k) a Committee of a society or an officer or a member thereof, fails to 
comply with the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) or (5) of section 81; 


(J) any officer or member of a society who is in possession of 
information, books and records, fails to furnish such information or produce 
books and papers, or give assistance to a person appointed or authorised by 
the Administrator or the Registrar under sections 22,72, 74, 85, 86, 90, 92, 
93, 94, 105 or 115; 


(m) any officer of a society fails to hand over the custody of books, 
records, cash, security and other property belonging to the society of which 
he is an officer, to a person appointed under sections 22,72, 85, 86 or 115; 


(n) a Committee of a society or any officer or a member thereof fails 
without any reasonable excuse to comply with orders made under 
section 87 or to give any notice, or to send any return or document, do or 
allow to be done anything, which the Committee, officer or member is by 
this Regulation required to give, send, do or allow to be done; 


(०) a Committee of a society or an officer or member thereof wilfully 
neglects or refuses to do any act or to furnish any information required for 
the purposes of this Regulation by the Registrar or other person duly 
authorised by him in writing in this behalf; 


(p) a Committee of a society, or any officer or member thereof, wilfully 
makes a false return, or furnishes, false information, or fails to maintain proper 
accounts; 


(q) any person wilfully or without any reasonable excuse disobeys any 
summons, requisition or lawful written order issued under provisions of this 
Regulation; 


(r) an officer or a society fails to comply with the order made by the 
Registrar under section 89; 


(s) an officer, member, agent or servant of a society fails to comply 
with the requirements of sub-section (2) of section 90; 


(t) an officer or a member of a society wilfully fails to comply with 
any decision, award or order passed under section 107; 


(४) amember ofa society fraudulently disposes of property over which 
the society has a prior claim, or a member or officer or employee or any 
person disposes of his property by sale, transfer, mortgage, gift or otherwise, 
with the fraudulent intention of evading the dues of the society; 


(v) an officer of a society wilfully recommends or sanctions for his 
personal use or benefit or for use or benefit of a person in whom he is 
interested, a loan in the name of any other person; 


(w) an officer or member of a society destroys, mutilates, tampers 
with, or otherwise alters, falsifies or secretes or is privy to the destruction, 
mutilation, alteration, falsification or secreting of any books, papers or 
securities or makes, or is privy to the making of any false or fraudulent entry 
in any register, book of account or document belonging to the society; 


(x) a Committee of co-operative bank fails to comply with all or any 
of the clauses of section 125. 


(2) Where an offence under this Regulation has been committed by a 


Committee of a society, or Committee of co-operative bank, every person who at 
the time the offence was committed, was a member of such Committee, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 


63 


64 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such 
person liable to any punishment as provided in this Regulation, if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


Punishment for 129. Every employer or officer, member, agent or servant of Committee of 
contravention of co-operative bank, who contravenes the provisions of section 125 shall, on 
section 125. a sie : 

conviction, be punished,— 


(7) under clause (a) of that section, with fine which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees; 


(ii) under clause (b) of that section, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees or with both; 


(iii) under clause (c) of that section, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees or with both; 


(iv) under clause (d) of that section, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees or with both; 


(v) under clause (e) of that section, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees or with both; 


(vi) under clause (7) of that section, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to two lakh 
rupees or with both; 


(vii) under clause (g) of that section, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees or with both. 


Punishment for 130. (1) Every employer or officer, member, agent or servant of a society, or 


a any other person, who commits an offence under section 128 shall, be punished,— 


(a) under clause (a) of that section, with simple imprisonment which 
may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees or both; 


(0) under clause (b) of that section, with penalty which may extend to 
twenty-five thousand rupees; 


(c) under clause (c) of that section with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees or with both; 


(व) under clause (d) of that section with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees or with both; 


(e) under clause (e) of that section with penalty which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees; 


(f) under clause (f) of that section with penalty which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees; 


(g) under clause (g) of that section with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees or with both; 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(A) under clause (/) of that section with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees or with both; 


(i) under clause (7) of that section, with simple imprisonment which 
may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to twenty-five 
thousand rupees or with both; 


(7) under clause (/) of that section, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees or with both; 


(k) under clause (4) of that section, with penalty which may extend to 
twenty-five thousand five hundred rupees; 


(J) under clause (/) of that section, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to twenty-five 
thousand rupees or with both; 


(m) under clause (m) of that section, with penalty which may extend 
to twenty-five thousand rupees; 


(7) under clause (7) of that section, with penalty which may extend to 
twenty-five thousand rupees; 


(०) under clause (0) of that section, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to 
twenty-five thousand rupees or with both; 


(p) under clause (p) of that section, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees or with both; 


(q) under clause (६) of that section, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees or with both; 


(r) under clause (r) of that section, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to twenty-five 
thousand rupees or with both; 


(s) under clause (s) of that section, with penalty which may extend to 
twenty-five thousand rupees; 


(7) under clause (f) of that section, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to twenty-five 
thousand rupees or with both; 


(४) under clause (४) of that section, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees or with both; 


(v) under clause (v) of that section, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees or with both; 


(w) under clause (w) of that section, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees, or with both. 


(2) No prosecution for an offence under section 128 shall be instituted in 


respect of the same facts on which a penalty has been imposed by the Registrar 
under any provisions of this Regulation. 


65 


Cognizance of 
offences. 


Constitution of 
Co-operative 
Tribunal. 


66 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(3) The penalties under this Regulation shall be imposed by the Registrar 
and the manner of imposing such penalties shall be such as may be prescribed. 


131. (J) No court inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate of first class shall 
try any offence for which imprisonment is provided as one of the modes of 
punishment with fine. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 it shall be lawful for the Judicial Magistrate of first class to pass a 
sentence or fine on any person convicted of an offence under section 147 as 
provided under sections 148 and 149, in excess of his powers under section 26 of 
that Code. 


(3) No prosecution under this Regulation shall be initiated, except with the 
previous sanction of the Registrar. 
CHAPTER XIV 
APPEALS, REVIEW AND REVISION 
132. (7) The Administrator shall constitute a Tribunal to be called the 


Co-operative Tribunal to exercise the functions conferred on it or under this 
Regulation. 


(2) The Tribunal shall consist of a President and such number of other 
members as the Administrator may, from time to time, consider necessary. 


(3) The qualifications, experience, terms and conditions for appointment of 
the President and other members shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Administrator may terminate the appointment of any member of the 
Tribunal before the expiry of the term of his office, if such member— 


(a) is adjudged as an insolvent; 


(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside 
the duties of his office unless such employment is authorised by the 
Administrator; 


(c) is or becomes in any way concerned or interested in any contract 
or agreement made by or on behalf of the Administration or participates in 
any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emoluments arising there 
from otherwise than as a member; 


(d) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a 
Member: 


Provided that the Member shall not be removed from his office on the 
grounds specified under clauses (b) or (c), except by an order made by the 
Administrator after an inquiry made by the Judge of the concerned High Court 
having jurisdiction in such manner as may be prescribed; or 


(e) is convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude. 


(5) Any vacancy in the membership of the Tribunal shall be filled by the 
Administrator. 


(6) The powers and functions of the Tribunal may be exercised and 
discharged by the Benches constituted by the President from amongst the 
members of the Tribunal including himself and such Benches shall consist of two 
or more members. 


(7) Where a matter is heard by three members the opinion of the majority 
shall prevail, and the decision shall be in accordance with the opinion of the 
majority and where a matter is heard by an even number of members, and the 
members are equally divided, if the President be one of the members, the opinion 
of the President shall prevail and in other cases the matter shall be referred for 
hearing to the President and shall be decided in accordance with his decision: 


Provided that any interlocutory application may be heard by one or more 
members who may be present. 


46 of 2023. 


5 of 1908. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(8) Subject to the previous sanction of the Administrator, the Tribunal shall 
frame regulations consistent with the provisions of this Regulation and rules made 
thereunder, for regulating its procedure and the disposal of its business which shall 
be published in the Official Gazette. 


133. (1) The Tribunal may call for and examine the record of any proceeding 
in which an appeal lies to it, for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality 
or propriety of any decision or order passed, and if, in any case, it appears to the 
Tribunal that any such decision or order should be modified, annulled or reversed, 
the Tribunal may pass such order thereon as it may deem appropriate. 


(2) Where an appeal is made to the Tribunal under section 109, it may make 
such interlocutory order spending the decision of the appeal as may appear to it 
to be just and convenient, or such orders as may be necessary for the ends of 
justice, or to prevent the abuse of the process of the Tribunal. 


(3) An order passed in appeal under sub-section (/) or in review under 
section 134, by the Tribunal, shall be final and conclusive and shall not be called 
in question in any civil or revenue court. 


(4) The Tribunal hearing an appeal under this Regulation shall exercise all 
the powers conferred upon an appellate court by section 99 and Order XLI in the 
First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 


134. (/) The Tribunal may, either on the application of the Registrar, or any 
interested party, review its own order in such case and pass in reference thereto 
such order as it thinks appropriate: 


Provided that no application made by the interested party shall be 
entertained, unless the Tribunal is satisfied that there has been discovery of new 
and important matter of evidence, which after the exercise of due diligence was 
not within the knowledge of the applicant or could not be produced by him at the 
time when the order was made, or that there has been some mistake or error 
apparent on the face of the record, or for any other sufficient reasons: 


Provided further that no such order shall be varied or revised, unless notice 
has been given to the interested parties to appear and be heard in support of such 
order. 


(2) An application for review under sub-section (/) by any party shall be 
made within a period of ninety days from the date of communication of the order 
of the Tribunal. 


135. () In exercising the powers conferred on the Tribunal by or under this 
Regulation, it shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court in respect 
of— 


(a) proof of facts by affidavit; 


(6) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 


(c) compelling the production of documents; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; and 
(e) any other matter which may be prescribed. 


(2) In the case of any such affidavit, any officer appointed by the Tribunal 
in this behalf may administer the oath to the deponent. 


136. (7) An appeal against an order or decision under sections 4, 9, 11, 13, 
17, 20, 22, 40, and 86 shall lie,— 


67 


Proceedings of 
Tribunal. 


Review of 
orders of 
Tribunal. 


Tribunal to have 
powers of civil 
court. 


Appeals. 


Extension of 
period of 
limitation of 
appellate 
authority in 
certain cases. 


Power of 
Administrator 
and Registrar to 
call for 
proceedings of 
subordinate 
officers to pass 
orders thereon. 


Power of 
Administrator to 
give directions 
for e-tender 
process. 


Recovery of 
sums due to 
Administration. 


68 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(a) if made or sanctioned or approved by the Registrar or an Additional 
Registrar or Joint Registrar on whom powers of the Registrar are conferred, 
to the Administrator; 


(b) if made or sanctioned by any person other than the Registrar or a 
Deputy Registrar or Assistant Registrar on whom the powers of the 
Registrar are conferred, to the Registrar. 


(2) An appeal against an order of a Liquidator under section 117 shall lie— 


(a) to the Administrator if the order was made with the sanction or 
approval of the Registrar; and 


(b) to the Registrar in any other case. 


(3) An appeal against an order or decision under sections 87, 96, 99 and any 
order passed by the Registrar for paying compensation to a society, and any other 
order for which an appeal to the Tribunal has been provided under this Regulation, 
shall lie to the Tribunal. 


(4) An appeal under sub-sections (/), (2) or (3) shall be filed within two 
months of the date of the communication of the order or decision. 


(5) The procedure to be followed in presenting and disposing of appeals 
under this section or under any other provisions of this Regulation shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 


(6) Save as otherwise provided in this Regulation, no appeal shall lie against 
any order, decision or award passed in accordance with this Regulation and every 
such order, decision or award shall be final, and where provisions for any appeal 
has been provided, any order passed in appeal shall be final and no further appeal 
shall lie against it. 


137. In all cases in which it is provided that an appeal may be filed under 
this Regulation against any decision or order within a specified period, the 
appellate authority may admit an appeal after the expiry of such period, if the 
appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within such period. 


138. The Administrator and the Registrar may call for and examine the 
record of any inquiry or the proceedings of any other matter of any officer 
subordinate to them, except those referred to in sub-section (/) of section 133, for 
the purpose of satisfying themselves as to the legality or propriety of any decision 
or order passed, and the regularity of the proceedings of such officer and in any 
case, it appears to the Administrator or the Registrar, that any decision or order or 
proceedings so called for should be modified, annulled or reversed, the 
Administrator or the Registrar, as the case may be, may after giving persons 
affected thereby an opportunity of being heard, pass such order thereon as he may 
deem appropriate. 


CHAPTER XV 
MISCELLANEOUS 


139. The Administrator may, by general or special order, direct any society 
or any class of society not to render contract in relation to such matters concerning 
such society or the class of any society and to make purchases for such amount 
by following the e-tender process. 


140. (7) Unless otherwise provided by this Regulation, all sums due from a 
society or from an officer or member or previous member or a deceased member 
of a society, to the Administration, may be recovered as arrears of land revenue. 


[Part H— 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 69 


(2) The sums due from a society to the Administration and recoverable 
under sub-section (/) may be recovered— 


(i) from the property of the society; 


(ii) in the case of a society of which the liability of the members is 
limited, from the members or past members or from their estate if they have 
died, subject to the limit of their liability; 


(iii) in the case of societies with unlimited liability, from the members 
or past members or their estate, if they have died. 


(3) The liability under this section shall in all cases be subject to the 
provisions of section 38. 


141. Every year within six months of the closure of the accounting year, Filing of 
every society shall file the following returns with the Registrar, namely:— ros 


(a) annual report of the activities; 

(b) audited statements of accounts; 

(c) plan for surplus disposal as approved by the general body; 
(d) list of amendments to the bye-laws of the society; 


(e) declaration regarding date of holding of general body meeting and 
conduct of elections where due; 


(f) any other information required by the Registrar in pursuance of any 
of the provisions of this Regulation. 


142. (J) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Filing of 
Regulation, and without prejudice to the provisions of the Information 5 कर कप 
18 of 2000. Technology Act, 2000, the Administrator may, from such date as may be notified, acta ak 
require that— in electronic 
Be ee form. 
(a) such applications, returns, reports, statement of accounts, or any 


other particulars or document as may be required to be filed or delivered 
under this Regulation or the rules made thereunder, shall be filed in the 
electronic form and authenticated; 


(0) such document, notice, any communication, or information, as 
may be required to be served or delivered under this Regulation, shall be 
served or delivered in the electronic form and authenticated; 


(c) such applications, returns, reports, statement of accounts, registers, 
bye-laws or any other particulars or documents and returns filed under this 
Regulation or the rules made thereunder shall be maintained by the Registrar 
in the electronic form and registered or authenticated, as the case may be; 


(d) such inspection of bye-laws, returns, reports, statement of accounts 
or any other particulars or documents maintained in the electronic form, as 
is otherwise available for inspection under this Regulation or the rules made 
thereunder, may be made by any person through the electronic form; and 


(e) such fees, charges, or other sums payable under this Regulation or 
the rules made thereunder shall be paid through the digital mode, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Registrar shall— 
(a) issue certificate of registration; 
(b) register the amendment of bye-laws; 
(c) register change of registered office; 


(d) register any document; 


Competency of 
a member to 
transfer land or 
interest therein 
to society. 


Registrar's 
powers to 
recover certain 
sums by 
attachment and 
sale of property. 


Power to 
exempt societies 
from provisions 
of Regulation. 


Delegation of 
powers of 

Administrator 
and Registrar. 


70 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(e) issue any certificate; 
(f) issue notice; and 


(g) receive such communication, as may be required to be registered 
or issued or recorded or received under this Regulation or the rules made 
thereunder or perform duties or discharge functions or exercise powers 
under this Regulation or the rules made thereunder or do any act which is 
by this Regulation directed to be performed or discharged or exercised or 
done by the Registrar, in the electronic form in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression “electronic 
form” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (7) of sub-section (/) 
of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000. 


143. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 
and the Registration Act 1908, it shall be lawful for a member of a Co-operative 
Farming Society to transfer to the society any land held by him or the whole or 
part of his interest in any land by an agreement in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


144. (/) The Registrar or any subordinate officer empowered by him in this 
behalf may, subject to such rules as may be made by the Administrator but without 
prejudice to any other mode of recovery provided by or under this Regulation, 
recover— 


(a) any amount due under a decree or order of a civil court, obtained 
by a society; 


(6) any amount due under a decision, award or order of the Registrar, 
his nominee or the board of nominees or Liquidator or Tribunal; 


(c) any sum awarded by way of costs under this Regulation; 


(d) any sum ordered to be paid under this Regulation as a contribution 
to the assets of the society, 


together with interest, if any, due on such amount or sum and the costs of 
recovering the same, by the attachment and sale or by sale without attachment of 
the property of the person against whom such decree, decision, award or order has 
been obtained or passed. 


(2) The Registrar or the officer empowered by him shall be deemed when 
exercising the powers under sub-section (/) or when passing any order on any 
application made to him for such recovery, to be a civil court for the purposes of 
article 182 in the First Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963. 


145. () The Administrator may, by general or special order, to be published 
in the Official Gazette, and for the reasons to be recorded in writing, exempt any 
society or class of societies from any of the provisions of this Regulation, or may 
direct that such provisions shall apply to such societies with such modifications 
not affecting the substance thereof as may be specified in the order: 


Provided that no order to the prejudice of any society shall be passed, 
without an opportunity being given to such society to represent its case. 


(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be applicable to matters related 
to banking. 


146. The Administrator may, by notification, and subject to such conditions, 
as it may think fit to impose, delegate— 


[Part H— 


21 of 2000. 
4 of 1882. 
16 of 1908. 


36 of 1963. 


39 of 2002. 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(a) any power exercisable by him under this Regulation except the 
power under sub-section (/) of section 136 and section 152 thereof to the 
Registrar; 


(8) all or any of the powers of the Registrar under this Regulation to 
any Committee constituted or to any co-operative federal society recognised 
under section 101 or to an officer of such society or to any panchayat 
constituted under any law relating to panchayats for the time being in force 
in the Union territory. 


147. (1) No society shall open a branch or a place of business outside the 
Union territory, and no co-operative society registered under any law in any other 
State shall open a branch or a place of business in the Union territory without the 
permission of the Registrar. 


(2) Every co-operative society registered under any law in any other State, 
and permitted to open a branch or a place of business in the Union territory under 
sub-section (/) or which has a branch or a place of business in the Union territory 
before the commencement of this Regulation, shall, within three months from the 
date of the opening of such branch or place of business or from the date of the 
commencement of this Regulation, as the case may be, file with the Registrar a 
certified copy of the bye-laws and amendments and, if these be not in English a 
certified translation thereof in English or Hindi and shall submit to the Registrar 
such returns and information as are submitted by similar societies registered under 
this Regulation in addition to those which may be submitted to the Registrar of 
that State where such society is registered. 


(3) The provisions of sub-sections (/) and (2) shall not apply to co-operative 
societies to which the provisions of the Multi-State Co-operative Societies 
Act, 2002 applies: 


Provided that in case of a co-operative society carrying on the business of 
banking, the guidelines on the subject issued by Reserve Bank from time to time 
shall be followed. 


(4) Nothing contained in sub-section (/) shall affect a society which has a 
branch or a place of business outside the Union territory at the commencement of 
this Regulation. 


148. The Registrar, any person exercising the powers of the Registrar, an 
official assignee under section 22, a custodian under section 72, co-operative 
election officer under section 74, a person authorised to audit the accounts of a 
society under section 90, or to hold an inquiry under section 92, or to make an 
inspection under sections 93 or 94, and a person appointed as a special officer 
under sections 86 or 123, or as anominee or board of nominees under section 104, 
or as a Liquidator under section 115, and all members of the Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of clause 28 of section 2 of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


149. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Registrar or any person subordinate to him or acting on his authority or any officer 
under this Regulation in respect of anything done or intended to be done in good 
faith in pursuance of this Regulation or rules made thereunder. 


150. (7) Save as expressly provided in this Regulation, no civil or revenue 
court shall have any jurisdiction in respect of— 


(a) the registration of a society or its bye-laws, or the amendment of 
its bye-laws, or the dissolution of the Committee of a society, or the 
management of the society on dissolution thereof; 


71 


Branches, etc., 
of societies 
outside Union 
territory. 


Registrar and 
other officers to 
be public 
servants. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Bar on 
Jurisdiction of 
courts. 


72 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(0) any dispute required to be referred to the Registrar or his nominee 
or board of nominees, for decision; or 


(c) any matter concerned with the winding up and dissolution of a 
society. 


(2) While a society is being wound up, no suit or other legal proceeding 
relating to the business of such society shall be proceeded with or instituted 
against the society or any member thereof, or any matter touching the affairs of 
the society, except by leave of the Registrar, and subject to such terms as he may 
impose. 


(3) All orders, decisions or awards passed in accordance with the provisions 
of this Regulation or the rules made thereunder, shall, subject to the provisions 
for appeal or revision, be final and no such order, decision or award shall be liable 
to be challenged, set aside, modified, revised or declared void in any court upon 
the merits, or upon any other ground whatsoever except for want of jurisdiction. 


Notice 151. Save as otherwise provided in this Regulation, no suit shall be instituted 

necessary in against a society, or any of its officers, in respect of any Regulation touching the 

sm: business of the society, until the expiration of two months next after notice in 
writing has been delivered to the Registrar or left at his office, stating the cause 
of action, the name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff and the 
relief which he claims, and the plaint shall contain a statement that such notice 
has been so delivered or left. 


Power to make 152. (/) The Administrator may, by notification and subject to the condition 
tules and its of previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with the provisions of this 


laying bef thi . 
कमर मर Regulation to carry out the purposes of this Regulation. 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the matters enumerated in 
respective sections of this Regulation. 


(3) Every rule made by the Administrator under this Regulation shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 


है 864 5 Act 153. The provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, shall not apply to societies 18 of 2013. 
४७७७४ registered, or deemed to be registered under this Regulation. 


Power to 154. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 

remove - Regulation, the Administrator may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 

difficulties. a पु : : ie हि है 
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Regulation as 
may appear to him to be necessary or expedient for the removal of that difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of one year from the date of commencement of this Regulation. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


Repeal and 155. (7) The Gujarat Cooperative Societies Act, 1961 as extended to the X of 1962. 
Seat Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli by order of the Central Government 
and the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 as extended to the Union XXIV of 1961. 
territory of Daman and Diu by order of Central Government (hereafter in this 
Chapter referred to as the said Acts) are hereby repealed: 


10 of 1897. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Provided that such repeal shall not affect— 


(i) the previous operation of the said Acts so repealed, or anything duly 
done or suffered thereunder; 


(ii) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or 
incurred under the law so repealed; 


(iii) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any 
offence committed against the said Acts so repealed; or 


(iv) any investigation, proceedings, legal proceedings or remedy in 
respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture 
or punishment as aforesaid, 


and any such investigation, proceedings, legal proceedings or remedy may be 
instituted, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment 
may be imposed, as if the said Acts had not been repealed. 


(2) All societies registered or deemed to be registered under the said Acts 
the registration of which was in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Regulation, shall on such commencement to be deemed to be registered under 
this Regulation; and all proceedings pending immediately before such 
commencement before any Registrar, Arbitrator, Liquidator or Tribunal or other 
officer, authority or person under the provisions of the said Acts shall stand 
transferred where necessary, to the Registrar, Arbitrator, Liquidator or Tribunal 
or other corresponding officer, authority or person under this Regulation, and if 
no such officer, authority or person exists or if there be a doubt as to the 
corresponding officer, authority or person to such officer, authority or person as 
the Administrator may designate and shall be continued and disposed of by such 
officer, authority or person in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation. 


(3) Any reference to the said Acts or to any provisions thereof or to any 
officer, authority or person entrusted with any functions thereunder, in any law 
for the time being in force in the Union territory or in any instrument or document 
shall be construed, where necessary, as a reference to this Regulation or its 
relevant provisions or the corresponding officer, authority or person functioning 
under this Regulation, and the corresponding officer, authority or person, as the 
case may be, shall have and exercise the functions under such law instrument or 
document. 


(4) The mention of particular matters referred to in sub-section (/) shall not 
be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of repeal. 


73 


74 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY __ [Part II—Sec. 1] 


THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 4(Z)] 


Co-operative Principles 


1. Voluntary and Open Membership 


Co-operatives are voluntary organisations, open to all persons capable of 
using their services and willing to accept the responsibilities of membership, 
without discrimination on bases of gender, social inequality, racial, political 
ideologies or religious consideration. 


2. | Democratic Member Control 


Co-operatives are democratic organisations controlled by their members, 
who actively participate in setting their policies and decision making. Elected 
representatives of these co-operatives are responsible and accountable to their 
members. 


3. | Member’s Economic Participation 


Members contribute equitable and control the capital of their co-operative 
democratically. At least a part of the surplus arising out of the economic results 
would be the common property of the co-operatives. The remaining surplus could 
be utilised benefiting the members in proportion to their share in the co-operative. 


4. Autonomy and Independence 


Co-operatives are autonomous, self-help organisations controlled by their 
members. If co-operatives enter into agreement with other organisations including 
Government or raise capital from external sources, they do so on terms that ensure 
their democratic control by members and maintenance of co-operative autonomy. 


5. Education, Training and Information 


Co-operatives provide education and training to their members, elected 
representatives and employees so that they can contribute effectively to the 
development of their co-operatives. They also make the general public, 
particularly young people and leaders aware of the nature and benefits of 
cooperation. 


6. Cooperation among Co-operatives 


Co-operatives serve their members most effectively and strengthen the 
co-operative movement, by working together through available local, regional, 
national and international structures. 


7. Concern for community 


While focussing on the needs of their members, co-operatives work for the 
sustainable development of communities through policies accepted by their 
members. 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. Kshitiz Sistatysones 


by Kshitiz Mohan 
Date: 2024.09. 


MGIPMRND—272GIl(S3)—30-9-2024. Mohan 2225330530 


