रजिस्ट्री सं" डी" Were 


(एन)04/0007/2003---23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-28072023-247686 
CG-DL-E-28072023-247686 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग I— खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We [4] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, जुलाई 28, 2023/ श्रावण 6, 945 (शक) 
No. 4] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, JULY 28, 2023/SRAVANA 6, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 28th July, 2023:— 


BILL No. 09 oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 207. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (4) This Act may be called the Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Short title and 
Act, 2023. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


33 of 20I7. 2. In section 4 of the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 20I7 (hereinafter referred Amendment 
to as the principal Act), after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, of section 4. 
namely:— 


'7A) On and from the date of commencement of the Indian Institutes of 
Management (Amendment) Act, 2023, the National Institute of Industrial Engineering, 
Mumbai, shall be called the “Indian Institute of Management, Mumbai”’ and all the 
provisions of this Act shall apply to the said Institute.’. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


Amendment 3. In section 5 of the principal Act,— 


of section 5. a 
(i) in clause (d),— 


(a) for the words "every person employed by every existing Institute", 
the words "every person, other than a Director employed by every existing 
Institute" shall be substituted; 


(b) after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"Provided also that the provisions of the first proviso shall also be 
applicable to the Directors of the Institutes."; 


(ii) after clause (f), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that in 
relation to the Indian Institute of Management, Mumbai, the reference to the 
following expressions in sections 4 and 5— 


(i) ““On and from the commencement of this Act”’; 
(ii) “before such commencement”’; 

(iii) “before commencement of this Act”; and 
(iv) “before the commencement of this 0८7, 


shall be construed as the reference to the date on which the provisions of the 
Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Act, 2023 comes into force.’. 
Amendment 4. In section L0 of the principal Act,— 


of section 0. 
(a) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the words "to be appointed by the 


Board", the words "to be nominated by the Visitor" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: — 


"(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the Board is 
suspended or dissolved under such conditions or procedure as may be 
prescribed, the Central Government shall constitute an interim Board for a period 
of six months or till a regular Board is constituted as per the provisions of this 


Act.", 
Insertion of 5. After section !0 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
new section namely:— 
l0A. 
Visitor. "I0A. (J) The President of India shall be the Visitor of every Institute. 


(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of any Institute and to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in 
such manner as the Visitor may direct. 


(3) The Board may also recommend to the Visitor, an inquiry as deemed proper 
against the Institute which has not been functioning in accordance with the provisions 
and objectives of the Act. 


(4) Upon receipt of any such report referred to in sub-section (2), the Visitor 
may take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in respect 
of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the Institute shall be bound to 
comply with such directions.". 


Amendment of 6. In section 2 of the principal Act, after sub-section (/), the following sub-section 
section 2. shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(IA) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an outgoing Member 
shall, unless the Board otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is 
appointed or nominated as a Member in his place.". 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


7. In section 6 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2), for the words "appointed by the Board, on such terms", 
the words "appointed by the Board with prior approval of the Visitor, in such manner 
and subject to such terms" shall be substituted; 


(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"(3) The Director shall be appointed out of the panel of names 
recommended by a search-cum-selection committee to be constituted by the 
Board consisting of— 


(a) the Chairperson of the Board, who shall be the Chairperson of 
the search-cum-selection committee; 


(b) one Member to be nominated by the Visitor; and 


(c) two Members chosen from amongst eminent administrators, 
industrialists, educationists, scientists, technocrats and management 
specialists. 


(3A) The procedure to be adopted for selection of the Director shall be 
such as may be prescribed."; 


(c) in sub-section (7), in the opening portion for the words "The Board may 
remove from office the Director", the words "The Board, with prior approval of the 
Visitor, may remove from office the Director" shall be substituted; 


(d) after sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(l0) The services of the Director may be terminated by the Visitor, in 
such manner as may be prescribed.". 


8. Section |7 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


9. In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
"(a) an eminent person to be nominated by the Visitor as Chairperson;"; 
(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
"(d) the Chairperson of each Institute—Member, ex officio;". 
0. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 


"(a) the conditions and the procedure subject to which the Board may be 
suspended or dissolved under sub-section (6) of section 0; 


(aa) such other powers and duties of the Board under clause (w) of 
sub-section (2) of section I;"; 


(ii) after clause (9), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ba) the procedure to be adopted for selection of the Director under 
sub-section (3A) of section 6; 


(bb) the manner of termination of services of Director under 
sub-section (/0) of section 6;". 


Amendment 
of section 6. 


Omission of 
Section 7. 


Amendment of 
section 29. 


Amendment of 
section 34. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Amendment of IL. In section 39 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after clause (c), the following 
section 39. clauses shall be inserted, namely: — 


"(d) the Board of National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai, 
functioning as such immediately before the commencement of the Indian Institutes of 
Management (Amendment) Act, 2023 shall continue to so function until a new Board 
is constituted for that Institute under this Act, but on such constitution of a new 
Board under this Act, the Members of the Board holding office before such 
constitution shall cease to hold office; 


(e) the Academic Council constituted in relation to National Institute of Industrial 
Engineering, Mumbai, before the commencement of the Indian Institutes of 
Management (Amendment) Act, 2023 shall continue to so function until anew Academic 
Council is constituted for that Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a 
new Academic Council under this Act, the Academic Council of the National Institute 
of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai shall cease to function; 


(f) until the first regulations in relation to National Institute of Industrial 
Engineering, Mumbai are made under this Act, the rules and bye-laws of the National 
Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai as in force immediately before the 
commencement of the Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Act, 2023 
shall continue to apply to the National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai 
with necessary modifications and adaptations in so far as they are not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act.". 


Amendment of 2. On and from the date of commencement of the Indian Institutes of Management 
Schedule. (Amendment) Act, 2023, in the Schedule to the principal Act, after SI.No.20 and the entries 
relating thereto, the following SI.No. and entries shall be inserted, namely:— 


"2l. Maharashtra National Institute Mumbai Indian Institute 
of Industrial of Management, 
Engineering, Mumbai, Mumbai.". 
a Society registered 
under the Societies 
Registration 
Act, 860 (2! of I860). 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


The Indian Institutes of Management Act, 20I7 (the Act) was enacted with a view to 
declare certain Institutes of management to be institutions of national importance with a 
view to empower these institutions to attain standards of global excellence in management, 
management research and allied areas of knowledge. 


2. In 96l, the Government of India decided to establish two Indian Institutes of 
Management at Calcutta and Ahmedabad. These specialised institutions were envisaged 
for increasing the pace of management training and education in India. As demand for more 
such institutions grew, four more Indian Institutes of Management at Bangalore, Lucknow, 
Indore and Kozhikode were established. In the Eleventh Plan, seven new Indian Institutes 
of Management at Shillong, Ranchi, Rohtak, Raipur, Kashipur, Tiruchirappalli and Udaipur 
were established. During 205-6, seven more Indian Institutes of Management at Amritsar, 
Bodh Gaya, Jammu, Nagpur, Sambalpur, Sirmaur and Visakhapatnam were established. 
Subsequently, the Act enabled the Institutes to grant degrees, made governance of the 
Institutes uniform and Board driven and enabled them to exercise academic autonomy. 


3. The National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai which was established in 
963 by the Government of India is well known for its techno-managerial strength and 
contribution to the country's economic growth. However, as the Institute is not part of any 
Act of the Parliament, it has experienced several challenges. Despite consistently being 
among top management Institutes in the country, it is unable to grant degrees that has 
adversely affected the prospects of all stakeholders of the Institute, especially the students. 
Such limitations shall be addressed once the Institute comes under the purview of the Act, 
as they shall be able to grant degrees similar to that of all the Indian Institutes of Management 
under the Act. In this context, a Committee of Experts to deliberate on the feasibility and 
desirability of bringing the National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai under the 
Act was constituted and the Committee has strongly recommended to include the said 
Institute in the Act. 


4. The present Bill, namely the Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) 
Bill, 2023, in the light of above, seeks to amend the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 207. 


5. The salient features of the Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Bill 2023, 
inter alia, are as under:— 


(i) to insert a new sub-section (JA) in section 4 of the Act to provide that the 
National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai shall be called the Indian 
Institute of Management, Mumbai and all the provisions of the Indian Institutes 
of Management Act, 207 shall apply to such Institute; 


(ii) to amend section 0 of the Act to provide that the Chairperson of the Board of 
Governors shall be nominated by the Visitor and to empower the Central 
Government to constitute an interim Board in case of suspension or dissolution 
of the said Board of Governors; 


(iii) to insert a new section I0A to provide that the President of India shall be the 
Visitor of every Institute; 


(iv) to amend section 6 of the Act to provide that the Director of the Institute shall 
be appointed out of the panel of names recommended by a search-cum-selection 
committee to be constituted by the Board consisting of such Members as 
mentioned in sub-section (3) of said section; 


(v 


~ 


to amend section 29 of the Act relating to "Coordination Forum of the Institute" 
so as to provide that an eminent person to be nominated by the Visitor shall be 
the Chairperson of the said Forum; and 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


(vi) to amend the Schedule to the Act so as to insert the National Institute of 
Industrial Engineering, Mumbai in the list of the Institutes to be called as Indian 
Institute of Management, Mumbai which is of consequential in nature. 


6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; DHARMENDRA PRADHAN. 


The 2\st July, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai has been allocated 
sixty-five crore rupees as grants-in-aid for the financial year 2022-23. It shall be provided a 
grant-in-aid of eighty crore rupees for a period of one year after becoming as Indian Institute 
of Management, Mumbai. After one year, no grants-in-aid support will be extended to the 
Institute. Thus, there is no additional financial implication with regard to the proposed 
amendment of the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 207. The National Institute of 
Industrial Engineering, Mumbai shall be generating this amount through additional internal 
accruals. 


In view of the foregoing, the Bill, if enacted, would not involve any additional financial 
expenditure, either recurring or non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY _ [Part II—Szc. 2] 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause || of the Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Bill, 2023 relates to 
amendment of section 34. The said section empowers the Central Government to make rules 
in respect of certain matters mentioned in the Act. It is proposed to amend the said section 
empowering the Central Government to make rules in respect of the following matters also, 
namely:— 


(a) the conditions and the procedure subject to which the Board may be 
suspended or dissolved under sub-section (6) of section 0; 


(b) the procedure to be adopted for selection of Director under 
sub-section (3A) of section 6; 


(c) the manner of termination of services of Director under sub-section (/0) of 
section l6. 


2. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made under the aforesaid provisions 
are matters of detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The 
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH, 


Secretary General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-I!0054. 
Kshitiz femme 


Date: 2023.07.28 
30" 


Mohan {ssoio.0: 


MGIPMRND—82GI(S3)—28-07-2023. 


