रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. 0. L.-33004/99 


"रत = राज़जपत्र 
Che Gazette of India 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-24052024-254330 
CG-DL-E-24052024-254330 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 


भाग तर--खण्ड 3---उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं. 98] नई दिल्ली, शुक्रवार, मई 24, 2024/ज्येष्ठ 3, 946 
No. 984] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, MAY 24, 2024/JYAISHTHA 3, 946 


गृह मंत्रालय 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्‍ली, 24 मई, 2024 


का.आ. 2080(अ).---गौहाटी उच्च न्यायालय के न्यायाधीश माननीय श्री न्यायमूर्ति संजय कुमार मेधि की 
अध्यक्षता में गठित अधिकरण, जिसको विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिनियम, 4967 की धारा 4() के अंतर्गत 
यह न्याय-निर्णय करने का मामला भेजा गया था कि मणिपुर के मैतई उग्रवादी संगठनों अर्थात द पीपुल्स लिब्रेशन आर्मी 
(पीएलए) तथा इसके राजनीतिक विंग, द रिवोल्यूशनरी पीपल्स फ्रंट (आरपीएफ), द यूनाइटेड नेशनल लिब्रेशन फ्रंट 
(यूएनएलएफ) और इसकी सशस्त्र विंग- द मणिपुर पीपल्स आर्मी (एमपीए), = trees रिवोल्यूशनरी पार्टी ऑफ 
कांगलीपाक (पीआरईपीएके) तथा इसकी सशस्त्र विंग- “द रेड आर्मी”, द कांगलीपाक कम्युनिस्ट पार्टी (कैसीपी) और इसकी 
सशस्त्र विंग, जिसे भी द "रेड आर्मी” कहा जाता है, द कांगली याओल कानन्‍्बा AT (केवाईकेएल), द कोर्डिनिशन कमेटी 
(कॉरकॉम) और द एलायंस फॉर सोशलिस्ट यूनिटी BETS ITH (एएसयूके) को इसके सभी गुटों, स्कंधों और अग्रणी संगठनों 
सहित विधिविरुद्ध संगम के रूप में घोषित करने के लिए पर्याप्त कारण है या नहीं, के आदेश दिनांक 06.05.2024 को 
विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण ) अधिनियम, 7967 की धारा 4 (4) के अनुसार आम जानकारी के लिए प्रकाशित किया 
जाता है : 


(आदेश इस अधिसूचना के अंग्रेजी भाग में छपा है।) 
[सं, 07/03/2023-0H8. V] 
पियूष गोयल, अपर सचिव 


38] GI/2024 (l) 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 24th May, 2024 


S.O. 2080(E).— In terms of Section 4(4) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, !967, the order dated 
06.05.2024 of the Tribunal presided over by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sanjay Kumar Medhi, Judge of the Gauhati High 
Court, to whom a reference was made under Section 4(l) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 967 for 
adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the Meitei Extremist Organizations of Manipur, viz, 
the Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) and its political wing, the Revolutionary Peoples’ Front (RPF), the United 
National Liberation Front (UNLF) and its armed wing- the Manipur People’s Army (MPA), the Peoples’ 
Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK) and its armed wing- the Red Army, the Kangleipak Communist Party 
(KCP) and its armed wing also called the “Red 


Army”, the Kanglei Yaol Kanba Lup (KYKL), the Co-ordination Committee (CorCom) and the Alliance for 
Socialist Unity Kangleipak (ASUK) along with all their factions, wings and front organizations as unlawful 
associations is published for general information: 


[No.0/03/2023-NE. V] 
PIYUSH GOYAL, Addl. Secy. 


UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES [PREVENTION] TRIBUNAL 
IN THE MATTER OF THE SEVEN VALLEY BASED INSURGENT GROUPS 

IN THE MATTER OF :- 

Notification bearing no. 8.0. 4899 (E) dated 3..2023, published in the Gazette of India in its issue dated 
3..2023, declaring the (I) the Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) and its political wing, the Revolutionary Peoples’ 
Front (RPF), ता) the United National Liberation Front (UNLF) and its armed wing, the Manipur Peoples’ Army 
(MPA), (III) the Peoples’ Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK) and its armed wing, the “Red Army”, (IV) 
the Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) and its armed wing, also called the “Red Army”, (V) the Kanglei Yaol Kanba 
Lup (KYKL), (VI) the Coordination Committee (CorCom) and (VII) the Alliance for Socialist Unity Kangleipak 
(ASUK) along with all their factions, wings and front organizations, as ‘unlawful associations’ in exercise of the 


powers conferred by sub-section [l] of Section 3 of the Unlawful Activities [Prevention] Act, 967 [Act no. 37 of 
967]. 


— AND - 

IN THE MATTER OF :- 

Notification bearing no. 8.0. 5052[E] dated 28..2023, published in the Gazette of India in its issue dated 
28..2023 and issued in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section [l] of Section 5 of the Unlawful Activities 
[Prevention] Act, 967, constituting ‘The Unlawful Activities [Prevention] Tribunal’, for the purpose of adjudicating 
whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the (I) the Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) and its political wing, 
the Revolutionary Peoples’ Front (RPF), (II) the United National Liberation Front (UNLF) and its armed wing, the 
Manipur Peoples’ Army (MPA), (III) the Peoples’ Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK) and its armed wing, 
the “Red Army”, (IV) the Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) and its armed wing, also called the “Red Army”, (५) 
the Kanglei Yaol Kanba Lup (KYKL), (VI) the Coordination Committee (CorCom) and (VID the Alliance for 
Socialist Unity Kangleipak (ASUK) as ‘unlawful associations’. 


— AND -— 


IN THE MATTER OF :- 


Reference under sub-section [l] of Section 4 of the Unlawful Activities [Prevention] Act, 967 made to the Unlawful 
Activities [Prevention] Tribunal by the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs vide letter bearing no. 
0/03/2023-NE.V dated 04.2.2023. 


BEFORE 
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR MEDHI 
PRESIDING OFFICER 
For the Union of India : Mr. Subhash Chandra Keyal, Advocate 


For the State of Manipur : Mr. Pran Bora, Senior Advocate 


[भाग W—are 30॥)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


Mr. Manash Haloi, Advocate 


Mr. Surya Prakash Chittawat, Advocate 


For the Tribunal : Mr. Saptarshi Das, 
Registrar, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal 
Date of Order : 06.05.2024 
l. In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section () of Section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 


967 [Act no. 37 of 967] [hereinafter referred to as ‘the UA(P) Act’, 7967 or simply as ‘The Act’, for ease of 
reference], the Central Government, in the Ministry of Home Affairs, by issuing a Notification bearing no. S.O. 
4899 (E) dated 3..2023, published in the Gazette of India in its issue dated 3..2023, has declared the (I) 
the Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) and its political wing, the Revolutionary Peoples’ Front (RPF), (ID) the 
United National Liberation Front (UNLF) and its armed wing, the Manipur Peoples’ Army (MPA), (III) the 
Peoples’ Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK) and its armed wing, the “Red Army”, (IV) the 
Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) and its armed wing, also called the “Red Army”, (V) the Kanglei Yaol 
Kanba Lup (KYKL), (शा) the Coordination Committee (CorCom) and (VII) the Alliance for Socialist Unity 
Kangleipak (ASUK) along with all their factions, wings and front organizations as ‘unlawful associations’. 


2. The Notification bearing no. 4899 (E) dated 3.!.2023 has, inter alia mentioned the grounds for which the 
Central Government is of the opinion that the abovementioned organizations along with all their factions, wings 
and front organizations should be declared as unlawful associations. The relevant excerpts of the Notification 
dated 3.]].2023 are reproduced hereunder:- 


Whereas the Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) and its political wing, the Revolutionary Peoples’ Front (RPF), 
the United National Liberation Front (UNLF) and its armed wing, the Manipur Peoples’ Army (MPA), the 
Peoples’ Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK) and its armed wing, the “Red Army”, the Kangleipak 
Communist Party (KCP) and its armed wing, also called the “Red Army”, the Kanglei Yaol Kanba Lup (KYKL), 
the Coordination Committee (CorCom) and the Alliance for Socialist Unity Kangleipak (ASUK), (hereinafter 
collectively referred to as the Meitei Extremist Organisations), have, as their professed aim, establishment of an 
independent nation by secession of Manipur from India through armed struggle and to incite indigenous people 
of Manipur for such secession; 


And whereas, the Central Government is of the opinion that they have been, - 
[i] engaging in activities prejudicial to the sovereignty and integrity of India; 
[ii] employing and engaging in armed means to achieve the aforesaid objectives; 
[iii] attacking and killing the Security Forces; the Police and Civilians in Manipur; 


[iv] indulging in acts of intimidation, extortion and looting of civilian population for collection of funds for 
their Organisations; 


[v] making contacts with sources abroad for influencing public opinion and for securing their assistance by 
way of arms and training for the purpose of achieving their secessionist objective; and 


[vi] maintaining camps in neighbouring countries for the purpose of safe sanctuaries, training and clandestine 
procurement of arms and ammunitions; 


And whereas, the Central Government is also of the opinion that the activities of the Meitei Extremist 
Organisations are considered detrimental to the sovereignty and integrity of India and that they are 
unlawful associations; 


And whereas, the Central Government is also of the opinion that if there is no immediate curb and control of 
the Meitei Extremist Organisations they will take the opportunity to, - 


[i] mobilise their cadres for escalating their secessionist, subversive, and violent activities; 


[ii] propagate anti-national activities in collusion with forces inimical to India’s sovereignty and national 
integrity; 


[iii] indulge in killings of civilians and targeting of the Police and Security Forces personnel; 
[iv] procure and induct illegal arms and ammunitions from across the international border; and 
[v] extort and collect huge funds from the public for their unlawful activities. 


3. By another Notification bearing no. 8.0. 5052[E] dated 28..2023, published in the Gazette of India in its issue 
dated 28..2023, the Central Government, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section [l] of Section 5 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of the UA(P) Act, 967, has constituted this Tribunal for the purpose of adjudicating whether or not there is 
sufficient cause for declaring the Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups as unlawful associations. 


The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India by an Order bearing no. !0/03/2023-NE.V dated 
29..2023 issued under the hand of Sri R.K. Pandey, Director [NE-II], North East Division, had initially 
appointed Sri Saumarjyoti Dutta, Deputy Registrar (Recruitment-ID, Gauhati High Court as the Registrar of the 
Tribunal in the matter of the Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups, constituted vide the Notification bearing no. 
S.O. 5052[E] dated 28..2023. However, vide letter no. 0/03/2023-NE.V dated 0.04.2024, Sri Saptarshi 
Das, Deputy Registrar (Bench), Gauhati High Court was appointed as Registrar of this Tribunal in place of Sri 
Saumarjyoti Dutta on account of transfer of the latter. 


The provisions of sub-section (l) of Section 4 of the UA(P) Act, 967 requires that where any association has 
been declared unlawful by a notification issued under sub-section (l) of Section 3, the Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the date of publication of the notification under the said sub-section, refer the 
notification to the Tribunal for the purpose of adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring 
the association unlawful. In accordance with the same, the present Reference has been made to this Tribunal by 
the Central Government under Section 4(l) of the UA[P] Act, 967 vide a letter bearing no. 0/03/2023- 
NE.V dated 04.2.2023. 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE TRIBUNAL 


First Sitting dated 08.0.2024 


The Tribunal held its first sitting on 08.0!.2024 where the learned Special Counsel, Union of India and the 
learned State Counsel, Manipur were present. After careful consideration of the material placed by the Central 
Government and after hearing the learned Special Counsel for the Union of India and the learned counsel for the 
State of Manipur; the Tribunal was prima facie satisfied that notices under Section 4(2) of the UP(A) Act, 967 
should be issued to the organizations, viz. the (I) the Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) and its political wing, the 
Revolutionary Peoples’ Front (RPF), ता) the United National Liberation Front (UNLF) and its armed wing, the 
Manipur Peoples’ Army (MPA), (IID) the Peoples’ Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK) and its armed 
wing, the “Red Army”, (IV) the Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) and its armed wing, also called the “Red 
Army”, (V) the Kanglei Yaol Kanba Lup (KYKL), (VI) the Coordination Committee (CorCom) and (VID the 
Alliance for Socialist Unity Kangleipak (ASUK) along with all their factions, wings and front organizations as 
well as to their principal office bearers to show cause within 30 (Thirty) days from the date of service of the 
notice as to why they should not be declared as unlawful. The Tribunal explicitly opined that the notices shall be 
served upon the organizations in the following manner:- 


[i] | By Speed Post/Registered A/D at the last known addresses of the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups 
along with all their factions, wings and front organizations as well as that of their principal office 
bearers. 


[ii] | Service of notice be also effected on the Office Bearers of the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups in 
Manipur at their addresses, if any, and if under detention, then through the Superintendent [Jail] 
concerned. 


[iii] By publication along with a copy of the Gazette Notification dated 3..2023 in two daily newspapers 
- one in a National Newspaper [in English] and the other one in a prominent local vernacular language 
newspaper - having wide circulation in the areas where the activities of the Seven Valley based 
Insurgent Groups are ordinarily carried on, within |4 days thereof. 


[iv] By affixing of the notice along with a copy of the Gazette Notification dated 3.].2023 at the last 
known addresses of the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups along with all their factions, wings and 
front organizations as well as that of their principal office bearers. 


[v] By a proclamation by beating of drums as well as loudspeakers about the contents of the notice and the 
Notification dated 3..2023 in the areas in which the activities of the Seven Valley based Insurgent 
Groups were or are ordinarily carried on. 


[vi] By displaying the notice along with a copy of the Gazette Notification dated 3.]|.2023, on the notice 
board of the offices of the Deputy Commissioners, the SDMs and Superintendents of Police in all the 
district headquarters of the State where the activities of the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups were 
or are believed to be ordinarily carried on. 


[vii] Notice was directed to be served on the State Government of Manipur through its Chief Secretary. 


[viii] The Notice and the Gazette Notification dated 3..2023 were directed to be announced in the All 
India Radio/electronic media at the prime time and also be pasted at the prominent places in the State 
where the activities of the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups were or are believed to be carried on. 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


[ix] By affixing copies of the notice at some conspicuous parts of the offices, if any, of the Seven Valley 
based Insurgent Groups. 


[x] By publishing on the website of Ministry of Home Affairs, Union of India and of the Department of 
Home and Political, Government of Manipur. 


[xi] By any other possible modes, including e-mail, etc. 


The Tribunal directed that report of the service of notice shall be submitted to the Registrar, duly supported 
by affidavits of the concerned Officer(s)/Official(s) who have effected the service along with the supporting 
documents. The Tribunal decided to hold its next sitting on 9.02.2024. 


B. Second Sitting dated 9.02.2024 


8. 


0. 


Shri S.C Keyal, learned Special Counsel for the Union of India submitted that in compliance of the order 
dated 08.0.2024, service of notice through publication in the website of Ministry of Home Affairs, Union of 
India has been effected and to that effect, an affidavit has been filed before the Registrar of this Tribunal. 


In the said affidavit, the deponent Shri A.K Dhyani, Director in the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government 
of India has deposed that in compliance of order dated 08.0].2024 of this Tribunal, publication has been 
effected in the website of Ministry of Home Affairs, Union of India, viz. (www.mha.gov.in) (home> Division 
of MHA>North East Division>Notifications Under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act [UAPA], 
967>Manipur>Sl. No. |). 


However, as far as the affidavit of the State of Manipur is concerned, on careful examination, it was 
discernible that all the documents pertaining to the various modes of service as enumerated in order dated 
08.0.2024, were not annexed and the said affidavit was also lacking in giving requisite details of the modes 
of service or the attempt to cause service under the said modes. It also appeared from the affidavit and the 
documents that the notices were effected only on 06.02.2024. Since section 4(2) of the UA(P) Act, 967 
mandates that 30 days time is required to be given from the date of such notice upon the concerned 
association/person, the proceedings were adjourned and the State of Manipur was explicitly directed to file an 
additional affidavit annexing all the relevant documents towards service of notice, including the hard copies 
of the two concerned newspapers and also to make appropriate statements regarding details of such service. 


C. Third Sitting dated .03.2024 


Il. 


2. 


Pursuant to order dated 9.02.2024, an additional affidavit was filed by the State of Manipur with regard to 
service of notice as required under section 4(2) of UA(P) Act, 967 read with Rule 6 of The Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Rules, 968. 


In the additional affidavit, the deponent Dr. Mayengbam Veto Singh, Joint Secretary (Home) Government of 
Manipur deposed that the State of Manipur complied with the order dated 08.0.2024 of this Tribunal for 
effecting service upon the members of the Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups by |! (Eleven) different 
ways as specified in the order. It was averred that compliance was effected in the manner which is 
enunciated; 


(i). With respect to service of notice by Speed Post/Registered A/D at the last known addresses of the 
Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups along with all their factions, wings and front organizations as 
well as that of their principal office bearers, the same could not be complied with as the addresses of 
the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups are not available. 


(ii). With respect to service of notice on the Office Bearers of the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups 
in Manipur at their addresses, if any, and if under detention, then through the Superintendent [Jail] 
concerned, notice has been served on 43 (Forty Three) numbers of members who are presently lodged 
in Manipur Central Jail, Sajiwa. 


(iii). With respect to service of notice by publication along with a copy of the Gazette Notification 
dated 3.] | .2023 in two daily newspapers - one in a National Newspaper [in English] and the other one 
in a prominent local vernacular language newspaper - having wide circulation in the areas where the 
activities of the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups are ordinarily carried on, within |4 days thereof; 
compliance has been effected thereof by publication in a local daily namely ‘Poknapham’ on 
0.0.2024 and in a National Newspaper namely ‘The Indian Express’ on 0.0.2024. 


(iv). With respect to service of notice by affixing of the notice along with a copy of the Gazette 
Notification dated 3.][.2023 at the last known addresses of the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups 
along with all their factions, wings and front organizations as well as that of their principal office 
bearers; the same could not be complied with as the addresses are not available. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


3. 


4. 


(v). With respect to service of notice by a proclamation by beating of drums as well as loudspeakers 
about the contents of the notice and the Notification dated 3.][.2023 in the areas in which the 
activities of the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups were or are ordinarily carried on; the same was 
complied with by making announcement by using loudspeaker in the area in which the activities of the 
Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups were carried on. 


(vi). With respect to service of notice by displaying the notice along with a copy of the Gazette 
Notification dated 3..2023, on the notice board of the offices of the Deputy Commissioners, the 
SDMs and Superintendents of Police in all the district headquarters of the State where the activities of 
the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups were or are believed to be ordinarily carried on; the same has 
been complied by displaying in the notice boards of Deputy Commissioners, SDMs and 
Superintendents of Police on 06.02.2024 where the activities of the Seven Valley based Insurgent 
Groups were carried on. 


(vii). With respect to service of notice by serving the same on the State Government of Manipur 
through its Chief Secretary; the same has been served on 08.0.2024. 


(viii). With respect to service of notice by announcement of the Notice and the Gazette Notification 
dated 3..2023 in the All India Radio/electronic media at the prime time and also be pasted at the 
prominent places in the State where the activities of the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups were or 
are believed to be carried on; the same was complied with by broadcasting in DDK and AIR 
(Akashvani) on 06.02.2024. 


(ix). With respect to service of notice by affixing copies of the notice at some conspicuous parts of the 
offices, if any, of the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups; the same could not be complied with as the 
addresses of the Seven Valley based Insurgent Groups are not available. 


(x). With respect to service of notice by publication on the website of Ministry of Home Affairs, Union 
of India and of the Department of Home and Political, Government of Manipur; the same was complied 
with and notice was published in the State Government Official Website on 23.02.2024. 


(xi). With respect to service of notice by any other possible modes, including e-mail, etc; the State 
Government took all measures expect vide e-mail as e-mail addresses are not available. 


The entire original copies of the two newspapers concerned were also filed. The steps taken by the State 
Government, as averred in the affidavit were scrutinized and were found to be in order. Service was held to 
be complete as the time prescribed by law to make necessary response had elapsed. The next date was fixed 
for filing of affidavit by the Union of India and State of Manipur. 


D. Fourth Sitting dated 0.04.2024 


The Union of India filed evidence-on-affidavit of Sri Rajesh Kumar Singh, working as Under Secretary in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. Two documents were exhibited, viz. 


a. Exhibit-CWI/A: Justification for continuation of declaration of The Seven Valley Based Insurgent 
Groups as unlawful association w.e.f. |3th November, 2023. 


b. Exhibit-CWI/B: Notification dated 3..2023 declaring the Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups 
as unlawful associations under the UA(P) Act, 967. 


5. The learned counsel representing the State of Manipur had placed 7 (Seven) list of witnesses which are described 


as under; 
SL. Name of Deponent List of Witnesses For 
No. 
l. S.W-l: Dr. Mayengbam Veto Singh; Joint Secretary (Home), Manipur | The Seven Valley Based Insurgent 
Govt. Groups 
S.W-2: Kabib K.; IGP (Int/NAB), Manipur 
S.W-I: Sri Laishram Khogen Singh, $.D.P.O, Bishnupur P.S Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) 


S.W-2: Babitarani Swain, S.D.P.O, Porompat (RPF) 


S.W-3: Sri L. Santosh Singh, S.D.P.O, Imphal. 


and its Political Wing The 
Revolutionary Peoples’ Front 


[भाग [avs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


S.W-4: Sri K. Meghachandra Singh, Superintendent of Police, Imphal 
East. 
S.W-5: Ksh. Shivakanta Singh, Superintendent of Police, Imphal West. 
S.W-6: Sri Amitabh Singh Arambam, Officer-in-Charge, Bishnupur P.S. 
S.W-7: Maimom Jiten Singh, Officer-in-Charge, Namboi P.S. 
S.W-I: Sri Kangjam Santosh Singh, S.D.P.O, Moirang P.S The United National Liberation 
3. Front (UNLF) and its Armed Wing 
The Manipur Peoples’ Army 
S.W-2: Babitarani Swain, S.D.P.O, Porompat (MPA) 
S.W-3: Sri L. Santosh Singh, S.D.P.O, Imphal. 
S.W-4: Sri K. Meghachandra Singh, Superintendent of Police, Imphal 
East. 
S.W-5: Ksh. Shivakanta Singh, Superintendent of Police, Imphal West. 
S.W-6: Sri Wankheimayumro Mi Singh, Officer-in-Charge, Moirang P.S. 
S.W-7: Atom Chitaranjen Meitei, Officer-in-Charge, Keibul Lamjao P.S. 
S.W-I: Sri Laishram Khogen Singh, S.D.P.O, Bishnupur P.S The People’s Revolutionary Party 
4. of Kangleipak (PREPAK) / The 
People’s Revolutionary Party of 
S.W-2: Babitarani Swain, S.D.P.O, Porompat Kangleipak-Progressive 
(PREPAK-PRO) and its Armed 
Wing The Red Army 
S.W-3: Sri L. Santosh Singh, S.D.P.O, Imphal. 
S.W-4: Sri K. Meghachandra Singh, Superintendent of Police, Imphal 
East. 
S.W-5: Ksh. Shivakanta Singh, Superintendent of Police, Imphal West. 
S.W-6: Sri Amitabh Singh Arambam, Officer-in-Charge, Bishnupur P.S. 
S.W-7: Maimom Jiten Singh, Officer-in-Charge, Namboi P.S. 
S.W-I: Sri Laishram Khogen Singh, $.D.P.O, Bishnupur P.S The Kangleipak Communist Party 
5. (KCP) and Its Armed Wing The 
Red Army 
S.W-2: Babitarani Swain, S.D.P.O, Porompat 
S.W-3: Sri L. Santosh Singh, S.D.P.O, Imphal. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


S.W-4: Sri K. Meghachandra Singh, Superintendent of Police, Imphal 
East. 


S.W-5: Ksh. Shivakanta Singh, Superintendent of Police, Imphal West. 


S.W-6: Sri Amitabh Singh Arambam, Officer-in-Charge, Bishnupur P.S. 


S.W-7: Maimom Jiten Singh, Officer-in-Charge, Namboi P.S. 


S.W-8: Ngangom Romen, S.D.P.O, Lamlai. 


S.W-I: Sri Laishram Khogen Singh, $.D.P.O, Bishnupur P.S The Kanglei Yaol Kanba Lup 
। (KYKL) 

S.W-2: Babitarani Swain, S.D.P.O, Porompat 

S.W-3: Sri L. Santosh Singh, S.D.P.O, Imphal. 

S.W-4: Sri K. Meghachandra Singh, Superintendent of Police, Imphal 

East. 

S.W-5: Ksh. Shivakanta Singh, Superintendent of Police, Imphal West. 

S.W-6: Sri Amitabh Singh Arambam, Officer-in-Charge, Bishnupur P.S. 

S.W-7: Maimom Jiten Singh, Officer-in-Charge, Namboi P.S. 

S.W-: Sri L. Santosh Singh, S.D.P.O, Imphal. The Coordination Committee 
Ts (CORCOM) 

S.W-2: Ksh. Shivakanta Singh, Superintendent of Police, Imphal West. 
6. The total number of depositions for the State of Manipur are 40. However, on perusal of the documents marked 


as exhibits, it was discerned that all the exhibits are either photocopies or certified copies and the original 
documents were said to be in possession of either the State of Manipur or the Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Government of India. As such, before these documents could be admitted as evidence, the originals were 
required to be produced. As such, the next date was fixed for production of the original documents and cross- 
examination of the witnesses who had filed their evidence-on-affidavit. 


E. Fifth Sitting dated 09.04.2024 


7. 


8. 


During the proceedings of the Tribunal on 09.04.2024, all the original documents, the photocopies or certified 
copies of which were marked as exhibits, were produced before the Tribunal. Sri Saptarshi Das, Registrar of this 
Tribunal, scrutinized all the photocopies and certified copies and compared them with the original and placed 
them before the Tribunal after completion of such scrutiny. 


Also, 4 (Four) deponents for the State of Manipur were physically present in the Court for the purpose of cross- 
examination and | (One) deponent for Union of India and 0 (Ten) deponents for State of Manipur were present 
vide video-conferencing for cross-examination, approval of which was already sought in advance. In spite of 


[भाग W—are 30॥)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9 


their appearance, none turned up from the Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups to cross-examine them. As 
such, evidence was closed and the next date was fixed for written submissions. 


F. Sixth Sitting dated 25.04.2024 


9. 


The learned counsel for Union of India and State of Manipur tendered their written submissions and hearing was 
concluded. The matter was reserved for necessary order(s). The contentions/submissions will be delved into in 
detail in the succeeding paragraphs. 


DISCUSSIONS, DECISIONS AND REASONS THEREOF 


20. 


2I. 


22% 


23. 


24. 


25. 


26. 


27. 


The Union of India submitted that in the State of Manipur, militant activities are carried out, inter alia, by 
Meitei extremist organizations, also called as Valley Based Insurgent groups which include Peoples’ Liberation 
Army generally known as PLA, and its political wing, the Revolutionary Peoples;’ Front (RPF), the United 
National Liberation Front (UNLF), the Peoples’ Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK) and its armed 
wing, the ‘Red Army’; the Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) and its armed wing, also called the ‘Red Army’; 
the Kanglei Yaol Kanba Lup (KYKL), the Coordination Committee (CorCom) and the Alliance for Socialist 
Unity Kangleipak (ASUK). 


These insurgent groups were initially declared as unlawful associations in 979 and since then, these 
declarations have been continuously extended. The objective of these organizations is secession from India and 
to regain the perceived lost sovereignty of Manipur State through armed struggle. To achieve these objectives, 
these outfits are engaged in various violent and illegal activities including attacking/killing security forces, 
government employees, law abiding citizens and non-locals in Manipur, intimidation, extortion, collection of 
illegal taxes from employees, commercial establishments, development works, kidnapping for ransom, arms and 
drugs smuggling, procurement of arms or ammunitions from abroad, maintaining camps in neighboring 
countries for sanctuary and training. 


These organizations have their camps or hideouts or shelter places in Myanmar like Sagaing, Chin and Rakhine 
for the purposes of sanctuary, training and clandestine procurement of arms and ammunition. Their areas of 
influence include valley districts of Manipur including Imphal East, Imphal West, Thoubal, Bishnupur, Jiribam 
and Kakching and some Kuki and Vaiphei dominated hill districts of State, like Tengnopal. 


The Union of India has brought to the notice of this Tribunal that the cadre strength of these extremist 
organizations is approximately 250. These extremist organizations have highly sophisticated weapons, arms 
and ammunitions, explosive devices with weaponry numbering 559 approximately. 


During the period from !3 November, 208 till December 2022, a total of 0I9 cases under UA(P) Act, 967 
have been registered against them, chargesheets filed in |] cases and 03 persons have been prosecuted or 
convicted. Also, during the last five years (20l9-2023) and in the current year of 2024 (upto 29.02.2024), out 
of a total of 689 violent incidents in Manipur, these extremist organizations were responsible for 335 incidents 
in which 09 security personnel and 2! civilians were killed. During this period, 205 arms were recovered and 
surrender of 95 extremists and arrest of !!79 extremists with 39 arms have materialized from these extremist 
organizations. 


It has been submitted that various illegal or violent activities have been reported in respect of these insurgent 
groups. In the year 2020, 44 violent incidents were perpetrated by these organizations which include 04 
ambushes on security forces, 2 explosions of bombs/HGs/IEDs, 6 planting of bombs and 24 acts of 
intimidation. These violent activities resulted in the unfortunate deaths of three personnel of Assam Rifles and 
injuries to six others in Indo-Myanmar border area of Chandel in July, 2020. 


In the year 202], 60 violent incidents were perpetrated by these organizations which include 05 ambushes, 08 
explosions, 29 planting of bombs, 02 attacks on civilians and 36 extortion related Incidents. In November 202], 
in an ambush in district Churachandpur, 05 Assam Rifles personnel (including CO of 46 Assam Rifles) were 
killed, seven were injured and 03 civilians were killed. In the year 2022, 96 violent incidents were perpetrated 
by these organizations which include 04 ambushes, 04 attacks on civilians, 29 explosions, 42 planting of 
explosives and 52 extortion related incidents. One Assam Rifles personnel tragically lost his life, three others 
were injured and 05 civilians were killed in the year 2022. In the year 2023, these organizations are responsible 
for 5 violent incidents in Manipur, in which 6 civilians were killed. During this period, the security forces have 
arrested l45 cadres of these organizations with 28 arms. These groups were involved in I] 
kidnappings/abductions cases in Manipur. During the first two months of current year (Jan & Feb, 2024), a total 
of 24 violent incidents were perpetrated by these organizations in which 7 civilians were killed. 43 persons have 
been kidnapped/ abducted by these organizations during the same period. 


These organizations are also engaged, through their front organizations and civil society organizations, in 
targeting non-local population, protesting against peace talks of authorities with other ethnic groups of the State, 
boycotting national days like Republic Day and opposing merger of Manipur with Indian Union. 


0 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


28. 


29. 


30. 


3l. 


32. 


The learned Special Counsel has strenuously submitted that the Central Government is of the opinion that the 
Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups along with their factions, wings and front organizations should be 
declared as ‘unlawful associations’ under the UA (P) Act, 967 for a further period of five years with effect from 
3th November, 2023 for the following reasons- 


a. Espousal of the policy of secession of Manipur from India, 

b. Engagement in activities prejudicial to the sovereignty and integrity of India; 

Cc. Adoption of violence and terror through armed action as a means for achieving their objective; 

4... Attack and killing of security forces personnel and civilian in Manipur; 

e. Extortion and illegal collections from the public; 

f. Contact with sources abroad for influencing public opinion and for securing their assistance by way of 


arms and training for the purpose of achieving their secessionist objective; and 


g. Maintenance of camps in neighboring country for the purpose of sanctuaries, training and clandestine 
procurement of arms and ammunitions. 


In view of the objectives, unlawful activities and violent activities being carried out by the Seven Valley Based 
Insurgent Groups, these outfits have been declared as unlawful association under the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 967 vide notification dated |3th November, 2023. The State Government of Manipur and 
Security Agencies has been consulted and they have recommended that these organizations be declared as 
‘unlawful associations’ under the UA (P) Act, 967 for a further period beyond 2..2023. The last notification, 
declaring these organizations as unlawful association was issued vide 8.0. 568l (E) dated 3.!.20I8. A 
reference under sub-section (l) of Section 4 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, !967 was made to the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal consisting of Hon’ble Mr. Justice G.S. Sistani, Judge of the Delhi 
High Court and the learned Tribunal vide its order dated 07.05.20l9 had confirmed the notification dated 
3..208 issued by the Government of India. The declaration has now been extended for a further period of 
five years we.f. 43.]].2023 vide notification S.O. 4899 dated 3 .2023. 


The State Government of Manipur, in its justification for extension of notification for declaring the Seven 
Valley Based Insurgent Groups as unlawful association’, in its written submission has enumerated the detailed 
activities of this outfit including case registered, number of charge sheets filed, copies of press release, 
newspaper clippings etc. In view of the foregoing submissions, it has been submitted that it is necessary to give 
effect to the notification declaring these organizations as ‘unlawful association’ from the date of its publication 
in the official gazette, under proviso to sub section (3) of UA(P) Act, 967. 


The State of Manipur, through its written submissions, has also comprehensively dealt with the respective 
criminal cases against the the Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups and their members which would be 
reflected in the succeeding paragraphs. 


After having bestowed my utmost consideration on the submissions, it is imperative that a comprehensive 
analysis of the evidences tendered by the State of Manipur in respect of the Seven Valley Based Insurgent 
Groups be undertaken to ascertain as to whether those would fall within the ambit of the definition of ‘unlawful 
association’ as defined by section 2(l)(p) of UA(P) Act, 967. The particulars of the Seven Valley Based 
Insurgent Groups will be discussed separately. 


‘Association’ and ‘Unlawful Association’ as defined by UA(P) Act, 967 


33. 


34. 


‘Association’, as per Section 2()(a) of the UA(P) Act, 967, means any combination or body of individuals. As 
per Section 2()(0) of the UA(P) Act, 967, ‘unlawful activity’, in relation to an individual or association, means 
any action taken by such individual or association [whether by committing an act or by words, either spoken or 
written, or by signs or by visible representation or otherwise], 


i. which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the cession of a part of 
the territory of India or the secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union, or which incites any 
individual or group of individuals to bring about such cession or secession; 


ii. which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India; 
or 


iii. | which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India. 


‘Unlawful Association’ has been defined in Section 2(l)(p) of the UA(P) Act, 967 and it means any 
association, 


i. which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any unlawful 
activity, or of which the members undertake such activity; or 


[भाग W—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण |] 


35. 


36. 


37. 


38. 


39. 


40. 
PEOPLES’ LIBERATION ARMY (PLA) AND ITS POLITICAL WING THE REVOLUTIONARY 


ii. which has for its object any activity which is punishable under Section [53A or Section [53B of the Indian 
Penal Code [45 of 860], or which encourages or aids person to undertake any such activity, or of which 
the members undertake any such activity; provided that nothing contained in sub-clause [ii] shall apply to 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 


Germane to the moot issue in discussion is the observation by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Jamaat-E- 
Islami Hind vs. Union of India, reported in (995) SCC 428, wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court, was 
pleased to opine that an ‘unlawful activity’, defined in the UA(P) Act, 967, means ‘any action taken’ of the 
kinds specified therein and having the consequence mentioned. It has been further observed to the effect that the 
definitions of ‘unlawful activity’ and ‘unlawful association’, as provided in the UA(P) Act, 967, make it 
evident that the determination of the question whether any association is, or has become, an unlawful 
association to justify a declaration under Section 3(l) thereof should be that ‘any action taken’, by such 
association constitutes an ‘unlawful activity’ which is the object of the association or the object is any activity 
punishable under Section 53A or Section !53B of the Indian Penal Code. 


The foregoing paragraph makes it vividly discernible that declaration of an association to be ‘unlawful’ 
primarily hinges on the fact whether ‘any action taken’ thereof by the association constitutes an ‘unlawful 
activity’ within the meaning of law. A declaration as regards an association under Section 3(l) as ‘unlawful 
association’ has to be based on an objective determination of the matter by the Central Government. 


Furthermore, section 4 of the UA(P) Act, !967 requires confirmation of the act of the Central Government by 
the Tribunal. The necessity and purpose underlying the making of the reference to the Tribunal under Section 
4(\) is an adjudication by the Tribunal of the existence of sufficient cause for making the declaration. 


The said ‘sufficient cause’ can only be elucidated by an inquiry and the nature of inquiry contemplated by the 
Tribunal under Section 4(3) requires it to weigh the materials on which the notification under Section 3(/) has 
been issued by the Central Government; the cause shown by the association which has been declared as an 
unlawful association in reply to the notice issued to it; and to take into consideration such further information 
which it may call for; to decide the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. 


This Tribunal has to undertake an objective inquiry whether the Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups are 
unlawful associations or not. Notwithstanding the fact that the Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups did not 
tender appearance to challenge the notification dated 3..2023, it is imperative that the documents exhibited 
by the Union of India and State of Manipur and subjected to the test of objectivity and so that the activities of 
the Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups satisfy the rigours of the definition of ‘unlawful activity’ under 
section 2(l)(o) of the UA(P) Act, 967 in order to ascertain whether they are ‘unlawful associations’ under 
section 2()(p) of the Act. 


The Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups are discussed individually in the following paragraphs. 


PEOPLES’ FRONT (RPF) 


4l. 


42. 


43. 


44. 


THE PEOPLE’S LIBERATION ARMY (PLA) was established under the leadership of N. Bisheswar Singh 
on 25.09.978 with the objective to organize a revolutionary front covering the entire Northeast and unite all 
ethnic groups, including the Meiteis, Nagas and Kukis to liberate Manipur. PLA, though a Meitei outfit, claims 
itself to be a trans-tribal organization seeking to lead the non-Meiteis as well. 


As part of its revitalization efforts, the PLA was reorganized on the lines of a disciplined army. The militant 
wing now comprises of four divisions, viz. Sadar Hill West areas of the Valley of Manipur, Sadar Hill areas in 
the eastern Valley, the entire hill areas in Manipur and the entire Imphal area. Each division has a commander, 
lieutenants, sergeant and lance corporals in its ranks. PLA activists are equipped with sophisticated arms. The 
group has also been reportedly involved in widespread extortion operations. 


The PLA recruits were trained in guerrilla warfare by the then United National Socialist Council of Nagaland 
(NSCN) at its headquarters in Challam, beyond the Somrah Tract, in north Myanmar during the eighties. PLA is 
also reported to have contacts with Pakistan’s Inter Services Intelligence (ISI). PLA has a government-in-exile 
in Bangladesh where the PLA has set up a number of bases in the Sylhet district. Two camps in Myanmar and 
five camps in Bangladesh are currently known to exist, where recruits receives arms training. 


A perusal of the evidence-on-affidavit, more particularly, evidence-on-affidavit of S.W-2, Shri. Kabib K., IGP, 
makes it ostensible that even though the organisation THE PEOPLE’S LIBERATION ARMY (PLA) was 
banned and such declaration has been last confirmed w.e.f. 3..208 (Gazette Notification No. 8.0. 568 (E) 
dated 3..208) for a period of five years, however, the members of the organisation THE PEOPLE’S 
LIBERATION ARMY (PLA) were still active and during the aforesaid period, i.e. from 3..208 to 
2..2023 and as many as 229 F.I.Rs were registered is against the members of the organisation THE 
PEOPLE’S LIBERATION ARMY (PLA). The details of the district wise list of registered F.I.Rs are provided 
in a tabular form hereunder: 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 
District No. of FIRs 
Bishnupur 27 
Chandel 7 
Churachandpur 3 
Imphal East 55 
Imphal West 56 
Jiriban 4 
Kakching 8 
Kanjong 3 
Kangpokpi 2 
Tengnoupal 6 
Thoubal 27 
Ukhrul 
TOTAL 229 


45. 


ili. 


Vi. 


Vii. 


46. 


In respect of PEOPLES’ LIBERATION ARMY (PLA) and its political wing THE REVOLUTIONARY 
PEOPLES’ FRONT (RPF), the State of Manipur adduced as many as Seven (7) Witnesses i.e. S.W- to 
S.W-7. 


SW - l SHRI. LAISHRAM KHOGEN SINGH being the Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) 
Bishnupur Police Station, exhibited as many as 5 F.I.Rs being, F.I.R dated 3/l2/20l8 (Exhibit- A-); 
F.LR dated 22/06/209 (Exhibit- A-2), F.L.R dated 28.05.2020 (Exhibit- A-3); F.I.R dated 3.2.208 
(Exhibit- A-4) and F.I.R dated 4.06.2022 (Exhibit- A-5). 


SW - 2 SMTI. BABITARANI SWAIN, IPS being the Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Porompat, 
exhibited as many as 3 F.I.Rs being, F.I.R dated 4-06-20l9 (Exhibit- A-6); F.I.R dated 08-07-2022 
(Exhibit- A-7) and F.I.R dated 09-02-2022 (Exhibit- A-8). 


SW - 3 SRI L. SANTOSH SINGH, being the Sub -Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Imphal, exhibited 
as many as 2 F.I.Rs being, F.I.R dated 2.03.2023 (Exhibit- A-9) and F.I.R dated 06.02.2024 (Exhibit- 
A-0). 


SW - 4 SHRI. K. MEGHACHANDRA SINGH, being the Superintendent of Police of Imphal East 
District certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I-R’s lodged in 
Imphal East District in State of Manipur. 


SW - 5 KSH. SHIVAKANTA SINGH, IPS, being the Superintendent of Police of Imphal West District 
certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Imphal 
West District in State of Manipur. 


SW - 6 SHRI. AMITABH SINGH ARAMBAM, being the Officer-In-charge, Bishnupur Police Station, 
certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.R’s lodged in 
Bishnupur Police Station. 


SW - 7 SHRI. MAIMOM JITEN SINGH, being the Officer-In-charge, Nambol Police Station, certified 
the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Nambol Police 
Station. 


Let me discuss in brief the exhibits adduced. It is pertinent to mention that all the accused persons named in the 
F.I.R are suspected members of the valley based insurgent group. Exhibit A-l is F.LR No. I(/)/20l9 of 
Bishnupur P.S under sections 7/20 of UA(P) Act, 967 lodged by one Hemanta Singh against one Naorem 
Indrakumar Singh and the allegation encircling the F.I-R was that of extortion on 3i.2.208 at around 5:30 
P.M. Exhibit A-2 is F.I.R No. 39(6)/209 of Bishnupur P.S under section 20 of UA(P) Act, 967 lodged by S.I 
N. Gallant Singh against one Nongmaithem Oken Singh @ Thouba wherein the accused person was 
apprehended on being suspected to be a member of the insurgent group. Exhibit A-3 is F.I-R No. 24(5)/2020 of 
Bishnupur P.S under section 20 of UA(P) Act, 967 lodged by A.S.I Gyanen Kshatriya against one Hijam 
Subol Singh @ Panamba wherein the accused person was apprehended on being suspected to be a member of 
the insurgent group. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


47. Exhibit A-4 is F.I.R No. 23(3)/202] of Bishnupur P.S under section 20 of UA(P) Act, 967 lodged by A.S.I H. 
Robash Singh against one S/S Capt. Thounaojam Bullet Singh @ Nonglen. Exhibit A-5 is F.ILR No. 29(6)/2022 
of Nambol P.S under section 20 of UA(P) Act, 967 lodged by HC Y. Shanta Singh against one Naorem Ingoba 
Singh @ Ingo. Exhibit A-6 is F.I.R No. 45(6)/20l9 of Porompat P.S under section 20 of UA(P) Act, 967 
lodged by Jem L. Thangminlem Khongsai against one Naoroibam Joyshankar Singh @ Bungochou @ 
Loyumba. In these cases, the accused persons were apprehended on being suspected to be members of the 
insurgent group. 


48. Exhibit A-7 is F.I.R No. 26(07)/2022 of Porompat P.S under sections 302/34 of IPC read with 25(.-C) of Arms 
Act read with sections 6/20 of UA(P) Act, !967 lodged by Inspector Md. Riaj Khan against unknown accused 
persons for the offences of murder and illegal possession of firearms. 


49. Exhibit A-8 is F.I.R No. 20(02)/2022 of Keirao Bitra P.S under sections 25(I-C) of Arms Act read with section 
20 of UA(P) Act, !967 lodged by S.I Md. Khalilur Rahman against Thokchom Jogendrajit Singh @ Chinglen 
@ Abinash for being member of valley based insurgent groups and for illegal possession of firearms. Exhibit 
A-9 is F.LR No. 45(3)/2023 of Singjamei P.S under section 25(l-B) of Arms Act read with section 39 of UA(P) 
Act, 967 lodged by HC A. Rajeshwor Singh against |) Ayekpam Abi Singh @ Rabi, 2) Kongjembam Abinash 
Singh @ Ibungo and 3) Ayekpam Kumarjit Singh for being member of valley based insurgent groups and for 
illegal possession of firearms. Finally, Exhibit A-0 is F.I.R No. l(02)/2024 of Imphal P.S under sections 
2/I2IA of IPC read with sections 3/[7/20 of UA(P) Act, 967 lodged by S.I N. Gavaskar Singh against one 
Maibam Arunkumar Singh for being member of valley based insurgent groups and for waging war against the 
government of India. 


50. So, it is seen that Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) and its political wing The Revolutionary Peoples’ Front 
(RPF) have been active in various districts of Manipur and have continued the pursuit of their aim which has 
resulted in a catena of violent incidents across the State of Manipur. 


THE UNITED NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT (UNLF) AND ITS ARMED WING THE MANIPUR 


PEOPLES’ ARMY (MPA) 


5l. THE UNITED NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT (UNLF) and its armed wing THE MANIPUR 
PEOPLES’ ARMY (MPA) is the oldest Meitei insurgent group in the State and was formed under the 
leadership of Areambam Samrendra Singh on 24.!.!964 to achieve independence and a socialist society. 
A pan-Manipuri Youth League was also formed in December [9686. Later, differences within the outfit surfaced 
over the issue of strategies to be adopted. While Samrendra Singh sought to spread ideological consciousness 
before launching an armed struggle, the more radical leader Oinam Sudhir Kumar established a Revolutionary 
Government of Manipur (RGM). Samarendra Singh was killed by unidentified terrorists in Imphal on 
0.06.200I. In the 970s and 980s, the UNLF concentrated mainly on mobilization and recruitment. In 990, it 
decided to launch an armed struggle for the ‘liberation’ of Manipur from India. In the same year, it formed an 
armed wing called the Manipur People’s Army (MPA). The major ideologies and operations of UNLF and MPA 
are elucidated as under: 


a. To establish an independent socialist Manipur. 


b. UNLF ‘s armed wing is called the MPA (Manipur People’s Army). It also maintains a communication and 
publicity cell. 


c. UNLF operates in the Jiribam Valley and Cachar district of Assam. 


d. UNLF after its formation, established a political relationship with the authority of the then East Pakistan, and 
underwent military training in 969. They also supported the Pakistani army during the !97! Bangladesh 
Liberation War. Later, the group also developed a relationship with China even while continuing its 
relations with Pakistan. On 4.06.975, UNLF leader N. Bisheswar Singh and |6 other Meitei rebels 
proceeded to Lhasa to seek Chinese assistance. The group has links with Naga and Mizo terrorist outfits as 
well. On 22.05.990, the UNLF, along with other insurgent groups operating in the Northeast — the 
National Socialist Council of Nagaland — Khaplang (NSCN-K), the United Liberation Front of Asom 
(ULFA), and the Kuki National Army (KNA) - floated a pan-Mongoloid coalition called the Indo-Burma 
Revolutionary Front (IBRF) to wage a ‘united struggle for the independence of Indo-Burma’. The UNLF 
has training camps in Myanmar and Bangladesh. It also maintains a close association with the NSCN-K. 


52. From the evidence adduced, more particularly, evidence-on-affidavit of S.W-2, Shri. Kabib K., IGP, shows that 
though the organisation THE UNITED NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT (UNLF) and its armed wing 
THE MANIPUR PEOPLES’ ARMY (MPA) were banned and such declaration has been last confirmed w.e.f. 
3..20l8 (Gazette Notification No. 8.0. 568! (E) dated 3..208) for a period of five years; however, the 
members of the organisation THE UNITED NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT (UNLEF) and its armed wing 
THE MANIPUR PEOPLES’ ARMY (MPA) were still active and during the aforesaid banning period, i.e. from 
3..208 to 2..2023, as many as 254 F.I.R’s were registered against the members of the organisation THE 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


UNITED NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT (UNLF) and its armed wing THE MANIPUR PEOPLES’ 
ARMY (MPA). The details of the district wise list of registered F.I.Rs are provided in a tabular form hereunder: 


District No. of FIRs 
Bishnupur 28 
Chandel Po लिि।णएणष!सि?ः!िक 
Churachandpur ll 
Imphal East 78 
Imphal West 58 
Jiribam 4 
Kakching 20 
Kanjong 7 
Kangpokpi 
Tengnoupal a. es 
Thoubal 32 
TOTAL 254 


53. In respect of THE UNITED NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT (UNLF) and its armed wing THE 
MANIPUR PEOPLES’ ARMY (MPA), the State of Manipur adduced as many as Seven (7) Witnesses i.e. 
S.W-I to S.W-7. 


SW - SHRI. KANGJAM SANTOSH SINGH being the Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Moirang Police 
Station, exhibited as many as 4 F.I.Rs being, F.I.R dated 08-09-209 (Exhibit- B-); F.I.R dated 09.02.2020 
(Exhibit- B-2); F.I.R dated 8.03.202 (Exhibit- 8-3) and F.I.R dated 2.02.2022 (Exhibit- 8-4). 


i. W- 2 SMTI. BABITARANI SWAIN, IPS being the Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Porompat, 
exhibited 3 F.I.Rs being, F.I.R dated 08.02.20l9 (Exhibit- 8-5), F.I.R dated 7.0!.2020 (Exhibit- 8-6) 
and F.I.R dated 28.!.202] (Exhibit- 8-7). 


iij SW - 3 SRI L. SANTOSH SINGH, being the Sub -Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Imphal, exhibited as 
many as 3 F.I.Rs being, F.I.R dated 04.09.2023 (Exhibit- 8-8), F.I.R dated 20.0.2022 (Exhibit- B-9) and 
F.L.R dated 25.0.2023 (Exhibit- B-0). 


iii. SW -4SHRI. K. MEGHACHANDRA SINGH, being the Superintendent of Police of Imphal East District 
certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Imphal 
East District in State of Manipur. 


iv. SW-—5 KSH. SHIVAKANTA SINGH, IPS, being the Superintendent of Police of Imphal West District 
certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Imphal 
West District in State of Manipur. 


v. SW-6 SHRI. WANKHEIMAYUM ROMI SINGH, being the Officer-In-charge, Moirang Police Station, 
certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Moirang 
Police Station. 


vi. SW - 7 SHRI. ATOM CHITARANJEN MEITEI, being the Officer-In-charge, Keibul Lamjao Police 
Station, certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in 
Keibul Lamjao Police Station. 


54. Let me discuss in brief the exhibits adduced. It is pertinent to mention that all the accused persons named in the 
F.I.R are suspected members of the valley based insurgent group. Exhibit B- is F.ILR No. 3(9)/209 of Keibul 
Lamjao P.S under section 302/34 of IPC read with section 25(l-C) of Arms Act read with sections 8 and 20 
UA(P) Act, 967 lodged by S.I 0. Jotin Singh against three unknown persons for the offence of murder and 
illegal possession of firearms. Exhibit B-2, Exhibit B-3 and Exhibit B-4 have been registered against the 
accused persons for being unlawful members of UNLF. Exhibit B-2 is F.I-.R No. 3(2)/2020 of Keibul Lamjao 
P.S against one Haobijam Bisheshwor Sing; Exhibit B-3 is F.LR No. 23(3)/202! of Moriang P.S lodged by HC 
S. Gyaneswar Singh against one Naorem Ratan @ Loya and Exhibit B-4 is F.I-R No. 8(2)/2022 of Moirang P.S 
lodged by one Ningthoukhongjam Loken Singh against one Oinam Rameshchandra Singh @ Nanao. These 
three F.I.Rs were registered under section 20 of UA(P) Act, 967. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


55. 


56. 


In a similar vein, Exhibit 8-5 to Exhibit B-0 were also lodged under various sections of UA(P) Act, 967 
against members of UNLF for being members of an unlawful association. For the sake of brevity, the same is 
enunciated hereunder: 


a. Exhibit B-5 is F.I-R No. 04(02)/20l9 of Heingang P.S lodged by Dinesh N UC against Khoirakpam 
Maheswor Singh. 


b. Exhibit B-6 is F.I.R No. 4(0)/2020 of Porompat P.S lodged by Jem Md. Zakariya against |) Khoijam Jiten 
Singhand Athokpam Somokanta Singh. 


c. Exhibit B-7 is F.I.R No. 50(/)/202] of Porompat P.S lodged by L. Dhanabir Singh against |) Laithangba 
Prafullo Singh 2) Laitonjam Kumar Singh and 3) Wahengbam Tompok Singh. 

d. Exhibit B-8 is F.I-R No. 8(9)/2022 of Singjamei P.S lodged by Jem L. Chingkheinganba against 3 accused 
persons. 

e. Exhibit B-9 is F.I.R No. 46(40)/2022 of Singjamei P.S lodged by Jem Radhakishor Tongbram against 
Ningthoujam Bijoy Singh. 

f. Exhibit B-0 is F.I.R No. 684((0)/2023 of Singjamei P.S lodged by N. Borkumar Meetei against ) 
Ningthoujam Bijoy Singh @ Kuber and 2) Ningthoujam Suresh Singh @ Naocha. 


So, it is seen that The United National Liberation Front (UNLF) and its armed wing The Manipur Peoples’ Army 
(MPA) have been active in various districts of Manipur and have continued the pursuit of their aim which has 


resulted in a catena of violent incidents across the State of Manipur. 


THE PEOPLE’S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK (PREPAK) / THE PEOPLE’S 


REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK- PROGRESSIVE (PREPAK - PRO) AND ITS ARMED 


WING THE RED ARMY 


57. 


58. 


59. 


60. 


THE PEOPLE'S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK (PREPAK) is an armed insurgent group 
in Manipur demanding a separate and independent homeland. PREPAK was formed under the leadership of R. K. 
Tulachandra on 09.0.977. The meeting was attended by R.K. Tulachandra, S. Wanglen, Achamba, Tajila, 
Meiraba, Meipaksana, Y. Ibohanbi and Paliba who were the founding members of PREPAK. After its formation, 
it launched a series of attacks and ambushes against Manipur Police and Manipur Rifles personnel during the late 
970s and early 980s. In 980, a small group split off from PREPAK and formed the Kangleipak Communist 
Party (KCP) led by its late leader Y. Ibahanbi. 


The founding leader, RK Tulachandra, was killed in an encounter in Kabowakching on 2..985. After his 
death, S. Wanglen became the Commander-in-Chief of the group. In the late !980s, the group suffered its first 
factionalism as it split into many small groups. Some of these groups joined other insurgent groups of the state 
like PLA and United National Liberation Front (UNLF). The late leader of the group, Urikhingbam Sarat alias 
Meiraba, with the help of the UNLF and PLA, played a crucial role in reuniting the group. After unification, 
PREPAK, along with PLA/ RPF and UNLF, launched a social reformation campaign in the state of Manipur. The 
campaign was aimed at eradicating crimes against women, drug and alcohol addictions etc. In the early 2000s, the 
group again split into two factions - one headed by its General Secretary, the other by the Vice-Chairman. Efforts 
were made by the UNLF, PLA/RPF, KYKL and KCP to reunite the two factions. Many cadres of both factions 
lost their lives in factional clashes. 


In the year 2006/2007, both the factions of PREPAK were re-united. However, another faction led by Defence 
Secretary Chinglemba Mangang of the General Secretary faction split off to form the United People's Party of 
Kangleipak (UPPK). 


From evidence-on-affidavit of S.W-2, Shri. Kabib K., IGP, it is discernible that even though the organisation 
THE PEOPLE'S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK (PREPAK) was banned and such 
declaration has been last confirmed w.e.f. 3..208 (Gazette Notification No. 8.0. 568! (E) dated 3..208) 
for a period of five years, however, the members of the organisation THE PEOPLE'S REVOLUTIONARY 
PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK (PREPAK) were still active and during the aforesaid banning period i.e. 
3..20i8 to 2.I.2023 as many as 69 F.I.Rs were registered against the members of the organisation THE 
PEOPLE'S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK (PREPAK). The details of the district wise list 
of registered F.I.Rs are provided in a tabular form hereunder: 


District No. of FIRs 
Bishnupur 4 
Chandel 2 
Churachandpur PB 


6. 


62. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Imphal East l] 
Imphal West 26 

Kakching 7 
Kanjong 2 
Senapati 
Tengnoupal 2 
Thoubal 4 
Ukhrul 2 
TOTAL |. ००»४»/“__ःयऱर्_़््7ह।| 


It is seen that THE PEOPLE'S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK (PREPAK) and THE 
PEOPLE'S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK-PROGRESSIVE (PREPAK - PRO) are one and 
the same groups, operating with the same motive. 


From evidence-on-affidavit of S.W-2, Shri. Kabib K., IGP, it is seen that even though the organisation THE 
PEOPLE'S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK PROGRESSIVE (PREPAK-PRO) was banned 
and such declaration has been last confirmed w.e.f. 3..20I8 (Gazette Notification No. S.O. 568! (E) dated 3-I- 
208) for a period of five years, however, the members of the organisation THE PEOPLE'S REVOLUTIONARY 
PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK PROGRESSIVE (PREPAK-PRO) were still active and during the aforesaid banning 
period, i.e. from 3..20I8 to 2..2023, as many as l06 F.I.Rs were registered against the members of the 
organisation THE PEOPLE'S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK PROGRESSIVE (PREPAK- 
PRO). The details of the district wise list of registered F.I-Rs are provided in a tabular form hereunder: 


District No. of FIRs 

Bishnupur |. ४ ।| 
Chandel 4 
Churachandpur 4 
Imphal East 47 
Imphal West 23 
Jiribam 
Kakching 4 
Tengnoupal |. ६: es 
Thoubal SS, 

TOTAL 06 


63. In respect of THE PEOPLE'S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK (PREPAK) and THE 
PEOPLE'S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK-PROGRESSIVE (PREPAK - PRO), the 
State of Manipur adduced as many as Seven (7) witnesses i.e. S.W- to S.W-7. 


i. 89१ - | धाप्तारा, LAISHRAM KHOGEN SINGH being the Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Bishnupur 
Police Station, exhibited as many as 6 F.I.Rs being F.I.R dated 05.07.202 (Exhibit- C-); F.I.R dated 
2.07.202 (Exhibit- C-2); F.I.R dated 27.02.202! (Exhibit- C-3), F.I.R dated 03.0.2022 (Exhibit- C- 
4), F.L.R dated 7.06.2022 (Exhibit- C-5) and F.I.R dated 0.02.209 (Exhibit- C-6). 


iii SW - 2 SMTI. BABITARANI SWAIN, IPS being the Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Porompat, 
exhibited as many as 4 F.I.Rs being FIR dated 0.03.202! (Exhibit- C-7); F.I.R dated 27.07.20l9 
(Exhibit- C-8); F.I.R dated 08.03.202 (Exhibit- C-9) and F.I.R dated 4.03.202] (Exhibit- C-0). It is 
pertinent to mention that the original F.I.R dated 08.03.202] was not produced by the State of Manipur 
and as such, the exhibit marked as Exhibit C-9 could not be compared with the original. 


iii. SW - 3 SRI L. SANTOSH SINGH, being the Sub -Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Imphal, exhibited | 
F.LR being, F.I.R dated 24.0.2023 Exhibit- C-. 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण ]7 


64. 


65. 


66. 


iv. SW-4SHRI. K. MEGHACHANDRA SINGH, being the Superintendent of Police of Imphal East District 


certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Imphal 
East District in State of Manipur. 


v. SW-5 KSH. SHIVAKANTA SINGH, IPS, being the Superintendent of Police of Imphal West District 
certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Imphal 
West District in State of Manipur. 


vi. SW - 6 SHRI. AMITABH SINGH ARAMBAM, being the Officer-In-charge, Bishnupur Police Station, 


certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I-Rs lodged in Bishnupur 
Police Station. 


vii. SW - 7 SHRI. MAIMOM JITEN SINGH, being the Officer-In-charge, Nambol Police Station, certified 


the copies of the FIR to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the FIR’s lodged in Nambol Police 
Station. 


Exhibit C- to Exhibit C-6 are F.I.Rs lodged under section 20 of UA(P) Act, 967 against accused persons for 
being members of the unlawful association. Their brief description is provided hereunder: 


a. Exhibit C- is F.I-R No. 35(7)/202 of Bishnupur P.S lodged by NK Sub. Bhagwat Singh against one 
R.K. Mubisana Meitei. 


b. Exhibit C-2 is F.I.R No. 36(7)/202l of Nambol P.S lodged by HC 0. Jayenta Singh against one 
Wakhingthem Ngouba Singh. 


c. Exhibit C-3 is FIR No. 20(2)/202l of Nambol P.S lodged by HC Y. Shanta Singh against one 
Moirangthem Inao Singh. 


d. Exhibit C-4 is F.I.R No. 4I((0)/2022 of Bishnupur P.S lodged by A.S.I Victor Haobijam against one 
Ningombam Ganga Devi. 


e. Exhibit C-5 is F.LR No. 30(6)/2022 of Nambol P.S lodged by A.S.I Victor Haobijam against one 
Yumnam Arun Singh. 


f: Exhibit C-6 is F.I.R No. 8(2)/20l9 of Nambol P.S lodged by Y. Rameshbabu Singh against one Mutum 
Sonali Leima. 


The other exhibits, viz. Exhibit C-7 to C- are also F.I.Rs pertaining to being members of unlawful 
associations and raising funds for furthering the aim of the association. Exhibit C-7 is F.I.R No. 22(03)/202] of 
Porompat P.S; Exhibit C-8 is F.I.R No. 237(7)/20l9 of Porompat P.S; Exhibit C-9 is F.I.R No. [7(3)202 of 
Irilbung P.S; Exhibit C-0 is F.I-R No. 8(03)/202] of Keirao Bitra P.S and Exhibit C-ll is F.IL.R No. 
(()/2023 of Singjamei P.S. 


So, it is seen that The People’s Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (prepak) / The People’s Revolutionary Party 
of Kangleipak- Progressive (prepak - PRO) and its armed wing the RED ARMY have been active in various 
districts of Manipur and have continued the pursuit of their aim which has resulted in a catena of violent 
incidents across the State of Manipur. 


THE KANGLEIPAK COMMUNIST PARTY (KCP) AND ITS ARMED WING THE RED ARMY; THE 


KANGLEI YAOL KANBA LUP (KYKL) 


67. 


68. 


69. 


The KANGLEIPAK COMMUNIST PARTY (KCP) and its armed wing THE RED ARMY is a Maoist 
militant group in Manipur, India, which is named after Kangleipak, the ancient name of Manipur. The 
Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) had been engaged in anarmed conflict separatist insurgency in 
Manipur against the government of India. The faction of the Kangleipak Communist Party came into existence 
in the late 2000s following the failure of certain party leaders to commit themselves to Marxism and Maoism. 
The incumbent chairman of its Politburo Standing Committee (highest decision-making body), Ibungo 
Ngangom, who used to head the Information and Public Relations Department of the Kangleipak Communist 
Party, was the main force behind the emergence of this faction, which has now become the most prominent one 
among the KCP factions. 


The Kangleipak Communist Party under the leadership of Ibungo Ngangom is a group that follows Marxism 
and Maoism. But what makes this group a unique communist party is the fact that its chairman has often spoken 
about ideological flexibility and adopting the so-called bamboo policy. According to Ibungo Ngangom, 
communism is a living ideology and nobody must hesitate to ‘adjust’ to make it realistic and successful. The 
group especially promotes the principle 'from each according to their abilities, to each according to their needs. 


The Kangleipak Communist Party (Marxist-Maoist) under the leadership of Ibungo Ngangom has two main 
organs: Politburo Standing Committee (PSC), which is a combination of its legislative and judiciary bodies; and 
the General Administrative Council (GAC), which is the executive branch of the group. 


8 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


70. 


Politburo Standing Committee: The Politburo Standing Committee consists of Ibungo Ngangom (Chairman), 
Amumacha Mangang (Deputy Chairman), Thoiba Meetei (Senior Member), Wangba Angomcha (Senior 
Member), Angousana Moi-rangcha (Senior Member), James Paomei (Member), Sanatombi Chanu Lourembam 
(Member), Moramba Meetei (Member), Tomthin Mangang (Member), Sanatomba (Member), Wangthoi 
(Member). Initially, it was a five-member committee. But it was expanded into an eleven-member committee 
during its recent bi-annual conference. 


General Administrative Council: Following the expansion of the politburo standing committee, the general 
administrative council of the outfit has also been reshuffled as Ibungo Ngangom (Secretary-in-Chief, also 
heading Foreign Affairs Department, Fund-raising Department and Central Intelligence Wing), Amumacha 
Mangang (Deputy Secretary-in-Chief), Wangba Angomcha (Secretary, Public Affairs Department), Angousana 
Moirangcha (Secretary, Finance & Budgetary Affairs Department), Sanatombi Chanu (Secretary, Information & 
Public Relations Department), James Paomei (previously Secretary, Public Affairs Department, he will now be 
Central Liaison Officer, Intra- Departmental Liaison Centre), Thoiba Meetei (previously Secretary, Finance & 
Budgetary Affairs Department, he will now be Auditor-in-Chief, Audit Commission), Sanatomba Khumancha 
(previously Commander, Bir Tikendrajit Cadre, ie. Special Contingency Response Wing, he is now 
Commander, Paona Cadre,i.e. Jungle Guerrilla Warfare Wing), Moramba Meetei (previously Commander, 
Paona Cadre i.e. Jungle Guerrilla Warfare Wing, he is now Commander, Thangal Cadre, i.e. Urban Guerrilla 
Warfare Wing), Tomthin Mangang (previously Commander, Thangal Cadre i.e. Urban Guerrilla Warfare Wing, 
he is now Commander, Bir Tikendrajit Cadre i.e. Special Contingency Response Wing), Wangthoi (previously 
Chief Intelligence Officer, Central Intelligence Wing, he is now Secretary, Capitalistic Concerns Regulation and 
Taxation Cell), announced the outfit. 


Evidence-on-affidavit of S.W-2, Shri. Kabib K., IGP shows that even though the organisation 
KANGLEIPAK COMMUNIST PARTY (KCP) and its armed wing THE RED ARMY was banned and such 
declaration has been last confirmed w.e.f. 3.!.20l8 (Gazette Notification No. 8.0. 568l (E) dated 
3.I.208) for a period of five years, however, the members of the organisation KANGLEIPAK 
COMMUNIST PARTY (KCP) and its armed wing THE RED ARMY were still active and during the 
aforesaid banning period, i.e. [3.!.20I8 to 2.!.2023 as many as 222 F.I.Rs were registered against the 
members of the organisation KANGLEIPAK COMMUNIST PARTY (KCP) and its armed wing THE RED 
ARMY. The details of the district wise list of registered F.I.Rs are provided in a tabular form hereunder: 


District No. of FIRs 


Bishnupur 28 


Chandel 4 


Churachandpur ee 


Imphal East 75 


Imphal West 62 


Jiribam ॥। 


Kakching 2 


Kanjong 3 


Tengnoupal PB 


Thoubal 20 


Ukhrul | 


TOTAL 222 


TI. 


In respect of KANGLEIPAK COMMUNIST PARTY (KCP) and its armed wing THE RED ARMY, the 
State of Manipur adduced as many as Eight (8) Witnesses i.e. S.W-l to S.W-8. 


SW - l SHRI. LAISHRAM KHOGEN SINGH being the Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) 
Bishnupur Police Station, exhibited as many as 4 F.I.Rs being, F.I.R dated 29.0!.209 (Exhibit- D-); 
F.L.R dated 3.03.209 (Exhibit- D-2); F.I.R dated 03.2.2020 (Exhibit- D-3) and F.I.R dated 5.2.202] 
(Exhibit- D-4). 


SW - 2 SMTI. BABITARANI SWAIN, IPS being the Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Porompat, 
exhibited | F.I.R being, F.I.R dated 03.02.2022 (Exhibit- 0-7). 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9 


ili. 


Vi. 


Vii. 


Vill. 


72. 


SW - 3 SRI L. SANTOSH SINGH, being the Sub -Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Imphal, exhibited 
as many as 2 F.I.Rs being, F.I.R dated 06.09.2023 (Exhibit- D-8) and F.I.R dated 8.08.2023 (Exhibit- 
D-9). 


SW - 4 SHRI. K. MEGHACHANDRA SINGH, being the Superintendent of Police of Imphal East 
District certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the FIR’s lodged in 
Imphal East District in State of Manipur. 


SW - 5 KSH. SHIVAKANTA SINGH, IPS, being the Superintendent of Police of Imphal West District 
certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Imphal 
West District in State of Manipur. 


SW - 6 SHRI. AMITABH SINGH ARAMBAM, being the Officer-In-charge, Bishnupur Police Station, 
certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Bishnupur 
Police Station. 


SW - 7 SHRI. MAIMOM JITEN SINGH, being the Officer-In-charge, Nambol Police Station, certified 
the copies of the F.I-.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Nambol Police 
Station. 


SW - 8 NGANGOM ROMEN being the Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Lamlai, exhibited | F.I.R 
being F.I.R dated 2.03.2020 (Exhibit- 0-5). 


Exhibit D- is F.I.R No. 5(0I)/209 dated 29.0.20I9 of Nambol P.S was lodged by S.I L. Pummuanthang of 
Nambol P.S against unnamed members of KCP for the allegation of criminal intimidation. The F.I.R was 
registered under sections 506/5! of IPC read with section !7/20 of UA(P) Act, 967. Exhibit D-7 is F.I.R No. 
08(02)/2022 dated 03.02.2022 of Heingang P.S lodged by S.I Md. Khalilur Rahman against Mangsatabem 
Romesh Meitei wherein the allegation was that the accused person, being member of the unlawful association 
had raised funds and used explosive substances. The F.I.R was registered under sections !7/20 of UA(P) Act, 
967 read with section 25([-C) of Arms Act, !959 and section 5 of The Explosives Substances Act, 908. 
Exhibit D-9 which is F.I.R No. 554(8)/2023 dated 8.08.2023 wherein the allegation was that of kidnapping 
using firearms by some unknown members of KCP. The F.I.R was registered under sections 365/!20B of IPC 
read with section 20 of UA(P) Act, 967 and section 25(l-B) of Arms Act, 959. The other exhibits pertain to 
F.I.Rs which have been registered against the accused persons for being members of unlawful association. 


THE KANGLEI YAOL KANBA LUP (KYKL) 


73. 


74. 


ID. 


76. 


77. 


The KANGLEI YAOL KANNA LUP (KYKL) which means ‘the Organisation to save the revolutionary 
movement in Manipur’ is a terrorist group formed in January !994 following merger of the Oken faction of the 
United National Liberation Front (UNLF), the Meiraba faction of People's Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak 
(PREPAK) and the Ibo Pishak faction of the Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP). 


During the period 995-996, a large number of its lower-ranking cadres either deserted the outfit or 
surrendered before the security forces. Further in 996, the outfit split into - the KYKL (O), led by Namoijam 
Oken and KYKL (T) led by Achou Toijamba. However, after five years of inter-group rivalry, the Oken and 
Toijamba factions decided to reunite sometime in mid-February 2002, with the purported objective of unity 
among various terrorist outfits in the region. 


It is stated herein that the objective of the KYKL is to ‘rebuild’ the Manipuri society by clearing it of all vices 
like immoral activities, drug trade and corruption. According to the KYKL ‘Public Relations Officer’ S.K. 
Loya, the group stands for ‘nationalism’ of the entire Northeastern region to be based on the principle of "all for 
one and one for all". Towards the end of 200], the outfit launched ‘Operation New Kangleipak’ (ONK), an 
‘anti-corruption’ campaign to ‘clean up’ the educational system in Manipur. While the outfit continues its 
activities under the ONK, it has also pledged open support to other terrorist groups who reportedly work against 
the narcotics trade, drug addiction, immoral activities and corruption in the society. 


The KYKL primarily operates within State of Manipur in the four valley districts of Imphal East, Bishenpur, 
Thoubal and Imphal West in Manipur. KYKL funds its activities primarily through extortion that it collects 
jointly with the Nagaland-based National Socialist Council of Nagaland-Isak Muivah (NSCN-IM). The 
association has close linkages with the Nagaland-based NSCN-IM. Further, indications of a re-grouping of 
terrorist outfits in the region was visible towards the later part of the year 2002 with the nexus between the Zomi 
Revolutionary Army (ZRA), Kanglei Yayol Kanna Lup (KYKL) and the NSCN-IM. Besides, the KYKL has 
also developed ‘working arrangements’ with the Meghalaya-based Achik National Volunteer Council (ANVC). 
Reports have also indicated that KYKL maintains links with the Khaplang faction of the NSCN (NSCN-K) with 
the latter providing training and shelter to KYKL cadres at its bases in Myanmar. 


From evidence-on-affidavit of S.W-2, Shri. Kabib K., IGP, it is seen that even though the organisation 
KANGLEI YAWOL KANNA LUP (KYKL) was banned and such declaration has been last confirmed w.e.f. 


20 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


3..20l8 (Gazette Notification No. 8.0. 568] (E) dated 3..208) for a period of five years, however, the 
members of the organisation KANGLEI YAWOL KANNA LUP (KYKL) were still active and during the 
aforesaid banning period, i.e. from 3..20I8 to 2..2023, as many as 32 FIR’s were registered against the 
members of the organisation KANGLEI YAWOL KANNA LUP (KYKL). The details of the district wise list 


of registered F.I.Rs are provided in a tabular form hereunder: 


District No. of FIRs 
Bishnupur 22 
Chandel 2 
Churachandpur Z 
Imphal East 32 
Imphal West 25 
Kakching [7 
Kanjong 5 
Kangpokpi 
Senapati 
Tengnoupal 0 
Thoubal 5 
TOTAL 32 


78. 


lil. 


Vi. 


Vii. 


79. 


THE COORDINATION COMMITTEE (CORCOM) 


In respect of KANGLEI YAWOL KANNA LUP (KYKL), the State of Manipur adduced as many as Seven 


(7) witnesses i.e. S.W-l to S.W-7. 


SW - SHRI. LAISHRAM KHOGEN SINGH being the Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) 
Bishnupur Police Station, exhibited as many as 5 F.I.Rs being, FIR dated 28.09.209 (Exhibit- E-); F.I.R 
dated 6.0.2020 (Exhibit- E-2); F.I.R dated 5.0.202] (Exhibit- E-3); F.I.R dated 0.0.2022 (Exhibit- 
E-4) and F.I.R dated 3.0.2023 (Exhibit- E-5). 


SW - 2 SMTI. BABITARANI SWAIN, IPS being the Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Porompat, 
exhibited as many as 2 F.I.Rs being, F.I.R dated 02.2.20l8 (Exhibit- E-6) and F.I.R dated 7.08.2022 
(Exhibit- E-7). 


SW - 3 SRI L. SANTOSH SINGH, being the Sub -Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Imphal, exhibited | 
F.LR being, F.I.R dated 4.0.2023 (Exhibit- E-8). 


SW - 4 SHRI. K. MEGHACHANDRA SINGH, being the Superintendent of Police of Imphal East 
District certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in 
Imphal East District in State of Manipur. 


SW - 5 KSH. SHIVAKANTA SINGH, IPS, being the Superintendent of Police of Imphal West District 
certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Imphal 
West District in State of Manipur. 


SW - 6 SHRI. AMITABH SINGH ARAMBAM, being the Officer-In-charge, Bishnupur Police Station, 
certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Bishnupur 
Police Station. 


SW - 7 SHRI. MAIMOM JITEN SINGH, being the Officer-In-charge, Nambol Police Station, certified 
the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Nambol Police 
Station. 


Exhibit E-8 is F.I.R No. 668(/0) dated 4.0.2023 of Singjaimei P.S lodged by S.I K. Kritibas Singh against 
one Karam Satrajit Singh for raising funds for KYKL by means of arms and ammunition. The F.I.R was 
registered under sections !7/20 of UA(P) Act read with section 25(lA) of Arms Act. The other exhibits pertain 
to allegations that the accused persons named in the F.I.R are members of the unlawful association. 


COORDINATION COMMITTEE (CORCOM 


[भाग W—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 2] 


80. 


8l. 


82. 


The COORDINATION COMMITTEE (CorCom) is a conglomerate of Seven Valley Based Insurgent 
Groupd - the Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP), Kanglei Yawol Kanna Lup (KYKL), People's Revolutionary 
Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK), its Progressive faction (PREPAK-Pro), Revolutionary People's Front (RPF, the 
political wing of the People's Liberation Army- PLA), United National Liberation Front (UNLF) and United 
Peoples Party of Kangleipak (UPPK), which was formed in July 20]. 


The COORDINATION COMMITTEE (CorCom) consisted of seven (UPPK thrown out after its surrender to 
the enemy) namely KCP, KYKL, PREPAK, PREPAK (Pro), RPF, and UNLF, and was necessitated by the 
peoples’ voice which had demanded a united struggle against Indian colonialism, which also hinges on the idea 
of building a united strength of all communities in Manipur and the WESEA region. After three years of its 
formation, various sub-committees have been formed. They are: Home Committees, Regional Affairs 
Committees, External Affairs Committee, Publicity Committee, Base Area Committee, Financial Affairs 
Committee, and Joint Fighting Force, which functions under the Joint Military Commission. 


From evidence-on-affidavit of S.W-2, Shri. Kabib K., IGP, it is seen that even though the organisation 
COORDINATION COMMITTEE (CorCom) was banned and such declaration has been last confirmed w.e.f. 
3..20l8 (Gazette Notification No. 8.0. 568] (E) dated 3..208) for a period of five years, however, the 
members of the organisation COORDINATION COMMITTEE (CorCom) were still active and during the 
aforesaid period i.e. from 3..208 to 2.!.2023, 2 F.LRs were registered against the members of the 
organisation COORDINATION COMMITTEE (CorCom) which are provided hereunder: 


District No. of FIRs 


Imphal West 2 


83. 


84. 


In respect of COORDINATION COMMITTEE (CorCom), the State of Manipur adduced Two (2) Witnesses 
ie. S.W-l & S.W-2. 


SW - I SRI L. SANTOSH SINGH, being the Sub -Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Imphal, exhibited 
as many as 2 F.I.Rs being F.I.R dated 25.0.202! (Exhibit- F-) and F.I.R dated 4.02.2023 (Exhibit- F- 
2). 


SW - 2 KSH. SHIVAKANTA SINGH, IPS, being the Superintendent of Police of Imphal West District 
certified the copies of the F.I.R to be True Copies of Original, in respect of the F.I.Rs lodged in Imphal 
West District in State of Manipur. 


Exhibit F- is F.I-R No. 08(0)/202! dated 25.0.202] under sections 24A/88/I89/90/34/505(I)(b)/506 of 
IPC read with section 20 of UA(P) Act which was registered because a General Strike was called on 26.0.202] 
for boycotting the celebration of The Republic Day. Exhibit F-2 is F.I.R No. 32(2)/2020 dated 4.02.2020 of 
Singjamei P.S which was registered under sections !7/20 of UA(P) Act. The F.LR was lodged by A.S.I Baljit 
Singh against one Daniel Leivon Lamkang wherein the allegation was that the accused person raised funds in 
the name of the association. 


THE ALLIANCE FOR SOCIALIST UNITY KANGLEIPAK (ASUK) 


85. 


86. 


87. 


88. 


THE ALLIANCE FOR SOCIALIST UNITY KANGLEIPAK (ASUK) is an organization, which is formed 
by coming together of The Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) as well as The Kanglei Yaol Kanba Lup 
(KYKL). Since most of the activities are being carried by either The Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) or 
The Kanglei Yaol Kanba Lup (KYKL) in their respective capacities, therefore, the quantum of cases being 
registered against THE ALLIANCE FOR SOCIALIST UNITY KANGLEIPAK (ASUK) within the State of 
Manipur is far less compared to the rest of the organization under ‘The Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups’. 


From an analysis of the materials produced before the Tribunal, it is discernible that the cases involved are 
offences under the Arms Act, 959 and the UA(P) Act, 967, apart from the offences of murder, kidnapping, 
extortion, waging or attempting to a wage war or abetting waging of war against the Government of India, 
conspiracy to wage or attempting to wage war, collection of arms with intention of waging war, sedition, 
criminal intimidation, as defined in the Indian Penal Code. 


The Union of India, in its affidavit through Rajesh Kumar Singh, working as Under Secretary in the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Government of India has vehemently contended that during the last five years, i.e. from 209- 
2023 and in the current year 2024, i.e. upto 29.02.2024, out of a total of 689 violent incidents in Manipur, these 
extremist organizations were responsible for 335 incidents, in which 09 security personnel and 2 civilians were 
killed. During this period, 205 arms were recovered and surrender of 95 extremists and arrest of |79 extremists 
with 39 arms have also taken place from these extremist organizations. 


After thorough introspection of the evidences adduced, it is evident that THE SEVEN VALLEY BASED 
ORGANISATIONS namely, (I) the Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) and its political wing, the Revolutionary 
Peoples’ Front (RPF), (II) the United National Liberation Front (UNLF) and its armed wing, the Manipur 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


89. 


Vi. 


90. 


Ol. 


92. 


93. 


94. 


Peoples’ Army (MPA), (III) the Peoples’ Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK) and its armed wing, 
the “Red Army”, (IV) the Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) and its armed wing, also called the “Red 
Army”, (V) the Kanglei Yaol Kanba Lup (KYKL), (VI) the Coordination Committee (CorCom) and (VID the 
Alliance for Socialist Unity Kangleipak (ASUK) along with all their factions, wings and front organizations has 
the professed aim to establish a separate country by cessation of Manipur from the Indian Union in alliance with 
other armed secessionist organizations of the North-Eastern Region. The evidences on record also testify that 
the THE SEVEN VALLEY BASED ORGANISATIONS namely, (I) the Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) 
and its political wing, the Revolutionary Peoples’ Front (RPF), (II) the United National Liberation Front 
(UNLF) and its armed wing, the Manipur Peoples’ Army (MPA), (III) the Peoples’ Revolutionary Party of 
Kangleipak (PREPAK) and its armed wing, the “Red Army”, (IV) the Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) 
and its armed wing, also called the “Red Army”, (V) the Kanglei Yaol Kanba Lup (KYKL), (VI) the 
Coordination Committee (CorCom) and (VID the Alliance for Socialist Unity Kangleipak (ASUK) along with 
all their factions, wings and front organisations continue to remain active in entire State of Manipur and are in 
possession of sophisticated weapons, explosives materials and ammunitions, etc. 


From the evidence adduced, it is seen that the Valley Based Organizations are 
engaging in activities prejudicial to the sovereignty and integrity of India; 
employing and engaging in armed means to achieve the aforesaid objectives; 
attacking and killing the Security Forces; the Police and Civilians in Manipur; 


indulging in acts of intimidation, extortion and looting of civilian population for collection of funds for 
their Organisations; 


making contacts with sources abroad for influencing public opinion and for securing their assistance by 
way of arms and training for the purpose of achieving their secessionist objective; and 


maintaining camps in neighbouring countries for the purpose of safe sanctuaries, training and clandestine 
procurement of arms and ammunitions; 


The Union of India and State of Manipur have suggested for continuation of these organizations’ status as 
unlawful associations beyond 3.][.2023, that is, beyond the tenure of the previous Notification under Section 
3(]) of the UA(P) Act, 967. Upon perusal of such materials, the Tribunal concurs with the view recorded 
therein. 


From the evidence on record, it is vividly discernible that there is no decline in the violent activities of the THE 
SEVEN VALLEY BASED ORGANISATIONS and they have continued with their secessionist activities and 
have been advocating extortions, killing of innocent people and thus, creating unrest in the State of Manipur. 


The activities of the Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups, as discussed in detail in the preceding paragraphs, 
certainly fall within the ambit of ‘unlawful activity’ defined in section 2(l)(0) of UA(P) Act, 967. As a 
necessary corollary, these organizations certainly are within the yardstick of the definition of ‘unlawful 
associations’ as defined in section 2(l)(p) of UA(P) Act, 967. In the absence of any materials against the 
declaration, the Tribunal, on an objective assessment of the materials placed before the Tribunal on behalf of the 
Central Government and the Government of Manipur in support of the declaration, has reached a conclusion that 
the Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups associations during the period under consideration, have been 
engaging themselves in activities which are unlawful activities, which undermine the unity and integrity of the 
nation and the safety and security of the citizens. The Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups have been 
continuously pursuing their secessionist goals and in pursuit of that goal, have incited violence causing loss of 
life and damage to property. Their agenda is inimical to the democratic ideals and unity and integrity of this 
country. 


Hence, the Tribunal concurs with the opinion of the Central Government that if there is no immediate curb and 
control of the (I) the Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) and its political wing, the Revolutionary Peoples’ Front 
(RPF), (IID) the United National Liberation Front (UNLF) and its armed wing, the Manipur Peoples’ Army 
(MPA), (III) the Peoples’ Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK) and its armed wing, the “Red Army”, 
(IV) the Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) and its armed wing, also called the “Red Army”, (V) the Kanglei 
Yaol Kanba Lup (KYKL), (VI) the Coordination Committee (CorCom) and (VII) the Alliance for Socialist 
Unity Kangleipak (ASUK); they will take the opportunity to, 

mobilise their cadres for escalating their secessionist, subversive and violent activities; 

propagate anti-national activities in collusion with forces inimical to India’s sovereignty and national 

integrity; 

indulge in killings of civilians and targeting of the Police and Security Forces personnel; 

procure and induct illegal arms and ammunitions from across the international border; and 

extort and collect huge funds from the public for their unlawful activities. 


The Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups have involved themselves in carrying out subversive acts in order to 
achieve their avowed objectives which are admittedly unlawful. These organizations are also engaged, through 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 23 


95. 


96. 


97. 


98. 


99. 


their front organizations and civil society organizations, in targeting non-local population, protesting against 
peace talks of authorities with other ethnic groups of the State, boycotting days of national importance like 
Independence Day, Republic Day etc. and opposing merger of the State of Manipur with Indian Union. 


In the case of Jamaat-E-Islami Hind (supra), the Hon’ble Apex Court, had explicitly opined that the terms 
‘adjudication’ and ‘sufficient cause’ as used in section 4(.) of the UA(P) Act, 967 contemplate an inquisitorial 
inquiry by the Tribunal into the materials on which the Notification under section 3(l) stands issued by the 
Central Government, cause (if any) shown by the Association in response to the notice and other materials and 
evidence brought on record. 


It necessarily entails that the procedure laid under the Act contemplates an objective determination of the 
question as to whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the concerned entities unlawful and not just a 
mechanical approval of the notification of the Central Government. 


This Tribunal, after scrutiny of the materials placed before it and after complying with the principles of natural 
justice and to ensure a fair procedure, has come to a conclusion that the Seven Valley Based Insurgent Groups 
are ‘unlawful associations’ within the meaning of section 2()(p) of UA(P) Act, 967. 


In view of the above discussion and for the reasons assigned therein, the Tribunal has decided the reference 
forwarded to it under sub-section (I) of Section 4 of the UA(P) Act, 967 vide letter bearing no. 0/03/2023- 
NE.V dated 04.2.2023, with the confirmation that there is sufficient cause to declare the Seven Valley Based 
Insurgent Groups, viz. (I) the Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) and its political wing, the Revolutionary 
Peoples’ Front (RPF), (II) the United National Liberation Front (UNLF) and its armed wing, the Manipur 
Peoples’ Army (MPA), (III) the Peoples’ Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK) and its armed wing, 
the “Red Army”, (IV) the Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) and its armed wing, also called the “Red Army”, 
(V) the Kanglei Yaol Kanba Lup (KYKL), (VI) the Coordination Committee (CorCom) and (VID) the Alliance 
for Socialist Unity Kangleipak (ASUK) along with all its factions, wings and front organisations, as ‘unlawful 
associations’. Accordingly, the declaration made in the Notification bearing no. 5.0. 4899 (E) dated 3..2023 
in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (.) of Section 3 of the UA(P) Act, 967 declaring the (I) the 
Peoples’ Liberation Army (PLA) and its political wing, the Revolutionary Peoples’ Front (RPF), (II) the United 
National Liberation Front (UNLF) and its armed wing, the Manipur Peoples’ Army (MPA), (IID) the Peoples’ 
Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK) and its armed wing, the “Red Army”, (IV) the Kangleipak 
Communist Party (KCP) and its armed wing, also called the “Red Army”, (५) the Kanglei Yaol Kanba Lup 
(KYKL), (VI) the Coordination Committee (CorCom) and (VID) the Alliance for Socialist Unity Kangleipak 
(ASUK) along with all its factions, wings and front organisations, as ‘unlawful associations’ for a period of 5 
(Five) years with effect from 3..2023 is confirmed by this Tribunal under sub-section (3) of Section 4 of the 
UA(P) Act, 967. 


This Order of this Tribunal is to be published in the Official Gazette in terms of sub-section (4) of Section 4 of 
the UA(P) Act, 967. 


JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR MEDHI 
PRESIDING OFFICER 
UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES [PREVENTION] TRIBUNAL 
IN THE MATTER OF THE SEVEN VALLEY BASED INSURGENT GROUPS 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-0064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-0054. ५०6७७ 
VERMA 


