रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल० -(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


Jina 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-21122025-268696 
CG-DL-E-21122025-268696 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


a 60] नई दिल्‍ली, रविवार, दिसम्बर 21, 2025/अग्रहायण 30, 1947 (शक) 
No. 60] NEW DELHI, SUNDAY, DECEMBER 21, 2025/AGRAHAYANA 30, 1947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 21st December, 2025/Agrahayana 30, 1947 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
20th December, 2025 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE VIKSIT BHARAT—GUARANTEE FOR ROZGAR AND 
AJEEVIKA MISSION (GRAMIN): VB—G RAM G (विकसित 
भारत---जी राम जी) ACT, 2025 


No. 36 oF 2025 
[20th December, 2025.] 


An Act to establish a rural development framework aligned with the 
national vision of Viksit Bharat @2047, by providing a statutory 
guarantee of one hundred and twenty-five days of wage employment 
in every financial year to every rural household whose adult 
members volunteer to undertake unskilled manual work; to promote 
empowerment, growth, convergence and saturation for a prosperous 
and resilient rural Bharat; and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


WHEREAS to align the rural development framework with the national vision 
of Viksit Bharat @2047 by providing an enhanced statutory wage employment 
guarantee of one hundred and twenty-five days in each financial year to such rural 
households whose adult members volunteer to undertake unskilled manual 
work, thereby enabling them to participate more effectively in the expanded 
livelihood security framework; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


AND WHEREAS to focus on empowerment, growth, convergence and 
saturation through public works aggregating into forming Viksit Bharat 
National Rural Infrastructure Stack, with a thematic focus on water security 
through water-related works, core rural infrastructure, livelihood-related 
infrastructure and special works to mitigate extreme weather events; 


AND WHEREAS to facilitate adequate farm-labour availability during peak 
agricultural seasons, and, in view of the wage employment guarantee for the rural 
workforce; 


AND WHEREAS to institutionalise convergence, saturation-driven planning and 
whole of government delivery through Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans, integrated 
with the PM Gati Shakti to address the varying needs of Gram Panchayats, and 
powered by geospatial systems, digital public infrastructure, District and State 
planning mechanisms, with such plans aggregated at the Block, District, State and 
National levels; 


AND WHEREAS to modernise governance, accountability and citizen 
engagement through a comprehensive digital ecosystem, including biometric 
authentication at various levels, global positioning system or mobile based 
worksite monitoring, real-time management information system dashboards, 
proactive public disclosures, and use of Artificial Intelligence for planning, 
audits and fraud-risk mitigation. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and 
Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint: 


Provided that the different dates may be appointed for different States or for 
different areas in a State and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into 
force of that provision in such State or, as the case may be, in such area. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 

(a) “adult” means a person who has completed the eighteenth year 
of age; 

(0) “applicant” means the head of a household or any of its other adult 


members who has applied for employment under the Scheme; 


(c) “Block” means a community development area within a district 
comprising a group of Gram Panchayats; 


(d) “Central Council” means the Central Gramin Rozgar Guarantee 
Council constituted under section 12; 


(e) “Centrally Sponsored Scheme” means a scheme in which the 
Central Government provides full or partial financial assistance and 
the State Governments undertake its implementation; 


(f) “District Programme Coordinator” means an officer of the State 
Government designated as such officer under sub-section (/) of section 17 
for the implementation of the Scheme in a district; 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(g) “household” means the members of a family related to each other by 
blood, marriage or adoption and normally residing together and sharing meals 
or holding a common ration card; 


(A) “implementing agency” includes any department of the Central 
Government or a State Government, a Zila Parishad, Panchayat at 
intermediate level, Gram Panchayat or any local authority or the Government 
undertaking, to undertake the implementation of any work taken up under 
the Scheme; 


(i) “intermediate level” means a level between the village and district 
levels as specified under clause (c) of article 243 to the Constitution of India; 


(j) “National Level Steering Committee” means a steering committee 
constituted by the Central Government under sub-section (/) of section 14; 


(k) “normative allocation” means the allocation of the fund made by the 
Central Government to the State; 


(J) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
and the term “notify” or “notified”, shall be construed accordingly; 


(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(n) “Programme Officer” means an officer appointed under sub-section (/) 
of section 18; 


(०) “rural area” means any area in a State except those areas covered by 
any urban local body or a Cantonment Board established or constituted under 
any law for the time being in force; 


(p) “Schedule” means Schedules appended to this Act; 


(4) “Scheme” means the Scheme notified by the State Government under 
sub-section (/) of section 3; 


(r) “State” means a State specified in the First Schedule to the 
Constitution and includes a Union territory; 


(s) “State Council” means the State Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Council 
constituted under sub-section (/) of section 13; 


(t) “State Level Steering Committee” means a steering committee 
constituted under sub-section (/) of section 15; 


(४) “unskilled manual work” means any physical work which any adult 
person is capable of doing without any skill or special training; 


(v) “Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack” means the 
consolidated aggregation comprising proposed works emerging from the 
Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans aggregated at the District and State 
levels, and aligned with the four thematic domains of works specified 
in Schedule I; 


(w) “Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan” means a future-ready, convergence- 
based local development plan aligned with the vision of Viksit Bharat @2047, 
formulated by the Gram Panchayat through a participatory and evidence-based 
process, and serving as the basis for identification and prioritisation of works 
under this Act, as provided in sub-section (3) of section 4; 


(x) “wage rate” means the wage rate referred to in section 10; 


(0) “work” means any work undertaken or executed under the Scheme. 


State 
Government 
implementation 
framework for 
Scheme. 


Planning 
framework in 
alignment with 
vision of Viksit 
Bharat @2047. 


Guarantee of 
wage 
employment to 
rural households. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


CHAPTER II 
IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK 


3. (1) The State Government, shall within six months from the date of 
commencement of this Act, by notification, make a Scheme consistent with the 
provisions of this Act and the features provided therein. 


(2) The Scheme made under sub-section (/) shall be implemented as a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme, under which the financial liability shall be shared 
between the Central Government and the State Government in accordance with the 
fund sharing pattern provided under sub-section (2) of section 22 of this Act, 
including enhanced share of the Central Government in respect of the North-Eastern 
States and Himalayan States, and the responsibility of the State Government to bear 
any expenditure incurred in excess of its allocated share. 


4. (1) All works undertaken under this Act shall be originated from the Viksit 
Gram Panchayat Plans prepared under sub-section (3), and consolidated at the 
Block, District and State levels and further aggregated into the Viksit Bharat 
National Rural Infrastructure Stack, which shall comprise a comprehensive listing 
of works aligned with National development priorities. 


(2) The Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack shall encompass 
four thematic focus domains, namely:— 


(a) water security through water-related works; 

(6) core rural infrastructure; 

(c) livelihood-related infrastructure; and 

(d) works for the mitigation of extreme weather events. 


(3) Rural works planning under this Act shall be undertaken through Viksit 
Gram Panchayat Plans, prepared by the Gram Panchayats and integrated with the 
PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan, so as to enable spatially optimised 
infrastructure development and strengthened inter-departmental convergence in 
accordance with the provisions specified in Schedule I. 


(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3), Gram Panchayats shall be categorised 
into Category A, Category B and Category C, in accordance with the provisions 
specified in Schedule I. 


(5) The Central Government shall determine the State-wise normative 
allocation for each financial year, based on objective parameters as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


(6) Any expenditure incurred by a State in excess of its normative allocation 
shall be borne by the State Government in such manner and by such procedure as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


5. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such rural 
area in the State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every 
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work, not less 
than one hundred and twenty-five days of guaranteed employment in a financial 
year in accordance with the Scheme made under this Act. 


(2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme shall 
be entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work. 


(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily wages 
shall be made on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the 
date on which such work was done. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(4) The Central Government or the State Government, may within the limits 
of economic capacity and development, make provisions for securing work to every 
adult member of a household under the Scheme for any period beyond the period 
guaranteed under sub-section (/), as may be expedient. 


6. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or rules made 
thereunder, and to facilitate adequate availability of agricultural labour during peak 
agricultural seasons, no work shall be commenced or executed under this Act, 
during such peak seasons as may be notified under sub-section (2). 


(2) The State Governments shall notify in advance, a period aggregating to 
sixty days in a financial year, covering the peak agricultural seasons of sowing and 
harvesting, during which works under this Act, shall not be undertaken. 


(3) The State Government may issue distinct notifications for different areas 
of the State, including districts, blocks or Gram Panchayats, based on agro-climatic 
zones, local patterns of agricultural activities or other relevant factors, and every 
such notification shall have a binding effect for the purposes of this Act. 


(4) All authorities responsible for planning, sanctioning or executing works 
under this Act shall ensure that all works are undertaken only outside the notified 
peak agricultural seasons. 


7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government 
may recommend to the Central Government, the need for special operational 
relaxations during natural calamities or other extraordinary circumstances for the 
purpose of ensuring timely response and support to affected households. 


(2) The Central Government may, upon consideration of the recommendations 
received from the State Government, make specific relaxations, including temporary 
expansion of permissible works, relaxed documentation norms, or enhanced wage 
employment provisioning, as may be appropriate to address the situation. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (2), the Central Government may 
declare such relaxations as may be appropriate to address the situation. 


CHAPTER III 
Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): 
VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) Scheme 


8. (/) For the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of section 3, every 
State Government shall, make a Scheme, for providing a guarantee of one hundred 
and twenty-five days of wage employment in a financial year to every rural 
household in the rural areas covered under the Scheme and whose adult members, 
by application, volunteer to do unskilled manual work subject to the conditions 
under this Act. 


(2) The State Government shall publish a summary of the Scheme made under 
sub-section (/) in at least two local newspapers, one of which shall be in a vernacular 
language circulating in the area or areas to which the Scheme applies, and shall also 
make such summary publicly available through electronic means, including the 
official website of the State Government or any designated digital platform. 


(3) The Scheme made under sub-section (/) shall conform to and provide for 
the minimum features specified in Schedule I. 


9. (1) The State Government may, without prejudice to the conditions 
specified in Schedule II, specify in the Scheme the conditions for providing 
guaranteed employment under this Act. 


(2) The persons employed under the Scheme made under this Act, shall be 
entitled to such facilities not less than the minimum facilities specified in 
Schedule II. 


Facilitating 
adequate 
agricultural 
labour 
availability 
during peak 
agricultural 
seasons. 


Relaxations 
during natural 
calamities and 
extraordinary 
circumstances. 


Viksit Bharat— 
Guarantee for 
Rozgar and 
Ajeevika 
Mission 
(Gramin): 
VB—G RAMG 
(विकसित 
भारत-.जी राम 
जी) Scheme. 


Conditions for 
providing 
guaranteed 
employment. 


Wage rate. 


Payment of 
unemployment 
allowance. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


10. The Central Government may, by notification, specify the wage rate for 
the purposes of this Act, which shall apply to all unskilled manual work provided 
under the Scheme: 


Provided that different wage rates may be notified by the Central Government 
for different areas: 


Provided further that the wage rate so notified shall not be less than the 
prevailing wage rate as notified under section 6 of the Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005: 


Provided also that until a wage rate is notified by the Central Government 
under this section, the wage rates notified under section 6 of the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, shall continue to apply in the 
areas covered by this Act. 


11. (/) Ifan applicant for employment under the Scheme is not provided such 
employment within fifteen days of receipt of his application seeking employment or 
from the date on which the employment has been sought in the case of an advance 
application, whichever is later, he shall be entitled to a daily unemployment 
allowance in accordance with the provision of this section. 


(2) Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be prescribed by 
the State Government and subject to the provisions of this Act and the Scheme and 
the economic capacity of the State Government, the unemployment allowance 
payable under sub-section (/) shall be paid to the applicants of a household, 
subject to the guarantee provided under this Act, at such rate as may be 
specified by the State Government, by notification, in consultation with the 
State Council: 


Provided that no such rate shall be less than one-fourth of the notified wage 
rate for the first thirty days during the financial year and not less than one-half of 
the wage rate for the remaining period of the financial year. 


(3) The liability of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance to 
a household during any financial year shall cease as soon as— 


(a) the applicant is directed by the Gram Panchayat or Programme 
Officer to report for work either by himself or depute at least one adult member 
of the household; or 


(5) the period for which employment is sought, comes to an end and no 
member of the household of the applicant had turned up for employment; or 


(c) the adult members of the household of the applicant have received in 
total at least one hundred and twenty-five days of work within the financial 
year; or 


(d) the household of the applicant has earned as much from the wages 
and unemployment allowance taken together which is equal to the wages for 
one hundred and twenty-five days of work during the financial year. 


(4) The unemployment allowance payable to the household of an applicant 
jointly, shall be sanctioned and disbursed by the Programme Officer or such local 
authority (including the Panchayat at the District, intermediate or village level) as 
the State Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf. 


(5) Every payment of unemployment allowance under sub-section (/), shall 
be made or offered not later than fifteen days from the date on which it became due 
for payment. 


(6) The State Government may prescribe the procedure for the payment of 
unemployment allowance under this Act. 


42 of 2005. 


42 of 2005. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


CHAPTER IV 
IMPLEMENTING AND MONITORING AUTHORITIES 


12. (J) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by — Central Gramin 
notification, appoint, there shall be constituted a Council to be known as the es 
Central Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Council to discharge the functions and perform — Council. 


the duties assigned to it under this Act. 


(2) The Central Council shall consist of Chairperson, representatives of 
Central Government and State Governments, not more than fifteen non-official 
members representing Panchayati Raj Institutions, organisations of workers and 
weaker section of the society and a Member-Secretary not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India. 


(3) The composition, terms and conditions of appointment, tenure, and 
meeting procedures shall be such, as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(4) The Central Council shall perform such functions, duties and advisory 
roles relating to evaluation, monitoring, implementation support and reporting 
under this Act, as may be assigned to it by the Central Government, and the 
detailed functions, responsibilities and modalities of functioning shall be such, as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


13. (J) For the purposes of regular monitoring and reviewing the State Gramin 
implementation of the provisions of this Act at the State level, every State Rozgar 
Government shall, by notification, constitute a State Council to be known as the ric a 
State Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Council, consisting of a Chairperson and such 
number of official members as may be determined by the State Government and 
not more than fifteen non-official members nominated by the State Government 
from Panchayati Raj Institutions, organisations of workers and weaker section of 
the society: 


Provided that not less than one-third of the non-official members nominated 
under this sub-section shall be women: 


Provided further that not less than one-third of the non-official members shall 
belong to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes 
and Minorities. 


(2) The terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and 
members of the State Council may be appointed and the time, place and 
procedure of the meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) of the 
Council shall be such, as may be prescribed by the State Government. 


(3) The duties and functions of the State Council shall include— 


(a) advising the State Government on all matters concerning the Scheme 
and its implementation in the State; 


(6) reviewing the monitoring and redressal mechanisms from time to 
time and recommending improvements; 


(c) monitoring the implementation of this Act and the Scheme in the 
State and coordinating such implementation with the Central Council; 


(व) preparing the annual report to be laid before the State Legislature by 
the State Government; 


(e) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the Central 
Council or the State Government. 


(4) The State Council shall have the power to undertake an evaluation of the 
Scheme operating in the State and for that purpose to collect or cause to be collected 
statistics pertaining to the rural economy and the implementation of the Scheme and 
Programmes in the State. 


National Level 
Steering 
Committee. 


State Level 
Steering 
Committee. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


14. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a National 
Level Steering Committee to recommend decisions relating to normative allocations 
to States and to advise on matters requiring inter-ministerial consultation, including 
convergence framework and to provide high level oversight for the effective 
implementation of this Act. 


(2) The National Level Steering Committee shall consist of such senior 
officials of the Central Government and such other members as may be determined 
by the Central Government, and the terms and conditions of their appointment shall 
be such, as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(3) The National Level Steering Committee shall— 
(a) recommend decisions relating to normative allocations to States; 


(6) recommend policy measures on matters requiring inter-ministerial 
consultation, including convergence initiatives and frameworks; 


(c) provide high level strategic oversight for effective implementation of 
this Act; 


(d) review performance of States and recommend corrective or 
supportive measures; 


(e) facilitate coordination among the Ministries and Departments of the 
Central Government and between the Central Government and State 
Governments for effective convergence and implementation of the provisions 
of this Act; 


(f) advise on standards, guidelines, monitoring systems, digital and 
geospatial public infrastructure necessary for implementation of the 
provisions of this Act; and 


(g) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central 
Government. 


15. (J) The State Government shall, constitute a State Level Steering 
Committee to provide operational guidance, coordination, and monitor the 
implementation of the Scheme. 


(2) The State Level Steering Committee constituted under sub-section (J), 
shall be presided over by the Chief Secretary of the State or by an officer not below 
the rank of Additional Chief Secretary nominated by the State Government and shall 
comprise of the following members, namely:— 


(a) Principal Secretary or Secretary of the respective Department; 
(0) the Director or Commissioner (in-charge of the Scheme); 


(c) Principal Secretaries or Secretaries of relevant Departments of the 
State Government; 


(d) such number of subject-matter experts, as may be determined by the 
State Government; 


(e) representatives of technical or research institutions; and 


(f) one member nominated by the Department of Rural Development, 
Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India. 


(3) The State Level Steering Committee shall— 


(a) oversee State wide planning and convergence with other 
programmes; 


(b) review of district performance and ensure timely preparation of the 
aggregate State plan; 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(c) coordinate with the National Level Steering Committee and 
implement directions issued therefrom; 


(व) support digital systems, monitoring arrangements, and process 
improvements at the State level; and 


(e) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State 
Government. 


16. (1) The Panchayats at the district, intermediate and village levels shall be 
the principal authorities for planning, implementation and monitoring of the Scheme 
made under this Act. 


(2) The Panchayat at the district level, shall oversee and coordinate 
implementation of the Scheme in the district, including finalisation and approval of 
the aggregate district level plan, supervision and monitoring of works, ensuring 
convergence, and perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State 
Government. 


(3) The Panchayat at the intermediate level, shall prepare and finalise the 
aggregate Block level plan, support Gram Panchayats in planning and 
implementation, supervise works at Gram Panchayat and Block levels, and 
facilitate convergence with line departments. 


(4) The Gram Panchayat shall register households, receive and process 
applications for work, prepare the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans, execute the works 
assigned to it, maintain such records as may be specified by the State Government, 
and discharge such other responsibilities as may be entrusted to it under the Scheme. 


17. (J) The District Collector or any officer of equivalent rank as the State 
Government may decide, shall be designated as the District Programme Coordinator 
for the implementation of the Scheme in the district. 


(2) The District Programme Coordinator shall be responsible for the 
implementation of the Scheme in the district in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder. 


(3) The functions of the District Programme Coordinator shall be as follows, 
namely:— 


(a) the District Programme Coordinator shall be responsible for the 
consolidation and finalisation of the district aggregate plan and shall oversee 
convergence, implementation and monitoring of the Scheme at the district 
level in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 


(6) the District Programme Coordinator shall ensure compliance with 
the provisions of this Act and with the directions and guidelines issued by the 
Central Government and the State Government, and shall accord such 
administrative sanctions and clearances as may be required for the timely and 
effective implementation of the Scheme, including those relating to digital, 
geospatial and monitoring systems; 


(c) the District Programme Coordinator shall coordinate with Programme 
Officers, and shall review, monitor and supervise their performance using the 
monitoring framework, management information system and accountability 
mechanisms established under this Act and the Scheme; 


(d) the District Programme Coordinator shall conduct periodic 
inspections of works undertaken under the Scheme, ensure adherence to 
quality and productivity standards, and shall redress the grievances of 
applicants through digital public infrastructure and designated grievance 
redressal systems in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


Principal 
authorities for 
planning and 
implementation 
of Scheme. 


District 
Programme 
Coordinator. 


Programme 
Officer. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(4) The Programme Officer and all other officers of the State Government and 
local authorities and bodies functioning within the district, shall assist the District 
Programme Coordinator in carrying out his functions under this Act. 


(5) The District Programme Coordinator, shall prepare an aggregate plan for 
the district under his jurisdiction by consolidating the approved Viksit Gram 
Panchayat Plans and aggregated Block Plans and the proposals received from the 
Zila Panchayats. 


18. (/) At every Panchayat at intermediate level, the State Government shall 
appoint a person who is not below the rank of Block Development Officer with such 
qualifications and experience as may be determined by the State Government as 
Programme Officer at the panchayat at intermediate level. 


(2) The Programme Officer shall assist the Panchayat at the intermediate level 
in discharging its functions under this Act and the Scheme made thereunder. 


(3) The Programme Officer shall be responsible for matching the demand for 
employment with the employment opportunities arising from works in the area 
under his jurisdiction. 


(4) The Programme Officer shall prepare an aggregate plan for the Block 
under his jurisdiction by consolidating the approved Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans 
and the proposals received from intermediate panchayats. 


(5) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (2), the functions of the 
Programme Officer shall include— 


(a) monitoring all works and projects undertaken by the Gram 
Panchayats and other implementing agencies within the Block, ensuring 
alignment with the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans; 


(6) sanctioning and ensuring payment of unemployment allowance to 
eligible households in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 


(c) ensuring prompt and fair payment of wages to all labourers employed 
under the Scheme within the Block, including through digital and biometric 
authenticated payment systems, as may be specified by the Central 
Government; 


(d) ensuring that regular social audits of all works within the jurisdiction 
of each Gram Panchayat are conducted by the Gram Sabha, and that timely 
and appropriate action is taken on objections and findings arising from 
such audits; 


(e) dealing promptly with all complaints and grievances relating to the 
implementation of the Scheme within the Block, through the grievance 
redressal mechanisms established under sub-section (/) of section 25 of 
this Act; 


(f) ensuring the geo-tagging, digital recording, and management 
information system reporting of all works undertaken within the Block, and 
compliance with monitoring, productivity, and transparency framework, 
specified by the Central Government under this Act; 


(g) facilitating inter-departmental convergence at the Block level to 
support saturation-driven planning and the execution of works under the 
Scheme; and 


(A) any other function as may be assigned to him by the District 
Programme Coordinator and the State Government under this Act. 


(6) The Programme Officer shall perform his function under the direction, 
control and superintendence of the District Programme Coordinator. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


19. The Gram Panchayat shall be responsible for— 


(a) registration of households and issuance of Gramin Rozgar Guarantee 
Cards; 


(b) receiving work applications and maintaining records of Gramin 
Rozgar Guarantee Cards; 


(c) preparing the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans; 


(d) every Gram Panchayat shall, after considering the recommendations 
of the Gram Sabha and the Ward Sabhas, keeping in view of the demand for 
works, prepare a Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan on saturation basis; 


(e) the Programme Officer shall allocate at least fifty per cent. of the 
works in terms of its cost under the Scheme to be implemented through the 
Gram Panchayats; 


(f) the Programme Officer shall supply each Gram Panchayat with— 
(7) the muster rolls for the works sanctioned to be executed by it; 


(ii) a list of employment opportunities available elsewhere to the 
residents of the Gram Panchayat; 


(g) the Gram Panchayat shall allocate employment opportunities among 
the applicants and ask them to report for work; 


(A) the works taken up by a Gram Panchayat under the Scheme, shall 
meet the required technical standards and measurements; 


(i) executing works allotted to it by the Programme Officer; and 


(j) a Gram Panchayat may take up any work under the Scheme from 
Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan within the area of the Gram Panchayat, as may 
be sanctioned by the Programme Officer. 


20. (1) The Gram Sabha, shall monitor and review the execution of all works 
undertaken under the Scheme within the jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat, in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Gram Sabha shall conduct regular social audits of all works taken up 
under the Scheme within the Gram Panchayat, in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government. 


(3) The Gram Panchayat shall make available to the Gram Sabha all records 
and documents required for conduct of the social audit, including muster rolls, bills, 
vouchers, measurement books, sanction orders, digital records, geo-tagged 
photographs, and all other connected books of account and papers, whether 
maintained in physical or electronic form. 


21. The State Government, shall provide the necessary staff and technical 
support to the District Programme Coordinator and the Programme Officer as may 
be necessary for the effective implementation of the Scheme. 


CHAPTER V 
NATURE OF THE SCHEME AND FUND SHARING PATTERN 
22. (1) The Scheme implemented under this Act shall be a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme. 


(2) For the purposes of this Act, the fund sharing pattern between the Central 
Government and the State Governments shall be 90:10 for the North Eastern States, 
Himalayan States and Union territory (Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu 
and Kashmir) and 60:40 for all other States and Union territories with legislature. 


Responsibilities 
of Gram 
Panchayats. 


Social audit of 
works by Gram 
Sabha. 


Responsibilities 
of State 
Government in 
implementing 
Scheme. 


Nature of 
Scheme and 
fund sharing 
pattern. 


Transparency 
and 
accountability. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(3) For the Union territories without legislature, the Central Government shall 
bear the entire expenses of the Scheme in the manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 


(4) The Central Government shall determine the State-wise normative 
allocation for each financial year, based on objective parameters as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


(5) Any expenditure incurred by a State in excess of its normative allocation 
shall be borne by the State Government in such manner and procedure as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


(6) In accordance with the State-wise normative allocation determined under 
this Act, the share of the Central Government shall include expenditure towards— 


(a) payment of wages for unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled labour 
employed under the Scheme; 


(b) the material component of works, subject to the provisions in 
Schedule I; 


(c) such administrative expenses as may be specified by the Central 
Government, including salary and allowances of Programme Officers and 
supporting staff, administrative expenses of the Central Council, facilities 
required under Schedule II, and such other items as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 


(7) In accordance with the State-wise normative allocation determined under 
this Act, the share of the State Government shall include expenditure towards— 


(a) payment of wages for unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled labour 
employed under the Scheme; 


(0) the material component of works, subject to the provisions in 
Schedule I; 


(c) such administrative expenses as may be specified by the Central 
Government, including salary and allowances of Programme Officers and 
supporting staff, administrative expenses of the State Council, facilities 
required under Schedule II, and such other items as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 


(8) The State Government, shall bear the expenditure towards unemployment 
allowance and delay compensation as may be prescribed by the State Government. 


CHAPTER VI 
TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY 


23. (1) The District Programme Coordinator and all implementing agencies in the 
district shall be responsible for the proper utilisation and management of the funds 
placed at their disposal for the purpose of implementing the Scheme under this Act. 


(2) The manner of maintaining proper books and accounts relating to the 
employment of labourers and the expenditure incurred in connection with the 
implementation of the provisions of this Act, shall be such, as may be prescribed by 
the State Government. 


(3) The State Government may determine the arrangements to be made for the 
proper execution of works under the Scheme and to ensure transparency and 
accountability at all levels in the implementation of the Schemes. 


(4) All payments of wages and unemployment allowances shall be made 
directly to the person concerned in such manner, as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


(5) If any dispute or complaint arises concerning the implementation of the 
Scheme by the Gram Panchayat, the matter shall be referred to the Programme Officer. 


(6) The Programme Officer shall enter every dispute or complaint in a complaint 
register maintained by him and shall dispose of such dispute or complaint within a 
period of seven days of its receipt; and where the matter relates to any other authority, 
it shall be forwarded to such authority under intimation to the complainant. 


24. Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, transparency and accountability 
in the implementation of the provisions of this Act, shall be ensured through— 


(a) biometric authentication of workers, functionaries, and transactions, 
in such manner, as may be specified by the Central Government; 


(b) geospatial technology-enabled planning, including geo-referencing, 
satellite imagery, digital mapping of works, and other approved spatial 
technologies, as may be specified by the Central Government; 


(c) mobile application-based and dashboard-based monitoring systems 
providing real-time visibility of demand, works, workforce deployment, 
payments, progress and other indicators, as may be specified by the Central 
Government; 


(d) weekly public disclosure systems, including digital and physical 
disclosure of key metrics, muster rolls, payments, sanctions, inspections and 
grievances, as may be specified by the Central Government; 


(e) strengthening of the social audit mechanism, and the adoption of 
such other technology-enabled systems, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 


25. (1) The State Government shall, determine a time-bound and multi-tier 
grievance redressal mechanism at the Block level and the District level for dealing 
with any complaint made by any person in respect of implementation of the 
Scheme and lay down the procedure for disposal of such complaints in such 
manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(2) These mechanisms shall address grievances related to applicants, which 
include,— 


(a) failure of the Gram Panchayat or Programme Officer to provide 
employment within the stipulated period referred to in sub-section (/) of 
section 11; 


(b) non-payment or delayed payment of wages; 
(c) non-payment of unemployment allowance; 
(d) lack of specified worksite facilities as specified in Schedule 1; 


(e) discrimination, harassment, or violation of worker rights, including 
those of women and vulnerable groups. 


26. (1) The Central Government may by rules provide for in consultation with 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, appropriate arrangements for 
audits of the accounts of the Schemes at all levels. 


(2) The accounts of the Scheme shall be maintained in such form and in such 
manner, as may be prescribed by the State Government. 


CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


27. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act, shall be liable to pay the 
penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees. 


Technology- 
enabled 
transparency and 
public 
accountability. 


Grievance 
redressal 
mechanism. 


Audit of 
accounts. 


Penalties for 
contravention. 


Power to 
delegate. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
give directions. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to amend 
Schedules. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
make rules. 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


28. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the powers 
exercisable by it (excluding the power to make rules) may, in such circumstances 
and subject to such conditions and limitations, be exercisable also by the State 
Government or such officer subordinate to the Central Government or the State 
Government as it may specify in such notification. 


(2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the powers 
exercisable by it (excluding the power to make rules and Schemes) may, in such 
circumstances and subject to such conditions and limitations, be exercisable also by 
such officer subordinate to it as it may specify in such notification. 


29. (1) The Central Government may give such directions as it may consider 
necessary to the State Government for the effective implementation of the 
provisions of this Act. 


(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (/), the Central 
Government may, on receipt of any complaint regarding any issue or improper 
utilisation of funds granted under this Act in respect of any Scheme, if prima facie 
satisfied that there is a case, cause an investigation into the complaint made by any 
agency designated by it and if necessary, order stoppage of release of funds to the 
Scheme and institute appropriate remedial measures for its proper implementation 
within a reasonable period of time. 


30. The provisions of this Act or the Scheme made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the 
time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such law: 


Provided that where a State Act exists or is enacted to provide employment 
guarantee for unskilled manual work to rural households consistent with the 
provisions of this Act under which the guarantee of the households is not less than 
and the conditions of employment are not inferior to what is guaranteed under this 
Act, the State Government shall have the option of implementing its own enactment: 


Provided further that in such cases the financial assistance shall be paid to the 
concermed State Government in such manner as shall be determined by the Central 
Government, which shall not exceed what the State would have been entitled to 
receive under this Act had a Scheme made under this Act had to be implemented. 


31. (/) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient 
to do so, it may, by notification, amend Schedule. 


(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (/) shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 


32. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the District 
Programme Coordinator, Programme Officer or any other person who is, or who is 
deemed to be, a public servant within the meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 in respect of anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or Schemes made thereunder. 


33. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, and subject to the 
condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) State-wise normative allocation for each financial year, based on 
objective parameters under sub-section (5) of section 4; 


(6) manner and procedure to bear the excess expenditure and its 
parameters under sub-section (6) of section 4; 


(c) the composition, terms and conditions of appointment, tenure and 
procedure of meeting under sub-section (3) of section 12; 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


(d) the detailed functions, responsibilities and modalities under 
sub-section (4) of section 12; 


(e) terms and conditions of appointment of officials of National Level 
Steering Committee under sub-section (2) of section 14; 


(f) manner to redress the grievance under clause (d) of sub-section (3) of 
section 17; 


(g) manner of conducting social audit by Gram Sabha under 
sub-section (2) of section 20; 


(h) manner to bear the expenses of Scheme under sub-section (3) of 
section 22; 


(i) objective parameters to determine the State-wise normative allocation 
under sub-section (4) of section 22; 


(7) manner and procedure to bear the excess expenditure under 
sub-section (5) of section 22; 


(k) other items under clause (c) of sub-section (6) of section 22; 
(J) other items under clause (c) of sub-section (7) of section 22; 


(m) manner of payments of wages and unemployment allowances under 
sub-section (4) of section 23; 


(n) social audit mechanism, and the adoption of such other 
technology-enabled systems under clause (e) of section 24; 


(०) manner to lay down the procedure for disposal of complaints under 
sub-section (/) of section 25; 


(p) the manner of transfer and vesting under sub-section (5) of section 37; 


(q) any other matter which is to be, or prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


34. (1) The State Government may, by notification, and subject to the condition 


of previous publication, and consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules 
made by the Central Government, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice of the foregoing power, such rules may 


provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) terms and conditions of eligibility under sub-section (2) of section 11; 

(b) the procedure for payment of unemployment allowance under 
sub-section (6) of section 11; 

(c) terms, conditions, time, place and procedure of meeting and quorum 
under sub-section (2) of section 13; 

(४) expenditure towards unemployment allowance and delay 
compensation under sub-section (8) of section 22; 

(e) manner of maintaining proper books and accounts under 
sub-section (2) of section 23; 

(f) form and manner to maintain the accounts of the Scheme under 
sub-section (2) of section 26; 


(g) any other matter which is to be, or prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by the State Government, for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act. 


35. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be 


laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 


or in 


two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 


immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. 


Power of State 
Government to 
make rules. 


Laying of rules 
and Schemes. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal, savings 
and transitional 
provisions. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) Every rule or Scheme made by the State Government under this Act shall, 
as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of the State Legislature 
where there are two Houses, and where there is one House of the State Legislature, 
before that House. 


36. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 


(2) No order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


(3) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 


37. (1) Save as provided in section 10, on and from such date as the Central 
Government may by notification appoint in this behalf (hereinafter referred to as the 
appointed date), the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act, 2005, together with all rules, notifications, Schemes, orders and guidelines 
made thereunder, shall stand repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything duly done or any action taken under 
the repealed Act, including any notification issued, scheme sanctioned, employment 
generated, muster roll prepared, wage liability accrued, or proceeding initiated, 
shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to 
have been done, taken, issued, sanctioned, accrued or incurred under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act, as if this Act had been in force at all 
material times. 


(3) All appointments, engagements, authorisations, approvals and 
administrative arrangements made under the repealed Act and continuing 
immediately before the appointed date shall, unless inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, continue to be valid and in force until they are altered, superseded or 
withdrawn under this Act. 


(4) All inquiries, investigations, audits and legal proceedings pending 
immediately before the appointed date shall be continued, heard and disposed of as 
if the repealed Act had not been repealed, and such proceedings shall not abate by 
reason only of such repeal. 


(5) All assets, liabilities, records, funds and obligations arising under, or 
relating to, the repealed Act shall stand transferred to and vest in the authorities 
constituted under this Act and shall be dealt with in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


42 of 2005. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


SCHEDULE I 
[See section 8(3)] 


Minimum features of Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission 
(Gramin); VB—G RAM G (विकसित URd—sit राम जी) Scheme 


1. The Scheme notified under section 8 of the Act by all States shall be called 
the “Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): 
VB—G RAMG (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) Scheme” and all documents pertaining 
to the said Scheme shall have a mention of the Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar 
and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) 
Act, 2025. 


2. All Scheme documents pertaining to the said Scheme shall have a mention 
of the Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): 
VB—G RAM G (विकसित भारत--जी राम जी) Act, 2025. 


3. The core objectives of the Scheme shall be as follows:—(a) The primary 
objective of this Act is to align the rural development framework with the national 
vision of Viksit Bharat @2047 by providing an enhanced statutory wage- 
employment guarantee of one hundred and twenty-five days in each financial year 
to such rural households whose adult members volunteer to undertake unskilled 
manual work, thereby enabling them to participate more effectively in the expanded 
livelihood security framework. 


(b) To focus on empowerment, growth, convergence and saturation through 
public works aggregating into forming Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure 
Stack, with a thematic focus on water security through water-related works, core 
tural infrastructure, livelihood-related infrastructure and special works to mitigate 
extreme weather events. 


(c) To facilitate adequate farm-labour availability during peak agricultural 
seasons, and, in view of the wage-employment guarantee for the rural workforce. 


(d) To institutionalise convergence, saturation-driven planning and whole of 
government delivery through Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans, integrated with the PM 
Gati Shakti to address the varying needs of Gram Panchayats, powered by geospatial 
systems, digital public infrastructure, district and State planning mechanisms, with 
such plans aggregated at the Block, District, State and National levels. 


(e) To modernise governance, accountability and citizen engagement through a 
comprehensive digital ecosystem, including biometric authentication at various levels, 
global positioning system or mobile based worksite monitoring, real time 
management information system dashboards, proactive public disclosures and the use 
of Artificial Intelligence for planning, audits and fraud risk mitigation. 


4. Works under the Scheme—(/) Focus of the Scheme—Classification of 
Works: The Scheme shall focus on the following categories of works, as identified 
in the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans and aggregated into the Viksit Bharat National 
Rural Infrastructure Stack. 


(2) For the purposes of section 4 of the Act, the works to be taken up under 
the Scheme, shall fall under the following Categories, together with their thematic 
focus and intended outcomes, namely:— 


(a) Category I—Water-Related Works (for Water Security)— 


18 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(A) The focus shall include conservation, irrigation, groundwater 
recharge, source sustainability, rejuvenation of water bodies, watershed 
development and afforestation and the Illustrative works include— 


(7) construction of canals, flood or diversion channels, check 
dams, gully plugs and underground dykes; 


(ii) construction or rejuvenation of ponds, percolation tanks, 
recharge pits, recharge shafts, injection wells and associated water 
harvesting structures; 


(iii) irrigation open wells, micro-irrigation channels and field 
water distribution systems; 


(iv) reclamation of community waterlogged land; 


(v) afforestation and plantation works linked with soil and 
moisture conservation; and 


(vi) rooftop rainwater harvesting and other decentralised 
recharge systems. 


(B) Intended Outcomes—Strengthening of water security through 
integrated water resource management, recharge and conservation for 
long-term climate resilience. 


(6) Category II—Core Rural Infrastructure— 


(A) Thematic focus shall include core civic, social, governance and 
service-delivery infrastructure relating to education, health, drinking 
water, sanitation, connectivity, renewable energy and community 
services and the Illustrative works include— 


(7) construction or upgradation of rural roads, culverts, cross- 
drainage structures and village connectivity facilities; 


(ii) construction of Gram Panchayat Bhawans, Anganwadi 
centres, rural libraries and other public buildings; 


(iii) construction of school infrastructure, including kitchen 
sheds, additional classrooms, laboratories, compound walls and 
playgrounds; 


(iv) crematoria and community infrastructure; 


(v) solid and liquid waste management assets, including 
stabilising ponds, community sanitary complexes, and waste 
segregation and collection centres; 


(vi) installation of solar lighting systems and other renewable 
rural energy infrastructure; 


(vii) village parking areas, transport sheds and other common 
rural amenities; 


(viii) rural housing works permissible under the schemes of 
the Central Government, including those permitted under the 
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana—Gramin; and 


(ix) repair and maintenance of works created under the Jal 
Jeevan Mission for ensuring water supply. 


(B) Intended Outcome—Creation of foundational civic and social 
infrastructure ensuring basic amenities, improved service access and 
enhanced quality of life in rural areas. 


(2) Category II]—Livelihood-related Infrastructure— 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


(A) Thematic focus shall include productive assets and facilities 
that enhance rural livelihoods through agriculture, livestock, fisheries, 
value addition, skilling and enterprise development and the Illustrative 
works include— 


(i) construction of training-cum-skill development centres 
and work sheds for livelihood activities; 


(ii) rural haats or weekly markets and other market 
infrastructure; 


(iii) food grain storage buildings, agricultural produce 
storage structures, cold storage units and other agri-value chain 
infrastructure; 


(iv) buildings for Self Help Groups and federation-level 
institutions; 


(v) compost structures, including vermicompost and NADEP 
units; 


(vi) development of silvipasture grasslands, dairy 
infrastructure and shelters for cattle, goats, pigs, poultry and other 
livestock; 


(vii) fisheries-related infrastructure, including fish drying 
yards; 


(viii) raising of nurseries and production of building material; 
and 


(ix) Integrated projects promoting circular and cyclical 
economy models, as may be approved by the Central Government. 


(B) Intended Outcome—Strengthening of sustainable livelihoods, 
value addition, enterprise development and self-reliant rural economies. 


(d) Category 1V—Special works to mitigate Extreme Weather Events 
and Disaster Preparedness— 


(A) Thematic focus shall include disaster risk reduction, 
climate adaptation, and protection of rural communities and assets 
from floods, cyclones, storms, droughts, landslides, forest fires and 
other extreme weather events and the Illustrative works include— 


(7) construction of cyclone shelters, flood shelters and 
multipurpose disaster resilient structures; 


(ii) construction of diversion channels, embankments 
and other disaster-mitigation works; 


(iii) stabilising ponds and water structures for flood 
management; 


(iv) post-disaster rehabilitation, restoration and repair 
of rural roads and community assets; 


(v) windbreak and shelterbelt plantations; and 


(vi) forest fire management works, including fire 
breaks, fuel buffer zones and allied measures. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(B) Intended Outcome—Creation of climate-resilient 
villages capable of withstanding extreme weather conditions. 


(3) Any other public work which may be notified by the Central Government. 
(4) Maintenance of rural public assets created under the Act. 


(5) Works for individual beneficiaries, including but not limited to housing- 
related works under the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana—Gramin, sanitation-related 
works, and other beneficiary-oriented developmental works undertaken under 
various schemes of the Central Government from time to time and expressly notified 
for inclusion under the Scheme, may also be taken up. The eligibility of such 
beneficiaries shall be as notified by the Central Government, aligned with the 
eligibility criteria specified under the respective Central Government schemes, with 
all such works conforming to the norms, standards and guidelines issued by the 
Central Government. 


(6) Without prejudice to the generality of the above, works creating individual 
assets as notified by the Central Government shall be prioritised on land or 
homestead owned by households belonging to— 


(a) the Scheduled Castes; 
(0) the Scheduled Tribes; 
(c) nomadic tribes; 

(d) denotified tribes; 


(e) economically weaker sections of the society as identified based on 
criteria notified by the Central Government; 


(f) women-headed households; 
(g) households headed by persons with disabilities; 
(A) beneficiaries of land reforms; 


(i) beneficiaries under the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana—Gramin 
(PMAY-G); and 


(j) beneficiaries under the Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 
(2 of 2007), and 


after exhausting the eligible beneficiaries under the above categories, works may be 
taken up on the lands of small or marginal farmers as identified on the basis of 
criteria notified by the Central Government, subject to such conditions as may be 
notified by the Central Government, including the requirement that such households 
possess a valid job card and have at least one adult member willing to work on the 
project undertaken on their land or homestead. 


5. Participatory Planning under the Scheme:—(/) All Central, State or local 
schemes, as may be notified by the Central Government for the purpose of 
convergence and saturation-based planning, shall be brought under a unified 
planning process anchored in the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans. 


(2) There shall be a systematic and participatory planning exercise 
undertaken at each tier of the Panchayati Raj system in accordance with 
the specified methodology. The Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans shall be 
prepared by the Gram Panchayats using GIS-based tools, PM Gati Shakti layers 
and other digital public infrastructure, and placed before the Gram Sabha for 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


approval. Works proposed to be undertaken by the Intermediate Panchayat, 
District Panchayat or other implementing agencies shall likewise be placed before 
the respective Panchayats along with the expected outputs and outcomes. The Viksit 
Gram Panchayat Plans shall be aggregated at the Block, District and State levels to 
ensure coherence with sectoral priorities, broader rural development strategies, and 
saturation-based planning for comprehensive coverage of eligible assets and 
outcomes across all Gram Panchayats. All works emerging from the Viksit Gram 
Panchayat Plans shall be consolidated into the Viksit Bharat—National Rural 
Infrastructure Stack. 


(3) Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan—Every Gram Panchayat shall prepare 
saturation-mode plans based on its classification into Category A, 3, C, etc., 
determined based on development parameters, including proximity to urban areas, 
to address the varying needs of the Panchayats. All such works shall be drawn 
exclusively from the approved Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan, prepared using PM Gati 
Shakti, GIS-based tools and other digital public infrastructure. 


(4) The works identified in the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans shall be executed 
through various Central, State and local schemes in convergence. The schemes to 
be taken up for such convergence shall be notified by the Central Government. 


6. Framework for Convergence and Integrated Planning—A Unified 
Convergence Framework shall be established for coherent planning, execution and 
monitoring of all works undertaken in rural areas, and for this purpose— 


(1) All Central, State or local schemes, as may be notified by the Central 
Government for the purpose of convergence and saturation-based planning, 
shall be brought under a unified planning process anchored in the Viksit Gram 
Panchayat Plans. 


(2) All existing assets and proposed works, whether funded under this 
Act or through any other Central, State or local scheme, shall be mandatorily 
registered and tracked through the Viksit Bharat—National Rural 
Infrastructure Stack using the designated digital portal, which shall maintain a 
comprehensive register of rural public works, prevent duplication, integrate 
departmental investments, and align all works with saturation outcomes. 


(3) The Ministry of Rural Development shall prepare and periodically 
update the management information system, a nationally harmonised, single 
digital backbone for rural public works covering water security, core rural 
infrastructure, livelihood-related infrastructure, and special works to mitigate 
extreme weather events; and all planning shall follow a strict bottom-up 
process beginning with the preparation of the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan, 
which shall be successively aggregated at the Block, District and State levels, 
and the aggregated State Plan shall be placed before the State Level Steering 
Committee for approval. 


(4) Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack shall guide States, 
Districts and Panchayati Raj Institutions in identifying priority infrastructure 
gaps, standardising work designs, and ensuring that public investments 
contribute measurably to saturation outcomes at the Gram Panchayat, Block 
and District levels. 


(5) This institutional architecture shall ensure a_ single-plan, 
multi-funding approach, promote convergence across departments and 
schemes, and align all rural development efforts with the Viksit Bharat @2047 
vision of creating productive, resilient and transformative rural assets. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


7. Intra-State distribution of normative Allocation—The State Government 
shall, upon receipt of the approved normative allocation from the Central 
Government, ensure equitable, need-based and transparent intra-State distribution 
of the allocation across districts and Gram Panchayats, taking into consideration 
the categorisation of Gram Panchayats and the assessed local needs for 
determining Gram Panchayat-wise allocations and corresponding district 
allocations; and the detailed methodology, parameters and _ procedural 
requirements for such distribution shall be notified by the Central Government. 


8. Completion of Ongoing Works—At the time of opening new works, it 
shall be ensured that ongoing or incomplete works are prioritised for completion, 
subject to planning norms and the approved Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans. 


9. Technical Estimates and Standards for Works—Every work under this Act 
shall have a technical estimate and design sanctioned by an authority authorised by 
the State Government, based on the framework aligned with the Viksit Bharat 
National Rural Infrastructure Stack. 


10. For works involving construction, appropriate labour-intensive 
technologies, depending upon the availability of labour and the use of local 
materials, shall be employed to the extent feasible. 


11. Bills of quantities shall use clear and commonly understood terminology 
to ensure transparency for all stakeholders. 


12. Each work shall have a summary of the estimate, design and a technical 
note indicating the expected outputs and outcomes. 


13. All technical estimates, designs and outcome notes shall be generated or 
uploaded through digital systems integrated with the designated management 
information system. 


14. Administrative and Financial Sanctions—(/) Works finalised at the 
Gram Panchayat level through the approved Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan and 
aggregated at the Block and District levels shall be accorded administrative or 
financial sanction by the competent authority as per the requirements and within 
thirty days. 


(2) The sanctioning authorities shall ensure that— 


(a) the proposed works are drawn exclusively from the approved Viksit 
Gram Panchayat Plan; 


(b) the works are consistent with thematic domains, and the Viksit 
Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack; 


(c) all sanctioned works are taken up through the designated digital 
portal under the Act. 


15. Muster Rolls and Attendance Systems—The muster rolls for works 
undertaken under this Act shall be maintained through digital systems and shall 
comply with the following requirements— 


(a) Each muster roll shall be in English and the local language and have 
a unique electronically generated identity number (e-muster) issued through 
the management information system. The muster roll shall include the names 
of all workers who have demanded or been allocated work and shall be 
authenticated by the authorised functionary of the Gram Panchayat or the 
Programme Officer. 


(6) Attendance at the worksite shall be recorded daily by an authorised 
person using biometric attendance systems, and all attendance details shall be 
made available for public viewing on a daily basis through the designated 
management information system. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


(c) e-Muster rolls shall be processed by officials in the manner stipulated 
under the relevant guidelines. 


16. Measurement and Basis for Payment—(/) Payment of wages shall only be 
made based on measurements taken at the worksite by authorised technical 
personnel within three days of the closure of the muster roll, and recorded digitally 
through systems integrated with the designated management information system. 


(2) The State Government shall ensure the deployment of adequate technical 
personnel to enable timely measurement. Suitable persons may be trained and 
deployed, with delegated technical responsibilities, and shall be paid wages at 
skilled rates. 


17. Wage Linkage to Output and Schedule of Rates—The State Government 
shall ensure that wages without any gender bias are linked to the quantum of work 
completed, in accordance with the Rural Schedule of Rates notified on the basis of 
time-and-motion studies for different types of work and different seasons, and 
revised periodically. 


18. Special Schedule of Rates for Vulnerable Groups—A separate Schedule 
of Rates shall be finalised for women, the elderly, persons with disabilities and 
persons with debilitating ailments to facilitate their productive participation in 
suitable categories of work. 


19. Working Hours and Earning Norms—(a) The Schedule of Rates shall be 
framed so that an adult person working for eight hours, inclusive of one hour of rest, 
can earn an amount equivalent to the notified wage rate. 


(6) Working hours of an adult worker may be flexible but shall not extend 
beyond twelve hours in a day, including intervals for rest. 


20. Material Component—For all works undertaken under this Act, the cost 
of the material component shall not exceed forty per cent. at the District level. 


21. Execution Without Contractors—(/) No contractor shall be engaged for 
the execution of any work or component financed through expenditure under this 
Act. All such works shall be executed directly by the implementing agencies in 
accordance with the processes laid down under the Act, including mandatory 
proactive disclosures and the social audit process. 


(2) In cases of convergence where components of a work are financed under 
other schemes, the execution of those components may follow the norms of the 
converging scheme, including the use of contractors where permitted. 


22. As far as practicable, works executed by the programme implementation 
agencies shall be performed by using manual labour and no labour displacing 
machines shall be used. 


23. Transparent Procurement of Materials—All materials required for the 
execution of works shall be procured by the Gram Panchayat or the implementing 
agency through transparent procurement systems, including e-tendering processes, 
as specified by the State Government. 


24. Out of the administrative costs allowed under the Scheme, at least 
one-third shall be utilised at the Gram Panchayat level to employ and pay the Gram 
Rozgar Sahayak, other technical personnel as per the work done and for other 
administrative expenses. 


25. Transparency and Accountability—(/) Every Scheme prepared under this 
Act shall contain comprehensive provisions to ensure transparency and 
accountability at all levels of implementation, including Mandatory Public 
Disclosure and social audit. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) Mandatory Public Disclosure—(a) Mandatory Public disclosure shall be 
undertaken through digital systems integrated with the designated management 
information system and displayed at the village level for public scrutiny. 


(6) Display at every worksite a “Janata Board” indicating details of 
the work, estimated labour days, material quantities in local terminology, and 
item-wise costs. 


(c) Digital and physical display of number of days of employment provided, 
wage payments, material payments, guarantees under the Act, works approved 
under the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan, and year-wise works taken up or completed 
by the Gram Panchayat and other implementing agencies. 


(d) Public disclosure of all information relating to works, labour demand, 
employment provided, payments, material utilisation and physical progress under 
this Act shall be carried out through digital systems integrated with the designated 
portal. Weekly disclosures shall be automatically generated and displayed in a 
publicly accessible physical and digital formats. In addition, the Gram Panchayat 
shall convene weekly disclosure meetings in the Gram Panchayat Bhawan to 
present the status of works, payments, grievances and other relevant information 
before the community. 


(e) The Ministry of Rural Development and the State Departments shall 
ensure that their official websites are regularly updated in compliance with 
clause (6) of sub-section (/) of section 4 of the Right to Information Act, 2005 
(22 of 2005), with all information on the Act available in free, downloadable 
electronic form. 


(3) Social audit—(qa) all works, expenditures and guarantees under this Act 
shall be subject to social audit at least once every six months in the manner as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government; 


(6) the procedure, standards and modalities for conducting social audits shall 
be as prescribed in the rules made under this Act; 


(c) until such rules are notified, the provisions of the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Schemes Rules, 2011 shall, 
mutatis mutandis, apply to the conduct of social audits under this Act. 


(4) Concurrent evaluation mechanism—For ensuring measurable 
outcomes and real-time accountability, technology-enabled monitoring shall be 
mandated for tracking work execution and post-completion asset outcomes, 
supported by verified data systems and spatial technologies. Weekly public 
disclosures shall be reinforced through a comprehensive transparency framework. 
A Concurrent Evaluation Mechanism, as may be specified by the Central 
Government through guidelines, shall provide continuous vigilance and enable 
timely corrective action. 


26. Recovery of misappropriated amounts—(/) Any misappropriation of 
amounts spent under the Act shall be recoverable under the relevant revenue laws 
for recovery prevailing in the State. 


(2) The portion of such recoveries pertaining to the Central share shall be 
remitted to the Consolidated Fund of India through the mechanism established by 
the Central Government. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


27. Inspection and Quality Control—The State Government shall ensure 


regular inspection and supervision of works by designated quality-control teams to 
verify adherence to quality standards, accuracy of measurements and conformity of 


wage 


payments to the actual quantum of work executed. Inspection reports shall be 


uploaded to the management information system. 


28. Grievance Redressal Mechanism—An effective grievance redressal 


mechanism shall be established under the Act, comprising the following 
components, namely:— 


(a) Institutional mechanisms for receiving grievances at the Ward, Gram 
Panchayat, Block and District levels, with at least one designated day each 
week when officials shall be mandatorily available to receive grievances; 


(6) Issuance of a dated acknowledgement for all grievances submitted in 
writing, telephonically, online, or orally to any authorised functionary; 


(c) Enquiry through spot verification or inspection and disposal shall be 
completed within seven working days of receipt of the grievance; 


(d) Upon completion of the enquiry, the concerned authority shall 
initiate immediate corrective action, and the grievance shall be resolved within 
fifteen days; 


(e) Failure to dispose of a grievance within seven working days at the 
level determined, shall be treated as a contravention of the provisions of this 
Act and shall attract action in accordance with section 27 or any corresponding 
provision of this Act; 


(f) Where prima facie evidence of financial irregularity is revealed 
during preliminary enquiry or through findings of the social audit report, the 
District Programme Coordinator shall, after obtaining legal advice, ensure that 
a First Information Report is lodged and necessary proceedings initiated; 


(g) The concerned authority shall inform the complainant in writing, 
physically or digitally, of the conclusions of the enquiry and the steps taken 
for redressal; 


(A) Action taken on grievances received by all implementing agencies 
shall be placed before the meetings of the Intermediate Panchayat and the 
District Panchayat for review and monitoring; 


(i) Appeals against the orders of the Gram Panchayat shall lie 
before the Programme Officer; appeals against the orders of the Programme 
Officer shall lie before the District Programme Coordinator; appeals against 
the orders of the District Programme Coordinator shall lie before the State 
Grievance Redressal Authority or any officer designated by the State 
Government; 


(j) All appeals shall be filed within forty-five days from the date of the 
order; 


(k) All appeals shall be disposed of within thirty days from the date of 
receipt; 


(0) Any grievance not resolved within fifteen days at the Ward, Gram 
Panchayat, Block or District level shall be automatically escalated to the next 
higher level through digital systems integrated with the designated 
management information system, and such escalations shall be continuously 
monitored electronically. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


29. Ombudsperson—The State Government shall appoint an Ombudsperson 
for each District to receive grievances, conduct enquiries and issue awards in 
accordance with the guidelines notified by the Central and the State Governments. 
The Ombudsperson shall operate through digital platforms integrated with the 
designated digital portal under this Act. 


30. Action for Contravention—Wherever contravention of any provision of 
this Act is established after due enquiry by the State Government, the District 
Programme Coordinator, the Programme Officer, the Ombudsperson or any other 
authority authorised by the State Government, action shall be taken in accordance 
with section 27 of this Act or any corresponding provision. 


31. Annual Reporting—The District Programme Coordinator, the Programme 
Officer and each Gram Panchayat shall prepare an annual report detailing facts, 
figures and achievements relating to the implementation of the Scheme within their 
jurisdiction. A copy of such report shall be made available to the public in physical 
or electronic form, on payment of such fee as may be specified in the Scheme. 


32. All accounts and records including muster rolls relating to the scheme shall 
be made available for public scrutiny free of cost. Any person desirous of obtaining 
a copy or relevant extracts therefrom may be provided such copies or extracts on 
demand not later than three working days from the date of receipt of application. 


33. Capacity Building and Strengthening Panchayats—There shall be a 
dedicated plan for training, Information Education Communication, digital literacy 
and strengthening Panchayati Raj Institutions. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


SCHEDULE II 
[See section 9(2)] 


1. Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card—(/) Household Registration—The adult 
member of every household residing in any rural area and willing to undertake 
unskilled manual work, may submit the names, ages and address of the household 
to the Gram Panchayat within whose jurisdiction they reside, for the purpose of 
registration of the household and issuance of a Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card. 


(2) Special Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card, where the job seeker is— 
(a) a single woman; or 
(b) a person with disability; or 
(c) persons above sixty years of age; or 
(d) a released bonded labourer; or 
(e) a person belonging to a Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group; or 
(f) a transgender person. 


(3) The Special Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card of a distinct colour, shall 
ensure special protection in the providing work, work evaluation, and worksite 
facilities, as applicable. 


(4) It shall be the duty of the Gram Panchayat, after making such enquiry, as 
it deems fit, to issue a Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card within fifteen days from the 
date of receipt of such application, containing therein a unique Gramin Rozgar 
Guarantee Card number with details of the registered adult members of the 
household, their photos, Bank or Post office account number, insurance policy 
number and the Aadhaar numbers, if any. 


(5) The Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card issued, shall be valid for three years, 
after which it may be renewed after due verification. 


(6) No Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card shall be cancelled except on any of the 
following grounds— 


(a) where it is found to be a duplicate; 


(b) where the entire household has permanently migrated to a place 
outside the jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat and no longer resides in the 
village; or 


(c) where all adult members of the registered household are deceased. 


(7) The State Government shall make arrangements for updating the following 
details in the Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card regularly while mentioning the key 
guarantees under the Act are clearly listed as follows:— 


(a) number of days for which work was demanded; 

(6) number of days of work allocated; 

(c) description of the work allocated along with the muster roll number; 
(d) measurement details; 

(e) unemployment allowance, if any, paid; 

(f) date-wise amount of wages paid; 


(g) delay compensation paid if any; 


(A) asset provided, if any. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


2. Demand for work—(/) Every adult member of a registered household 
whose name appears in the Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card, shall be entitled to 
apply for unskilled manual work under the Scheme; and every such application shall 
be compulsorily registered, and a receipt issued with the date, which shall be entered 
in the given digital platform. 


(2) The State shall proactively verify the requirements of the Vulnerable 
Groups and provide them with work. 


(3) Application for work may be oral or written and made to the Ward member 
or to the Gram Panchayat or to the Programme Officer or any person authorised by 
the State Government or through digital platforms, or through any other means 
authorised by the State Government. 


(4) Applications for work may be filed individually or for a group together. 


(5) There shall be no limit on the number of days of employment for which a 
person may apply, or on the number of days of employment actually provided to 
him subject to the aggregate guarantee of the household. 


(6) Normally, applications for work must be for at least six days of continuous 
work. 


(7) Provision shall be made in the Scheme for advance application, that is, 
application which may be submitted earlier than the date from which employment 
is sought. 


(8) Provision shall be made in the Scheme for submission of multiple 
applications by the same person provided that the corresponding periods for which 
employment is sought do not overlap. 


3. Allocation of work—(/) The Gram Panchayat and Programme Officer shall 
ensure that every applicant shall be provided unskilled manual work in accordance 
with the provisions of the Scheme within fifteen days of receipt of an 
application or the date from which he seeks work in case of advance application, 
whichever is later. 


(2) Priority shall be given to women in such a way that at least one-third of 
the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and requested for work. 
Efforts to increase participation of single women and the person with disabilities 
shall be made. 


(3) Applicants who are provided with work shall be so intimated 
in writing, by means of a letter sent to him at the address given in the Gramin 
Rozgar Guarantee Card or through any other effective mode of communication 
or by a public notice displayed at the office of the Panchayats at district, 
intermediate or village level. 


(4) A list of persons who are provided with the work shall be displayed on the 
notice board of the Gram Panchayat and at the office of the Programme Officer and 
at such other place as the Programme Officer may deem necessary and the list shall 
be open for inspection by the State Government and any interested person. 


(5) As far as possible, the employment shall be provided within a radius of 
five kilometers of the village where the applicant resides at the time of applying. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


(6) A new work under the Scheme can be commenced if at least ten labourers 
become available for work, provided that this condition shall not be applicable for 
new works, as determined by the State Government, in hilly areas and in respect of 
afforestation works. 


(7) In case the employment is provided outside the radius specified in 
sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph 3, it shall be provided within the Block, and the 
labourers shall be paid ten per cent. of the wage rate as extra wages to meet 
additional transportation and expenses for living. 


(8) A period of employment shall be for at least six days continuously, with 
not more than six days in a week. 


4. Worksite management—(/) For the purpose of transparency at the 
worksite, the following shall be ensured— 


(a) there shall be a project initiation meeting in which various provisions 
of the work shall be explained to the workers; 


(6) a copy of the sanction work order shall be available for public 
inspection at the worksite; 


(c) measurement record of each work and details of the workers shall be 
available for public inspection; 


(d) a Citizens’ Information Board shall be put up at every worksite and 
updated regularly in the manner specified by the Central Government; 


(e) the vigilance and Monitoring Committee set up according to the 
instructions of the Central Government may check all works and its evaluation 
report will be recorded in the Works Register in the format specified by the 
Central Government and submitted to the Gram Sabha during the Social 
Audit. 


(2) The facilities of safe drinking water, shade for children and periods of rest, 
first aid box with adequate material for emergency treatment for minor injuries and 
other health hazards connected with the work being performed shall be provided at 
the worksite. 


(3) In case the number of children below the age of five years accompanying 
the women working at any site is five or more, provisions shall be made to depute 
one of such women workers to look after such children. The person so deputed shall 
be paid wage rate. 


5. Welfare—(/) If any personal injury is caused to any person employed under 
the Scheme by any accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, he 
shall be entitled to such medical treatment as required, free of cost. 


(2) Where hospitalisation of the injured worker is necessary, the State 
Government shall arrange for such hospitalisation including accommodation, 
treatment, medicines and payment of daily allowance which is not less than half of 
the wage rate. 


(3) If a person employed under the Scheme meets with death or becomes 
permanently disabled by accident arising out of and in the course of employment, 
he or his legal heirs, as the case may be, shall be paid by the implementing agency 
an ex gratia as per entitlement under the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana 
or as may be notified by the Central Government. 


(4) If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child accompanying a 
person who is employed under the Scheme, such person shall be entitled to medical 
treatment free of cost; and in case of death or disablement of the child due to the 
said accident, ex gratia shall be paid to the legal guardians as determined by the 
State Government. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


6. Wage payment—(/) In case the payment of wages is not made within fifteen 
days from the date of closure of the muster roll, the wage seekers shall be entitled 
to receive payment of compensation for the delay, at the rate of 0.05% of the unpaid 
wages per day of delay beyond the sixteenth day of closure of muster roll. 


(2) Any delay in payment of compensation beyond a period of fifteen days 
from the date it becomes payable, shall be considered in the same manner as the 
delay in payment of wages. 


(3) For the purpose of ensuring accountability in payment of wages and to 
calculate culpability of various functionaries or agencies, the States shall divide 
the processes leading to determination and payment of wages into various stages 
such as,— 


(a) measurement of work; 

(6) computerising the muster rolls; 
(c) computerising the measurements; 
(व) generation of wage lists; and 


(e) uploading Fund Transfer Orders (FTOs), and specify stage-wise 
maximum time limits along with the functionary or agency which is 
responsible for discharging the specific function. 


(4) The computer system shall have a provision to automatically calculate the 
compensation payable based on the date of closure of the muster roll and the date of 
deposit of wages in the accounts of the wage seekers. 


(5) The State Government shall pay the compensation upfront after due 
verification within the time limits as specified above and recover the compensation 
amount from the functionaries or agencies who are responsible for the delay in 
payment. 


(6) It shall be the duty of the District Programme Coordinator or Programme 
Officer to ensure that the system is operationalise. 


(7) The number of days of delay, the compensation payable and actually paid 
shall be reflected in the Management Information System. 


(8) Effective implementation of sub-paragraph (/) shall be considered 
necessary for the purposes of section 29 of the Act. 


7. The payment of wages shall, unless so exempted by the Central 
Government, be made through the individual savings accounts of the workers in the 
relevant Banks or Post Offices. 


8. In case of employment provided under the Scheme, there shall be no 
discrimination solely on the ground of gender and the provisions of the Equal 
Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 of 1976), shall be complied with. 


9. Record maintenance and grievance redressal system—The Gram Panchayat 
shall prepare and maintain or cause to be prepared and maintained such registers, 
vouchers and other documents in such form and in such manner as may be specified 
in the Scheme containing particulars of Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Cards and pass 
books issued, name, age and address of the head of the household and the adult 
members of the households registered with the Gram Panchayat. 


10. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, in the event of 
any national calamity such as flood, cyclone, tsunami and earthquake resulting in 
mass dislocation of rural population, the adult members of rural households of areas 
so affected may— 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31 


(a) seek for registration and get Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card issued 
by the Gram Panchayat or Programme Officer of the area of temporary 
relocation; 


(b) submit written or oral applications for work to the Programme 
Officer or the Gram Panchayat of the area of temporary relocation; and 


(c) apply for re-registration and re-issuance of Gramin Rozgar Guarantee 
Card in the event of any loss or destruction. 


(2) The details of such Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Cards shall be intimated to 
the District Programme Coordinator. 


(3) In the event of restoration of normalcy, the Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card 
so issued shall be re-endorsed at original place of habitation and clubbed with the 
original Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card on being retrieved. 


(4) The number of days of employment provided shall be counted while 
computing 125 days of guaranteed employment per household. 


11. Every worker shall have an opportunity of being heard and register any 
grievance either orally or in writing, at all implementation levels for disposal as per 
the provisions of the Grievance Redressal Mechanism under the Scheme. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


italy signed 
iz 


KSHITIZ bys 


(0h 


MOHAN Piss seas 


MGIPMRND—408GI(S4)—21-12-2025. 


