रजिस्ट्री सं" Sle Ter 


The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-06082024-256078 
CG-DL-E-06082024-256078 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग I] — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं" 5] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, अगस्त 5, 2024/ श्रावण 4, 946 (शक) 
No. 5] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, AUGUST 5, 2024/SRAVANA 4, 946 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में first पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


RAJYA SABHA 


The following Bill has been introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 5th August, 2024:— 
Bill No. LII of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act,948. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


.(/) This Act may be called the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment 
Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


53 of 948. 2. Inthe Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 948 (hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Act), in section 3,— 


(7) clause (5) shall be omitted; 
(ii) for clause (2), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(c) "mineral oils" means any naturally occurring hydrocarbon, whether in 
the form of natural gas or in a liquid, viscous or solid form, or a mixture thereof, 


(&)04/0007/2003—24 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—24 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 3. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


and includes crude oil, natural gas, petroleum, condensate, coal bed methane, 
oil shale, shale gas, shale oil, tight gas, tight oil, gas hydrate in their usual 
industrial connotation and other gases occurring in association with mineral 
oils, but does not include coal, lignite and helium occurring in association with 
petroleum or coal or shale;'; 


(iii) in clause (d), after the word "license", the words, brackets and figures 
"sranted before the commencement of the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) 
Amendment Act, 2024" shall be inserted; 


(iv) in clause (e), for the words "natural gas and petroleum, crude oil", the 
words "mineral oils" shall be substituted; 


(v) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


'(f) "petroleum lease" means a lease granted on or after the 
commencement of the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment 
Act, 2024, for the purpose of prospecting, exploration, development, production, 
making merchantable, carrying away or disposing of mineral oils or for purposes 
connected therewith, and includes a mining lease granted before the 
commencement of the said Act.". 


Amendment 3. In section 4 of the principal Act,— 


of section 4. ‘ : : ae 
(a) inthe marginal heading, for the words "mining lease", the words "petroleum 


lease" shall be substituted; 


(6) for the words "mining lease" at both the places where they occur, the 
words "petroleum lease" shall be substituted. 


Insertion of 4. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
new section 4A. namely:— 


Prospecting, "4A. No person shall undertake any operation in any part of India or in its 
cae of mineral territorial waters, continental shelf and exclusive economic zone for the purposes of 
Ous. 


prospecting, exploration, development or production, making merchantable, carrying 
away or disposing of mineral oils, except under a valid lease granted under this Act 
and the rules made thereunder: 


Provided that nothing in this section shall affect any operation undertaken in 
any area in accordance with the terms and conditions of a license or lease granted 
before the commencement of the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment 
Act, 2024.". 


Amendment 5. In section 5 of the principal Act,— 


f section 5. é : ; 32४ 
aR (A) in the marginal heading, for the words "mining leases", the words "petroleum 


leases" shall be substituted; 


(B) in sub-section (/), for the words "grant of mining leases or for prohibiting 
the grant", the words "grant or extension or renewal of petroleum leases or for 
prohibiting the grant or extension or renewal" shall be substituted; 


(C) in sub-section (2),— 


(i) in clause (a), for the words "mining leases", the words "petroleum 
leases" shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (0), for the words "mining leases may be granted", the words 
"petroleum leases may be granted or extended or renewed" shall be substituted; 


(iii) for clause (c), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 
"(c) the maximum or minimum area of the petroleum leases; 


(ca) the period for which any petroleum lease may be granted or 
extended or renewed; 


978८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(cb) the terms on which petroleum leases may be merged or 
combined;"; 


(iv) in clause (d), for the word "mine", the word "oilfield" shall be 
substituted; 


(v) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(e) the mechanism to enable resolution of disputes arising out of, 
or in relation to the petroleum leases or any authorisation granted by the 
Central Government for working of an oilfield through alternative dispute 
resolution methods under any law for the time being in force, in a place 
within India or outside India; 


(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be made by rules 
or in respect of which provision is to be made under this section."; 


(D) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(3) The terms and conditions of a petroleum lease shall remain stable during the 
period of the lease for expeditious and efficient development of oilfields or production of 
mineral oils and shall not be altered to the disadvantage of the lessee during the period of 
the lease.". 


6. In section 6 of the principal Act,— 


(A) in the marginal heading, for the word "mineral", the words "mineral oils" 
shall be substituted; 


(B) in sub-section (/), for the words "conservation and development", the 
words "exploration, development, production and conservation" shall be substituted; 


(C) in sub-section (2),— 
(४) in clause (d),— 


(a)for the words "oil wells", the words "mineral oil wells and 
decommissioning and site restoration activities" shall be substituted; 


(6) for the word "oil", the words "mineral oils" shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (e), for the word "oil", the words "mineral oils" shall be 
substituted; 


(iii) in clause (g), for the word "mines", the word "oilfields" shall be 
substituted; 


(iv) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ga) the collection, aggregation, dissemination, use or sharing of 
the data and samples related to mineral oils with the Central Government 
or any other party nominated by the Central Government, for the purposes 
of economic development, academic research and public welfare;"; 


(v) in clause (i), for the words "mined, quarried, excavated or 
collected", the word "produced" shall be substituted; 


(vi) in clause (7), for the words "owners or lessees of mines of special or 
periodical returns and reports, and the forms", the words "lessees of oilfields of 
special or periodical returns and reports, and the formats" shall be substituted; 


(vii) after clause (7), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: — 


"(k) the sharing of production and processing facilities and other 
infrastructure, both on land and offshore, by two or more lessees for 
more efficient development of oilfields or production of mineral oils; 


Amendment 
of section 6. 


Amendment 
of section 
6A. 


Substitution 
of new 
sections 9, 9A 
and 9B for 
section 9. 


Penalties. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(J the safety at oilfields including safety mechanisms, standards 
and protocols for conduct of mineral oil operations, protection of persons 
and infrastructure such as terminals, installations, other structures and 
devices, and mineral oils; 


(m) the sound management of mineral oils in accordance with good 
international petroleum industry practices including obligations of lessees 
towards protection of environment during operations and while 
abandoning, decommissioning and undertaking site restoration activities; 


(n) the unitisation of leases across States, Union territories and 
offshore leases, where there is reservoir continuity or connectivity, or for 
efficient exploration, development or production of mineral oils; 


(०) promote and facilitate adoption of measures for reducing carbon 
and greenhouse gas emissions and decarbonising operations including 
but not limited to use of oilfields for other purposes, such as, production 
of hydrogen, carbon capture utilisation and storage or coal gasification; 


(p) reporting of carbon and greenhouse gas emissions related to, 
arising out of, or resulting from mineral oil operations; 


(4) promote and facilitate development of comprehensive energy 
projects at oilfields, including planning, development, installation, sharing 
and use of infrastructure for carrying out mineral oil operations and solar, 
wind or other form of renewable energy projects; 


(r) any other matter which is required to be, or may be made by 
rules, or in respect of which provision is to be made under this section.". 


7. In section 6A of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the words "mined, quarried, excavated" wherever they occur, the word 
"produced" shall be substituted; 


(5) in sub-section (2), after the words "mining lease", the words "or petroleum 
lease" shall be inserted; 


(c) in sub-section (3),— 


(i) for the words "crude oil, casing-head condensate or natural gas", the 
words "mineral oils" shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words "petroleum or natural gas, or both", the words "mineral 
oils" shall be substituted; 


(d) in sub-section (4), for the words "mining leases", the words "petroleum 
leases" shall be substituted. 


8. For section 9 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"9. (/) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 4A or sub-section (/) or 
sub-section (2), of section 6A shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five lakh rupees. 


(2) Any rule made under any of the provisions of this Act may provide that any 
contravention thereof shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five lakh rupees. 


(3) Whoever, after having been punished with penalty as referred to in 
sub-section (/) or sub-section (2), continues to contravene any of the provisions of 
this Act or rules made thereunder shall be liable to pay a further penalty which may 
extend to ten lakh rupees per day for the entire duration during which the contravention 
continues commencing from the date of imposition of the first penalty. 


978८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


9A. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for providing eligibility criteria for designating an adjudicating authority 
and for the manner of conducting inquiry and imposing penalty under the provisions 
of this Act: 


Provided that no officer below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of 
India shall be designated as an adjudicating authority. 


(2) The adjudicating authority may summon and enforce the attendance of any 
person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to 
produce any document which in his opinion may be useful for or relevant to the 
subject matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person 
concerned has contravened the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, 
he may determine such penalty in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 


(3) No penalty shall be imposed on any person under this section or any rules 
made thereunder without affording an opportunity of being heard. 


9B. () Every appeal against the order of the adjudicating authority under this 
section shall lie with the Appellate Tribunal referred to in section 30 of the Petroleum 


9 of 2006. and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 and the provisions contained in 
sections 33, 34, 35 and 36 of that Act, shall, mutatis mutandis apply, in relation to 
every such appeal. 

(2) The provisions contained in section 37 of the Petroleum and Natural Gas 

9 of 2006. Regulatory Board Act, 2006, shall mutatis mutandis apply, in relation to every appeal 


against the order of the Appellate Tribunal referred to in sub-section (/).". 


9. Insection l0 of the principal Act, after the words, figure and letter "of section 6A", 
the words and figure "or section 8" shall be inserted. 


0. In section |] of the principal Act, for the word "mine" wherever it occurs, the word 
"oilfield" shall be substituted. 


Il. In section 2 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the words "mining lease", the words "petroleum lease" shall be 
substituted; 


(6) for the word "mine", the word "oilfield" shall be substituted. 


2. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"|३/, All mining leases and licenses granted before commencement of the 
Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 2024, shall continue to be 
valid for their respective tenure subject to the terms and conditions governing the 
grant of such leases and licenses."”. 


Adjudication. 


Appeal. 


Amendment 
of section 0. 


Amendment 
of section I]. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Insertion of 
new section 
3A. 


Validity of 
leases and 
licenses. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Originally, oilfields, mines and minerals were comprehensively regulated together 
through the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 948. Subsequently, 
in 957, the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, |957 was enacted for 
the development and regulation of mines and minerals under the control of the Union. The 
original Act of 948 was also renamed as the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) 
Act, 948 (the said Act) and made applicable to mineral oils only. 


2. The said Act, which provides for a very different global energy context, requires to 
be amended to meet the needs and aspirations of the country for energy access, energy 
security and energy affordability. Further, there is an urgent and pressing need to increase 
domestic production of oil and gas to meet the rising demand for energy and reduce import 
dependence of the country. In order to unlock valuable mineral oil resources, it is necessary 
to attract investment in the sector to infuse necessary capital and technology for expediting 
petroleum operations in the country by creating an investor friendly environment that 
promotes ease of doing business, prospects for exploration, development and production 
of all types of hydrocarbons, ensures stability, promotes adequate opportunities for risk 
mitigation, addresses energy transition issues including next-generation cleaner fuels and 
provides for a robust enforcement mechanism for ensuring compliance of the provisions of 
the said Act. 


3. Therefore, it is felt necessary to amend the said Act and for that purpose to 
introduce the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Bill, 2024 in Parliament. 
The salient features of the amendments proposed in the said Bill, inter alia, are— 


(a) delinking of petroleum operations from mining operations; 
(6) broadening the scope of the expression "mineral oils"; 

(c) Introducing the concept of "petroleum lease"; 

(d) granting lease on stable terms; 


(e) strengthening petroleum operations through rules framed for governing 
various functional aspects, such as, grants of leases or licences, their extension or 
renewal, sharing of production and processing facilities including infrastructure and 
safety at oilfields; 


(f) providing for efficacious dispute resolution; 


(g) decriminalising the provisions of the said Act by introducing penalties, 
adjudication by an adjudicating authority and appeal as against the order of 
adjudicating authority; 


(h) creating an environment for facilitating energy transition by enabling 
development of comprehensive energy projects for harnessing wind and solar energy 
along with mineral oils at oilfields. 


4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; HARDEEP SINGH PURI. 
The 3\st July, 2024. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for the 
purposes of regulating various aspects of petroleum leases such as the grant, extension 
and renewal thereof, including the terms subject to which they may be merged or combined. 
The clause also provides for residuary powers to frame rules relating to matters connected 
therewith. 


2. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules 
regarding matters connected with mineral oil development including safety, reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions and facilitating development of comprehensive energy projects 
at oilfields. The clause also provides for residuary powers to frame rules relating to matters 
connected therewith. 


3. Clause 8 of the Bill provides for insertion of new sections 9A and 9B so as to 
empower the Central Government to make rules for providing the eligibility criteria for 
designation of an adjudicating authority and for providing the manner in which the 
adjudicating authority shall conduct inquiry and impose the penalties. 


4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure or 
detail. The delegation of legislative power is, thus, of a normal character. 


P.C. MODY, 
Secretary-General. 


PUBLISHED BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, RAJYA SABHA, UNDER RULE 68 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE AND 
CONDUCT OF BUSINESS IN THE RAJYA SABHA AND UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, 
MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-0002. ee हि 


Mohan 


MGIPMRND—20/GI(S3)—05-08-2024. 


