रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल०--(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


प्यारत का Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-09082025-265333 
CG-DL-E-09082025-265333 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — ars 
PART II — Section I 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं" 24] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, अगस्त 8, 2025/भाद्र 7, 947 (शक) 
No. 24] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 2025/BHADRA 7, 947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 8th August, 2025/Bhadra 7, 947 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
8th August, 2025 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE CARRIAGE OF GOODS BY SEA ACT, 2025 


9 oF 2025 
[8th August, 2025.] 


An Act to provide for the responsibilities, liabilities, rights and immunities 
attached to carriers with respect to the carriage of goods by sea and for 
matters connected therewith or related thereto. 


WHEREAS the delegates at the International Conference on Maritime Law 
held at Brussels in October, 922, agreed unanimously to recommend their 
respective Governments to adopt as the basis of a Convention a draft Convention 
for the unification of certain rules relating to bills of lading; 


AND WHEREAS at a meeting held at Brussels in October, 923, the rules 
contained in the said draft Convention were amended by the Committee appointed 
by the said Conference; 


AND WHEREAS the said rules were amended by the Protocol signed 
at Brussels on 23rd February, |968 and by the Protocol signed at Brussels 
on 2lst December, |979; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Application of 
Schedule. 


No implied 
absolute 
undertaking in 
contracts to 
which applicable 
tules apply. 


Statement as to 
application of 
Schedule to be 
included in bills 
of lading. 


Modification of 
Article VI of 
applicable rules 
in relation to 
goods carried in 
sailing ships and 
by specified 
routes. 


Modification of 
paragraphs 4 
and 5 of Article 
वा in relation to 
bulk cargoes. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
issue directions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


AND WHEREAS it is expedient that the said rules as so amended and as set out 
with modifications in the Schedule thereto should, subject to the provisions of this 
Act, have the force of law with a view to establishing the responsibilities, 
liabilities, rights and immunities attaching to carriers under bills of lading. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 


l. (/) This Act may be called the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “applicable rules” mean the applicable rules provided in the 
Schedule to this Act; 


(6) “notification” means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette and the expression “notify” with its grammatical variation and 
cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly; and 


(c) “Schedule” means the Schedule annexed to this Act. 


3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the applicable rules laid down in the 
Schedule shall have effect in relation to and in connection with the carriage of 
goods by sea in ships carrying goods from any port in India to any other port, 
whether in or outside India. 


4. There shall be no implied absolute undertaking in any contract for the 
carriage of goods by sea, to which the applicable rules apply, by the carrier of the 
goods to provide a seaworthy ship. 


5. Every bill of lading, or similar document of title, issued in India, which 
contains or is evidence of any contract to which the applicable rules apply, shall 
contain an express statement that it is to have effect subject to the applicable rules 
laid down in the Schedule, as applied by this Act. 


6. Article VI of the applicable rules shall, in relation to— 


(a) the carriage of goods by sea in sailing ships, carrying goods from 
any port in India to any other port whether in or outside India; 


(b) the carriage of goods by sea in ships, carrying goods from a port 
in India notified in this behalf, to a port in Sri Lanka specified in the said 
notification, 


have effect as though the said Article referred to goods of any class instead of to 
particular goods and as though the proviso to the second paragraph of the said 
Article were omitted. 


7. Where under the custom of any trade,— 


(a) the weight of any bulk cargo inserted in the bill of lading is a 
weight ascertained or accepted by a third party other than the carrier or the 
shipper; and 


(5) the fact that the weight is so ascertained or accepted is stated in the 
bill of lading, 


then, notwithstanding anything contained in the applicable rules, the bill of lading 
shall not be deemed to be prima facie evidence against the carrier of the receipt 
of goods of the weight so inserted in the bill of lading, and the accuracy thereof 
at the time of shipment shall not be deemed to have been guaranteed by the 
shipper. 


8. The Central Government may give such directions, as it may deem 
necessary, for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act. 


26 of 925. 


44 of 958. 


0 of 897. 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


9. (J) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient 
so to do, it may, by notification, amend the Schedule. 


(2) Any amendment notified under sub-section (/) shall have effect as if 
enacted in this Act and shall come into force on the date of the notification, unless 
the notification otherwise directs. 


0. Every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should 
not be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done in pursuance of that notification. 


Il. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to 
it to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of a period of two years, from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


2. (/) The Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 925 is hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act referred to in sub-section (J), it 
shall not affect,— 


(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything done or 
any action taken or purported to have been done or taken or suffered 
thereunder under the Act so repealed; or 


(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or 
incurred under the Act so repealed; or 


(c) the operation of any rule, notification, order, notice or direction 
issued or exemption granted thereunder, in so far as it is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, and shall be in force until it is repealed or 
superseded under the corresponding provisions of this Act; or 


(d) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty as aforesaid, and any such proceeding or 
remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty may 
be imposed as if that Act had not been repealed; or 


(e) the reference made to the repealed Act under any other legislation, 
rule, order, or any other legal instrument and any such reference shall, in so 
far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be construed to 
as a reference to this Act or its corresponding provisions. 


(3) Nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of section 33] and the 
provisions of Part XA, of the Merchant Shipping Act, 958, or the operation of 
any other enactment for the time being in force limiting the liability of the owners 
of sea-going vessels. 


(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of 
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 897 shall apply with regard to the effect of 
repeal. 


Power of 
Central 
Government to 
amend 
Schedule. 


Laying of 
notification 
before 
Parliament. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


THE SCHEDULE 
[See sections 3, 5 and 9] 
APPLICABLE RULES RELATING TO BILLS OF LADING 


ARTICLE I: Definitions —In these applicable rules the following expressions 
have the meanings hereby assigned to them respectively, that is to say— 


(a) “carriage of goods” covers the period from the time when the 
goods are loaded on to the time when they are discharged from the ship; 


(0) “carrier” includes the owner or the charterer who enters into a 
contract of carriage with a shipper; 


(c) “contract of carriage” applies only to contracts of carriage covered 
by a bill of lading or any similar document of title, in so far as such 
document relates to the carriage of goods by sea including any bill of lading 
or any similar document as aforesaid issued under or pursuant to a 
charterparty from the moment at which such bill of lading or similar 
document of title regulates the relations between a carrier and a holder of 
the same; 


(व) “goods” includes any property including live animals as well as 
containers, pallets or similar articles of transport or packaging supplied by 
the consignor, irrespective of whether such property is to be or is carried on 
or under deck; 


(e) “ship” means any vessel used for the carriage of goods by sea. 


ARTICLE II: Risks.—Subject to the provisions of Article VI, under every 
contract of carriage of goods by sea the carrier, in relation to the loading, handling, 
stowage, carriage, custody, care, and discharge of such goods, shall be subject to 
the responsibilities and liabilities, and entitled to the rights and immunities 
hereinafter set forth. 


ARTICLE III: Responsibilities and liabilities ——(/) The carrier shall be 
bound, before and at the beginning of the voyage, to exercise due diligence to— 


(a) make the ship seaworthy; 
(b) properly man, equip, and supply the ship; and 


(c) make the holds, refrigerating and cool chambers, and all other parts 
of the ship in which goods are carried, fit and safe for their reception, 
carriage and preservation. 


(2) Subject to the provisions of Article IV, the carrier shall properly and 
carefully load, handle, stow, carry, keep, care for and discharge the goods carried. 


(3) After receiving the goods into his charge, the carrier, or the master or 
agent of the carrier, shall, on demand of the shipper, issue to the shipper a bill of 
lading showing among other things— 


(a) the leading marks necessary for identification of the goods, as the 
same are furnished in writing by the shipper before the loading of such 
goods starts, provided such marks are stamped or otherwise shown clearly 
upon the goods if uncovered, or on the cases or coverings in which such 
goods are contained, in such a manner as should ordinarily remain legible 
until the end of the voyage; 


(5) either the number of packages or pieces, or the quantity, or weight, 
as the case may be, as furnished in writing by the shipper; 


(c) the apparent order and condition of the goods: 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Provided that no carrier, master or agent of the carrier, shall be bound to 
state or show in the bill of lading any marks, number, quantity, or weight, which 
he has reasonable ground for suspecting not accurately to represent the goods 
actually received, or which he has had no reasonable means of checking. 


(4) Such a bill of lading shall be prima facie evidence of the receipt by the 
carrier of the goods as therein described in accordance with clauses (a), (b) 
and (c) of paragraph 3 of this Article. However, proof to the contrary shall not be 
admissible when the bill of lading has been transferred to a third party acting in 
good faith. 


(5) The shipper shall be deemed to have guaranteed to the carrier the 
accuracy at the time of shipment of the marks, number, quantity, and weight, as 
furnished by him, and the shipper shall indemnify the carrier against all loss, 
damages, and expenses arising or resulting from inaccuracies in such particulars. 
The right of the carrier to such indemnity shall in no way limit his responsibility 
and liability under the contract of carriage to any person other than the shipper. 


(6) (a) Unless notice of loss or damage and the general nature of such loss 
or damage be given in writing to the carrier or his agent at the port of discharge 
before or at the time of the removal of the goods into the custody of the person 
entitled to delivery thereof under the contract of carriage, or if, the loss or damage 
be not apparent, within three days, such removal shall be prima facie evidence of 
the delivery by the carrier of the goods as described in the bill of lading. 


(b) The notice in writing need not be given if the state of the goods has at 
the time of their receipt been the subject of joint survey or inspection. 


(c) In any event the carrier and the ship shall be discharged from all liability 
in respect of loss or damage unless suit is brought within one year after delivery of 
the goods or the date when the goods should have been delivered. This period may, 
however, be extended if the parties so agree after the cause of action has arisen: 


Provided that a suit may be brought after the expiry of the period of one year 
referred to in this sub-paragraph within a further period of not more than three 
months as allowed by the court. 


(d) In the case of any actual or apprehended loss or damage, the carrier and 
the receiver shall give all reasonable facilities to each other for inspecting and 
tallying the goods. 


(7) After the goods are loaded, the bill of lading to be issued by the carrier, 
master or agent of the carrier, to the shipper shall, if the shipper so demands, be a 
“shipped” bill of lading, provided that, if the shipper shall have previously taken 
up any document of title to such goods, he shall surrender the same as against the 
issue of the “shipped” bill of lading, but at the option of the carrier, such document 
of title may be noted at the port of shipment by the carrier, master, or agent with 
the name or names of the ship or ships upon which the goods have been shipped 
and the date or dates of shipment, and when so noted the same shall for the 
purpose of this Article be deemed to constitute a “shipped” bill of lading. 


(8) Any clause, covenant or agreement in a contract of carriage relieving the 
carrier or the ship from liability for loss or damage to or in connection with goods 
arising from negligence, fault or failure in the duties and obligations provided in 
this Article or lessening such liability otherwise than as provided in these 
applicable rules, shall be nud/ and void and of no effect. 


(9) A benefit of insurance or similar clause shall be deemed to be a clause 
relieving the carrier from liability. 


ARTICLE IV: Rights and immunities —(/) Neither the carrier nor the ship 
shall be liable for loss or damage arising or resulting from unseaworthiness unless 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


caused by want of due diligence on the part of the carrier to make the ship 
seaworthy, and to secure that the ship is properly manned, equipped and supplied, 
and to make the holds, refrigerating and cool chambers and all other parts of the 
ship in which goods are carried fit and safe for their reception, carriage and 
preservation in accordance with the provisions of paragraph | of Article III. 
Whenever loss or damage has resulted from unseaworthiness, the burden of 
proving the exercise of due diligence shall be on the carrier or other person 
claiming exemption under this section. 


(2) Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be responsible for loss or damage 
arising or resulting from— 


(a) act, neglect, or default of the master, mariner, pilot, or the servants 
of the carrier in the navigation or in the management of the ship; 


(b) fire, unless caused by the actual fault or privity of the carrier; 

(c) perils, dangers and accidents of the sea or other navigable waters; 
(d) act of God; 

(e) act of war; 

(f) act of public enemies; 

(g) arrest or restraint of princes, rulers or people, or seizure under legal process; 
(A) quarantine restriction; 


(7) act or omission of the shipper or owner of the goods, his agent, or 
representative; 


(7) strikes or lock-outs or stoppage or restraint of labour from whatever 
cause, whether partial or general; 


(x) riots and civil commotions; 
(J) saving or attempting to save life or property at sea; 


(m) wastage in bulk or weight or any other loss or damage arising from 
inherent defect, quality, or vice of the goods; 


(n) insufficiency of packing; 
(०) insufficiency or inadequacy of marks; 
(p) latent defects not discoverable by due diligence; 


(q) any other cause arising without the actual fault or privity of the 
carrier, or without the fault or neglect of the agents or servants of the carrier, 
but the burden of proof shall be on the person claiming the benefit of this 
exception to show that neither the actual fault nor privity of the carrier nor 
the fault or neglect of the agents or servants of the carrier contributed to the 
loss or damage. 


(3) The shipper shall not be responsible for loss or damage sustained by the 
carrier or the ship arising or resulting from any cause without the act, fault or 
neglect of the shipper, his agents, or his servants. 


(4) Any deviation in saving or attempting to save life or property at sea, or 
any reasonable deviation shall not be deemed to be an infringement or breach of 
these applicable rules or of the contract of carriage, and the carrier shall not be 
liable for any loss or damage resulting therefrom. 


(5) (a) Neither the carrier nor the ship shall in any event be or become liable for 
any loss or damage to or in connection with goods in an amount exceeding 666.67 
Special Drawing Rights per package or unit or two Special Drawing Rights 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


per kilogram of gross weight of the goods lost or damaged, whichever is higher 
or the equivalent of that sum in other currency, unless the nature and value of such 
goods have been declared by the shipper before shipment and inserted in the bill 
of lading. This declaration if embodied in the bill of lading shall be prima facie 
evidence, but shall not be binding or conclusive on the carrier. 


(b) Where a container, pallet or similar article of transport is used to consolidate 
goods, the number of packages or units enumerated in the bill of lading and as packed 
in such article of transport shall be deemed to be the number of packages or units for 
the purposes of this paragraph as far as these packages or units are concerned. 


(c) Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be entitled to the benefit of 
limitation of liability provided for in this paragraph if it is proved that the damage 
resulted from an act or omission of the carrier done with intent to cause damage, 
or recklessly and with knowledge that damage would probably result. 


(d) Where the nature or value of the goods has been knowingly mis-stated 
by the shipper in the bill of lading, the liability of the carrier or ship shall not 
exceed the value so stated. 


(e) By agreement between the carrier, master or agent of the carrier and the 
shipper, another maximum amount than that mentioned in this paragraph may be 
fixed, provided that such maximum shall not be less than the figure above named. 


(f) Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be responsible in any event for loss 
or damage to or in connection with goods if the nature or value thereof has been 
knowingly mis-stated by the shipper in the bill of lading. 


(6) (a) Goods of an inflammable, explosive or dangerous nature to the 
shipment whereof the carrier, master or agent of the carrier, has not consented, 
with knowledge of their nature and character, may at any time before discharge 
be landed at any place or destroyed or rendered innocuous by the carrier without 
compensation, and the shipper of such goods shall be liable for all damages and 
expenses directly or indirectly arising out of or resulting from such shipment. 


(6) If any such goods shipped with such knowledge and consent shall 
become a danger to the ship or cargo, they may in like manner be landed at any 
place or destroyed or rendered innocuous by the carrier without liability on the 
part of the carrier except to general average, if any. 


ARTICLE V: Surrender of Rights and Immunities, and Increase of 
Responsibilities and Liabilities—A carrier shall be at liberty to surrender in 
whole or in part all or any of his rights and immunities or to increase any of his 
responsibilities and liabilities under the applicable rules contained in any of these 
Articles, provided such surrender or increase shall be embodied in the bill of 
lading issued to the shipper. The provisions of these applicable rules shall not 
apply to charterparties, but if bills of lading are issued in the case of a ship under 
a charterparty they shall comply with the terms of these applicable rules. Nothing 
in these applicable rules shall be held to prevent the insertion in a bill of lading of 
any lawful provision regarding general average. 


ARTICLE VI: Special conditions—Notwithstanding the provisions of the 
preceding Articles, a carrier, master or agent of the carrier, and a shipper shall, in 
regard to any particular goods be at liberty to enter into any agreement in any 
terms to the responsibility and liability of the carrier for such goods, and as to the 
rights and immunities of the carrier in respect of such goods, or his obligation as 
to seaworthiness, so far as this stipulation is not contrary to public policy, or the 
care or diligence of his servants or agents in regard to the loading, handling, 
stowage, carriage, custody, care, and discharge of the goods carried by sea, 
provided that in this case no bill of lading has been or shall be issued and that the 
terms agreed shall be embodied in a receipt which shall be a non-negotiable 
document and shall be marked as such. Any agreement so entered into shall have 
full legal effect: 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [शा II—Sec. |] 


Provided that this Article shall not apply to ordinary commercial shipments 
made in the ordinary course of trade, but only to other shipments where the charter 
or condition of the property to be carried or the circumstances, terms and 
conditions under which the carriage is to be performed, are such as reasonably to 
justify a special agreement. 


ARTICLE VII: Limitations on the application of the applicable rules — 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a carrier or a shipper from entering into 
any agreement, stipulation, condition, reservation or exemption as to the 
responsibility and liability of the carrier or the ship for the loss or damage to or in 
connection with the custody and care and handling of goods prior to the loading 
on and subsequent to the discharge from the ship on which the goods are carried 
by sea. 


ARTICLE VIII: Limitation of liability—The provisions of these applicable 
tules shall not affect the rights and obligations of the carrier under any statute 
for the time being in force relating to the limitation of the liability of owners of 
sea-going vessels. 


ARTICLE IX: Gold value—The monetary units mentioned in these 
applicable rules are to be taken to be gold value. 


DR. RAJTV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-0054. 


MGIPMRND—50GI($4)—8-8-2025. KSHITIZ (er ioean 
MOHAN oroaao 405० 


