रजिस्ट्री te डी० Uer—( TH) 04/0007/2003—26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


प्यारत का Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


Ot. GH. -S7. Wet. -37.-8092026-276322 
CG-DL-E-8092026-276322 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — asl 
PART II — Section | 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 40] नई दिल्ली, शुक्रवार, सितम्बर 8, 2026/भाद्र 27, 948 (शक) 
No. 40] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 2026/BHADRA 27, 948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the /6/॥ September, 2026/Bhadra 27, 948 (Saka) 


THE ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS REGISTRATION 
(AMENDMENT) REGULATION, 2026 


No. |2 oF 2026 
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic 


of India. 


A Regulation further to amend the Registration Act, |908, in its application to the 
Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. 


In exercise of the powers conferred by article 240 of the Constitution, the 
President is pleased to promulgate the following Regulation made by her:— 


l. (J) This Regulation may be called the Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
Registration (Amendment) Regulation, 2026. 


(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Administrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


Amendment of 
section |7. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


2. In the Registration Act, 908 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), 
in section 2,— 


(a) in clause (/), for the words “his father’s name, or where he is 


usually described as the son of his mother, then his mother’s name”, the 
words “his marital status and his father’s name, or where he is usually 
described as the ward of his mother, then his mother’s name” shall be 
substituted; 


(6) for clause (2), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(2) “Book” includes a portion of a Book and also any number of 
sheets connected together with a view of forming a Book or portion of 
a Book and also includes a Book in electronic form. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this clause, the expression 
“electronic form” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in 
clause (r) of sub-section (/) of section 2 of the Information Technology 
Act, 2000;’; 


(c) after clause (5), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(5A) “Government” means the Union territory Administration of 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands headed by the Administrator;’; 


(d) in clause (9), the word “and” occurring at the end, shall be omitted; 
(e) after clause (9), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(9A) “notification” means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, and 
the expression “notified” shall be construed accordingly; 


(9B) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;’; 
(f) in clause (0), for the word “idiot.”, the words “idiot; and” shall be 


substituted; 


(g) after clause (/0), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(/0A) “Union territory” means the Union territory of Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands.’. 


3. In section 7 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), after clause (e), the following clauses shall be 


inserted, namely: — 


“(f) any decree or order or award or a copy thereof, with respect 
to an immovable property, passed by a civil Court, on consent of the 
defendants or on circumstantial evidence, but not on the basis of any 
instrument which is admissible in evidence under section 35 of the 
Indian Stamp Act, |899 such as registered title deed produced by the 
plaintiff, where such decree or order or award purports or operates to 
create, declare, assign, limit, extinguish whether in present or in future, 
the right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent, of the value of 
one hundred rupees or more; and 


(g) a sale certificate issued by any competent officer or authority 
under any Central Act or State Act for the time being in force;”; 
(b) in sub-section (2),— 


(A) in clause (vi), for the words “any decree or order of a Court”, 
the words, brackets, letter and figure “any decree or order of a Court, 
not being a decree or order or award falling under clause (f) of 
sub-section (/),” shall be substituted; 


(B) the Explanation shall be omitted. 


6 of 908. 


2] of 2000. 


2 of 899. 


Sec. |] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


4. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


न_[908, (J) No document shall be accepted for registration, unless it is 
accompanied by a true copy thereof. 


(2) The true copy referred to in sub-section (/) shall be legibly 
handwritten, printed, typewritten, lithographed or otherwise prepared in such 
manner as may be prescribed, and such true copy shall be self-attested.”. 


5. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the words 
“persons executing the document”, the words “, and in the case of a document for 
sale of property, the persons claiming under that document also” shall be inserted. 


6. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


“22A. (/) The registering officer may refuse the registration of a 
document, if,— 


(a) it is submitted without a true translation in a language 
commonly understood in the district of the registering officer; or 


(80) it is a document referred to in sub-section (/) of section 20; or 


(c) it is a non-testamentary document, and is presented without 
sufficient description to identify the property that is the subject of 
registration as specified under section 2; or 


(d) such document, not being a will, is presented for registration 
later than four months after the date of execution, under section 23, 
subject to the provisions of sections 24, 25 and 26; or 


(e) the person, by whom the document is purported to be 
executed,— 


(i) denies the execution of the document; or 
(ii) is a minor; or 


(iii) appears to the registering officer to be a person with 
mental incapacity; or 


(iv) is dead and the representative or assign of such person 
denies execution; or 


(f) the document relates to transfer of property by way of 
agreement to sell, sale, gift, exchange or lease or otherwise in respect 
of any immovable property owned by the Central Government or 
Government or any authority or undertaking of the Central 
Government or Government or any authority or undertaking 
constituted or established under any Central Act or any other 
Regulation for the time being in force, unless such document is 
accompanied by a no objection certificate issued by the competent 
authority; or 


(g) the document relates to transfer of property by way of 
agreement to sell, sale, gift, exchange or permanent alienation or lease, 
or otherwise pertaining to any immovable property which is attached 
permanently or provisionally by any competent authority under any 
Central Act or any other Regulation for the time being in force, or any 
Court or tribunal or authority, upon the production of order of such 
attachment; or 


Insertion of new 
section l9A. 


Documents 
presented for 
registration to be 
accompanied by 
true copies 
thereof. 


Amendment of 
section 20. 


Insertion of new 
section 22A. 


Grounds for 
refusal of 
registration of a 
document. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(h) the document relates to the transfer of property in respect of 
which the approval of the Central Government or Government or any 
authority or undertaking of the Central Government or Government or 
any authority or undertaking constituted or established under any 
Central Act or any other Regulation is required under any law for the 
time being in force, before entering into any transaction in connection 
with such immovable property, unless such document is accompanied 
by an approval (by whatever name called) issued by the competent 
authority; or 


(i) the appropriate registration fee under this Act has not been paid; or 


(j) the registering officer finds that the document has not been 
executed by the person by whom it is purported to have been executed 
based on information accessed and examined; or 


(k) the registering officer finds that he is not satisfied about the 
identity of the persons appearing before him and alleging to have 
executed the document. 


(2) The power under this section shall not be construed as empowering 
the registering officer to adjudicate upon questions of title or ownership of 
property, which are within the jurisdiction of any competent Court or other 
authority under any law for the time being in force: 


Provided that such a decision of refusal shall apply to documents 
executed on or after the date of promulgation of the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands Registration (Amendment) Regulation, 2026. 


(3) The reasons for refusal to register shall be recorded as specified 
under section 7.”. 


Amendment of 7. In section 28 of the principal Act, for the words, brackets and letters 
3000 25 “clauses (a), (0), (2), (४) and (e)”, the words, brackets and letters “clauses (a), (0), 
(c), (४), (०), (f) and (g)” shall be substituted. 
Amendment of 8. In section 34 of the principal Act,— 
section 34. 
(a) in sub-section (/), after the words “persons executing such 
document,”, the words “and in the case of document for sale of property, the 
persons claiming under that document” shall be inserted; 


(b) in sub-section (3), in clause (0), after the words “executed the 
document,”, the words “or they are claiming under the document” shall be 
inserted. 


Insertion of new 9. After section 34 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
section 34 A, ee 
inserted, namely:— 


Person claiming “34A. No document for sale of property shall be registered under this 


han aaa Act, unless the person claiming under such document has also signed it.”. 
property also to 


sign document. 


Amendment of 0. In section 45 of the principal Act,— 
section 45. 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “cause the contents thereof”, the 
words “cause a true copy of the contents thereof” shall be substituted; 


(09) in sub-section (2), for the words “copy has been made”, the words 
“true copy has been filed” shall be substituted. 


Amendment of l. In section 46 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following 
section 46. है ; : 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


“(2) When any such order is made, the Registrar shall, unless a true 
copy of the will has already been filed under section 45, open the cover and 
cause a true copy of the will to be made and filed in his Book No. 3 and 
make a note on such copy that the original has been removed into Court in 
pursuance of the order aforesaid.” 


2. In section 50 of the principal Act, for the words, brackets, letters and 
figures “clauses (a), (0), (c) and (d) of section 7, sub-section (/)”, the words, 
brackets, letters and figures “clauses (a), (0), (c), (४), (e), (f) and (g) of sub-section (/) 
of section 7” shall be substituted. 


3. In section 5 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) True copies of all documents, and the Memoranda, 
registered under sections 7, 8 and 89 which relate to immovable 
property, other than wills shall be filed in Book .”; 


(0) in sub-section (3), for the words “entered all documents”, the words 
“filed the true copies of all documents” shall be substituted; 


(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(5) Where any of the Books mentioned in sub-section (/) is 
destroyed, or in the opinion of the Registrar, is in danger of being 
destroyed, or becoming illegible wholly or partially, the Registrar may, 
by a written order, direct such Book or such portion thereof as he 
thinks fit, to be reconstructed or recopied, as the case may be, and 
authenticated in such manner as may be prescribed, and the copy 
prepared and authenticated under such direction shall, for the purposes 
of this Act, be deemed to have taken the place of and to be the original 
Book or portion thereof and all references in this Act, to the original 
Book or portion thereof, shall be deemed to be references to the Book 
or portion so prepared and authenticated.”. 


4. In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for clause (c), the 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(c) subject to the provisions of section 62, where a document is 
admitted to registration, a true copy thereof shall, without unnecessary delay, 
be filed in the appropriate Book, according to the order of its admission.”. 


5. In section 53 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that where the Book is in electronic form, all entries and 
numbers in that Book and the Book maintained manually shall be identical.”. 


6. In section 54 of the principal Act, for the words “copied, or filed a memorandum 
of’, the words “filed a true copy or a memorandum of” shall be substituted. 


7. In section 55 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2), for the words “document entered or 
memorandum filed”, the words “document of which a true copy or a 
memorandum, is filed’’ shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (4), for the words “authority entered”, the words 
“authority of which a true copy is filed” shall be substituted; 


Amendment of 
section 50. 


Amendment of 
section 5]. 


Amendment of 
section 52. 


Amendment of 
section 53. 


Amendment of 
section 54. 


Amendment of 
section 55. 


Amendment of 
section 58. 


Amendment of 
section 60. 


Amendment of 
section 62. 


Insertion of new 
sections 68A and 
68B. 


Prohibition of 
unlicensed 
person. 


Grant of licence 
to document- 
writers. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(c) in sub-section (5), for the words “document entered”, the words 
“document of which a true copy is filed” shall be substituted. 


8. In section 58 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), after clause (a), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


“(aa) in the case of a document for sale of property, the signature and 
addition of every person admitting the claim under such document, and, if 
such claim has been admitted by the representative, assign or agent of any 
person, the signature and addition of such representative, assign or agent;”; 


(0) in sub-section (2), after the words “execution of a document”, the 
words “and in the case a document for sale of property, any person admitting 
the execution of such document, or any person admitting the claim under that 
document” shall be inserted. 


9. In section 60 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words “the 
document has been copied”, the words “the true copy of the document has been 
filed” shall be substituted. 


20. In section 62 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(/) When a document is presented for registration under section 9, 
the translation together with the true copy of such document, shall be filed in 
the appropriate Book.”. 


2l. After section 68 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


‘68A. (४) No person, who is not licenced as provided under 
section 68B, shall engage in the profession of document-writer and any 
document drawn-up and signed by a person who does not hold a licence, 
shall not be accepted for registration by the registering officers: 


Provided that no advocate or pleader shall be required to have a licence 
under section 68B. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall prohibit an executant of a document 
from preparing a document to be presented for registration or from 
performing any other act on his own behalf for which a licensed 
document-writer could have been otherwise engaged. 


(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to a document executed outside 
India or outside the Union territory or a will or a document scribed by a 
licensed document-writer authorised for one sub-district or district, as the 
case may be, or a document executed by or on behalf of the Union territory 
or local authorities or other corporate bodies. 


688. (/) The Registrar of a district or any other officer authorised by 
him in this behalf may, grant a licence in such form, to a document-writer or 
his apprentice, subject to such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The licence referred to in sub-section (/) shall be— 


(i) granted after conducting a written test in such manner as may 
be determined by the Administrator; and 


(ii) valid for one sub-district or one district. 


Sec. |] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(3) A licence may be granted to any person who has been in the 
profession of the document-writer for at least ten years prior to date of 
commencement of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Registration 
(Amendment) Regulation, 2026, without requiring him to appear in the 
written test referred to in sub-section (2), if the Registrar of a district or any 
other officer authorised by him in this behalf is satisfied that he is otherwise 
fit to take the profession of a document-writer. 


(4) A licence granted under sub-section (/) shall remain valid for three 
years from the date of grant of the licence and shall be subject to renewal 
before the expiry of its period of validity, on such terms and conditions, as 
may be prescribed. 


(5) The licence granted under sub-section (/) may, at any time, be 
suspended or cancelled for breach of such conditions, as may be prescribed, 
or for any other reason to be recorded in writing by the Registrar of the 
district or an officer authorised by him, after giving the document-writer an 
opportunity to show cause against the proposed suspension or cancellation of 
the licence and after the same has been duly considered. 


(6) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Registrar of the district or 
an officer authorised by him, may prefer an appeal to the Inspector-General 
of Registration within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such 
order passed under this section: 


Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain such appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if he is satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented by a sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the given time. 


Explanation—For the purposes of section 68A and this section, the 
expressions,— 


(i) “apprentice” means a person who assists a document-writer in 
the preparation of document and transcribing them (including copies, if 
any) to be presented for registration; and 


(ii) “document-writer” means and includes a person engaged in the 
profession of preparing documents, namely, doing the work of 
conveyancing, investigation of titles, preparation of draft deeds and 
engrossing and transcribing the deed, including copies, if any, for 
registration, as well as conducting searches and inspection under this Act.’. 


22. In section 69 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after clause (8), the 


following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(bb) providing for the grant of licences to document-writers and 
apprentices to document-writers, the suspension and cancellation of such 
licences, the terms and conditions under which licences may be granted and 
generally for all other purposes connected with the writing of documents to 
be presented for registration;”. 


23. After section 70, the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
‘PART XIA 
REGISTRATION OF DOCUMENTS BY MEANS OF ELECTRONIC DEVICES 
70A. This Part shall apply to the areas only in respect of which a 
notification is issued by the Government under section 70B. 


708. (/) The Government may, by notification, direct that in any office 
as may be specified therein, the process of registration of any category or 
categories of documents may be completed and copying done with the help 
of the electronic devices like computers, scanners and the compact disks and 
copies preserved on such devices and retrieved when required. 


Amendment of 
section 69. 


Insertion of new 
sections 70A, 
70B and 70C. 


Application of 
this Part. 


Documents 
scanned by 
electronic 
devices in 
notified areas. 


Saving. 


Insertion of new 
section 80A. 


Recovery of fees 
and provision for 
refund. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for 
the time being in force in the Union territory, a copy of any document 
registered and scanned using electronic devices and certified or attested by 
the registering officer in-charge of the office, shall be admissible as evidence 
of any transaction as is described in the said document. 


(3) The registration and authentication of electronic records shall be 
carried out using secure authentication mechanisms, including, but not 
limited to— 


(a) “electronic signature” as defined in clause (ta) of 
sub-section (/) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000; 


(6) Aadhaar based e-authentication under the Aadhaar (Targeted 
Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) 
Act, 206; and 


(c) any other form of digital verification as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government. 


(4) All data storage, processing and retrieval under this section shall 
comply with the provisions of the Digital Personal Data Protection 
Act, 2023, including appropriate data protection, encryption, access 
control, audit trails and cyber security protocols to ensure confidentiality, 
integrity and availability of personal and sensitive data. 


(5) The Government shall ensure periodic review and updating of the 
technological infrastructure and protocols used for electronic registration 
and document management, in alignment with the prevailing national cyber 
security standards and data protection laws. 


70C. Nothing contained in this Part shall apply,— 


(i) to any document, which in the opinion of registering officer, 
is not in a fit condition to be processed by means of electronic 
devices; and 


(ii) in the case of unforeseen eventuality like breakdown of the 
computerised system of registration: 


Provided that the registering officer shall record the reasons 
therefor in writing: 


Provided further that the registering officer shall ensure that the 
data and images of the documents registered during the period of 
non-application of this Part, due to a breakdown of the computerised 
system, are duly incorporated into the computer system, after the 
same is restored, in such manner as may be prescribed.’. 


24. After section 80 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“80A. (J) If on inspection or otherwise, it is found that any fee 
payable under this Act has not been paid or has been paid insufficiently, 
such fee may (after failure to pay the same on demand within the period 
specified therein), on a certificate of the Inspector-General of Registration, 
be recovered as an arrear of land revenue from the person from whom such 
demand is made, and such certificate issued by the Inspector-General shall 
be binding on the parties: 


Provided that no such certificate shall be granted unless due inquiry 
is made and such person is given an opportunity of being heard. 


2 of 2000. 


8 of 206. 


22 of 2023. 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. |] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(2) Where the Inspector-General of Registration finds the amount of 
fee in excess of that which is legally chargeable has been charged and paid 
under the provisions of this Act, he may, upon an application in writing or 
otherwise, refund the excess fee so charged and paid.”. 


25. For section 8l of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“8I. Every registering officer appointed under this Act and every 
person employed in his office for the purposes of this Act, who, being 
charged with the endorsing, copying, translating, registering or filing a true 
copy of any document presented or deposited under its provisions, endorses, 
copies, translates, registers or files a true copy of such document in a manner 
which he knows or believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to cause or 
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause, injury, as defined in 
clause (/4) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, to any person, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven 
years, or with fine, or with both.”. 


26. In section 82 of the principal Act, in clause (5), for the words and figures 


“section 9 or section 2”, the words “this Act or the rules made thereunder” shall 
be substituted. 


27. After section 82 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“82A. (7) On and from such date as the Government may, by 
notification, appoint in this behalf, no person shall write a document for 
another person for presentation to a registering officer, except under a 
licence granted in accordance with the rules made under this Act: 


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply, where the writer 
of such document is an authorised agent of the executants, or a pleader 
engaged by the executants, for drawing up the document or the registered 
clerk of such pleader. 


(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (/) shall, for the 
first contravention, be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees and, for 
every subsequent contravention, be punishable with fine which may extend 
to ten thousand rupees. 


82B. Any notification of table of fees payable under this Act, made by 
the Administrator of the Union territory before the commencement of the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands Registration (Amendment) Regulation, 2026 
shall be and shall be deemed always to have been validly made in 
accordance with law, at all material times when such notification was made 
and any fees imposed, collected or recovered at any time before the 
commencement of the said Regulation under such rule shall be deemed to 
have been validly assessed, imposed, collected or recovered and shall not be 
called in question in any Court or tribunal or before any officer or authority 
whatsoever merely on the ground that such notification was made without 
power to do so or that such fees was invalidly imposed, collected or 
recovered under such notification.”. 


28. In section 83 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following 


sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(Z) No prosecution for any offence under this Act shall be commenced 
save by or with the permission of the Inspector-General or any officer 
empowered in this behalf by the Government.”. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 8]. 


Penalty for 
incorrectly 
endorsing, 
copying, 
translating, 
registering or 
filing documents 
with intent to 
injure. 


Amendment of 
section 82. 


Insertion of new 
sections 82A and 
82B. 


Penalty for 
writing 
documents 
without licence. 


Validation of 
notifications 
relating to table 
of fees. 


Amendment of 
section 83. 


Amendment of 
section 84. 


Insertion of new 
section 87A. 


Delegation of 
powers. 


Insertion of new 
sections 89A and 
89B. 


Power to make 
tules. 


Laying of rules. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


29. In section 84 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “Indian Penal Code”, the words 
and figures “Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023” shall be substituted; 


(5) in sub-section (3), for the words and figures “In section 228 of the 
Indian Penal Code”, the words and figures “In section 267 of the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023” shall be substituted. 


30. After section 87 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely: — 


“87A. The Government may, by order, published in the Official 
Gazette of the Union territory, delegate all or any of the powers conferred on 
them under this Act to the Inspector-General of Registration, who shall 
exercise the same subject to such restrictions and conditions as Government 
may impose.”. 


3l. After section 89 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“89A. (J) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 69, the 
Administrator may, by notification and subject to the condition of previous 
publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:— 


(a) the manner of preparation of true copies accompanied to 
documents for registration under sub-section (2) of section 9A; 


(8) the manner of reconstruction or recopying and authentication 
of Book or portion of such Book by the Registrar under sub-section (5) 
of section 5]; 


(c) the form, terms and conditions and the method of conducting 
written tests for granting of a licence by the Registrar under 
sub-section (/) of section 68B; 


(d) terms and conditions for renewal of licence by the Registrar 
under sub-section (4) of section 68B; 


(e) the conditions for suspension or cancellation of licence under 
sub-section (5) of section 68B; 


(f) any other form of digital verification under clause (c) of 
sub-section (3) of section 70B; 


(g) the manner of restoration of documents through electronic 
devices mentioned under the second proviso to section 70C; and 


(A) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in 
respect of which provision is to be made, by rules. 


(3) Every rule made under this section shall be notified in the Official 
Gazette of the Union territory and, unless they are expressed to come into 
force on a particular day, shall come into force on the day on which they are 
so notified. 


89B. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.”’. 


45 of 860. 
45 of 2023. 


45 of 860. 
45 of 2023. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l] 


32. In section 90 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in clause (d), for the Amendment of 
words “grants or assignments by Government of land or of any interest in land”, 207 
the words “grants, assignments or leases by Government of immovable property or 
of any interest in immovable property” shall be substituted. 


33. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Power to remove 
Regulation, the Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette of the eueticuldies: 
Union territory, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Regulation as may appear it to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of 
two years from the date of commencement of this Regulation. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054. 


GORAKHA Digitally signed 


by GORAKHA 
NATH NATH YADAVA 
Date: 2026.09.8 


YADAVA 20:07:00 +05'30° 
MGIPMRND—73 GI—]8.09.2026 


