रजिस्ट्री do डी" wer 


(एन) 04/0007/2003---24 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—24 


JIRNd a Isa 
The Gazette of Gudia 


Ooh. -ST. Wet.-37.-06022024-25828 
CG-DL-E-06022024-25828 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग I] — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 5] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार , फरवरी 5, 2024/ माघ 6, 945 (शक) 
No. 5] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 2024/MAGHA I6, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


RAJYA SABHA 


The following Bill has been introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 5th February, 
2024:— 


Birt No. XIX or 2024 
A Bit further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 950 


and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950 to modify the list of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in relation to the State of Odisha. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) 
Orders (Amendment) Act, 2024. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Scheduled Castes Order” means the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 
C.O. 9. 950; 


(b) “Scheduled Tribes Order” means the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 
C.O. 22. 950. 


3. The Scheduled Castes Order is hereby amended in the manner and to the extent 
specified in the First Schedule. 


4. The Scheduled Tribes Order is hereby amended in the manner and to the extent 
specified in the Second Schedule. 


Short title. 


Definitions. 


Amendment 
of Schedule 
Castes Order. 


Amendment 
of Scheduled 
Tribes Order. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 


In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 950, in the Schedule, in Parr XIII. C.O. 49. 
Odisha, entries 87 and 88 shall be omitted. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 4) 


C.O. 22. In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950, in the Schedule, in 
Part XII.—Orissa,— 


(a) for "Parr XII.—Orissa", the following shall be substituted, namely:— 
"Part XII.—Odisha"; 
(b) for entry 6, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— 
"6. Bhuiya, Bhuyan, Pauri Bhuyan, Paudi Bhuyan"; 
(c) in entry 8, after "Tamaria Bhumij", the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
", Tamodia Bhumij, Tamudia Bhumij, Tamundia Bhumij, Tamulia Bhumij, 
Tamadia Bhumij, Tamadia, Tamaria, Tamudia"; 
(d) for entry 9, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— 
"9. Bhunjia, Chuktia Bhunjia"; 
(e) inentry 3, after "Banda Paroja", the following shall be inserted, namely: — 
", Banda Paraja, Bonda Paraja, Bondo, Bonda, Banda"; 
(f) for entry 7, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— 
"7, Dharua, Dhuruba, Dhurva, Durua, Dhurua, Dhurava"; 
(g) in entry 28, after "Kanwar", the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
", Kaur, Kunwar, Kaonr, Kuanr, Konwar, Kuanar, Kaanr, Koanr, Kuanwar"; 
(h) for entry 3, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— 


"३] , Khond, Kond, Kandha, Kandha Kumbhar, Nanguli Kandha, Sitha 
Kandha, Kondh, Kui, Kui (Kandha), Buda Kondh, Bura Kandha, Desia Kandha, 
Dungaria Kondh, Kutia Kandha, Kandha Gauda, Muli Kondh, Malua Kondh, 
Pengo Kandha, Raja Kondh, Raj Khond"; 


(i) in entry 47, after "Mankidi", the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
", Mankidia"; 

(j) in entry 53, after "Uran", the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
",Uram, Oram, Uraon, Dhangara, Oraon Mudi"; 

(k) in entry 55, after "Solia Paroja", the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
", Bareng Jhodia Paroja, Penga Paroja, Pengu Paroja, Porja, Selia Paroja"; 

(I) in entry 57, after "Rajuar", the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
", Rajual, Rajuad"; 

(m) in entry 59, after "Vesu Saora", the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
", Saara"; 

(n) after entry 62, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:— 


"63. Muka Dora, Mooka Dora, Nuka Dora, Nooka Dora (in undivided Koraput 
district which includes Koraput, Nowrangapur, Rayagada and Malkangiri districts) 


64. Konda Reddy, Konda Reddi". 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr [I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Scheduled Castes have been defined in clause (24) of article 366 of the Constitution 
as "such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as 
are deemed under article 34 to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of this Constitution.". 


Scheduled Tribes have been defined in clause (25) of article 366 of the Constitution as 
"such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within such tribes or tribal 
communities as are deemed under article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of this 
Constitution.". 


2. Articles 34 and 342 of the Constitution provide as under:— 


"34. Scheduled Castes.-() The President may with respect to any State or 
Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, 
by public notification, specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within 
castes, races or tribes which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to 
be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be. 


(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes 
specified in a notification issued under clause () any caste, race or tribe or part of or 
group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under 
the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification. 


342. Scheduled Tribes.-(l) The President may with respect to any State or 
Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, 
by public notification, specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups 
within tribes or tribal communities which shall for the purposes of this Constitution 
be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the 
case may be. 


(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Tribes 
specified in a notification issued under clause () any tribe or tribal community or part 
of or group within any tribe or tribal community, but save as aforesaid a notification 
issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.". 


3. According to the provisions of articles 34 and 342 of the Constitution, the first list 
of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes were notified during the year 950 in 
respect of various States and Union territories, vide the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) 
Order, 950 and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950, respectively. These lists 
were modified from time to time. List of Scheduled Tribes of the State of Odisha has been 
modified, vide, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) Orders 
(Amendment) Act, 2002 (40 of 2003). 


4. The State Government of Odisha has recommended for inclusion of four Particularly 
Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) in their own names in the list of Scheduled Tribes in 
respect to the State of Odisha, as under:— 

(i) Pauri Bhuyan, Paudi Bhuyan as synonyms of Bhuiya, Bhuyan at SI. No. 6; 
(ii) Chuktia Bhunjia as synonym of Bhunjia at Sl. No. 9; 


(iii) Bondo as sub-entry under Scheduled Tribes "Bondo Poraja, 
Bonda Paroja, Banda Paroja" at Sl. No.3; and 


(iv) Mankidia as synonym of Scheduled Tribe "Mankirdia" at Sl. No. 47. 
5. The State Government of Odisha has also recommended to omit two community 
names listed as Scheduled Castes namely, (i) Tamadia at Sl. No. 87 and (ii) Tamudia at 


Sl. No. 88 from the list of Scheduled Castes and to include the said community names in the 
Scheduled Tribes list in respect of the State of Odisha, as under:-— 


"Tamadia, Tamaria, Tamudia, Tamodia Bhumij, Tamudia Bhumij, Tamundia 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


Bhumij, Tamulia Bhumij, Tamadia Bhumij", as a sub-entry under main entry "Bhumij" 
at Sl. No. 8. 


6. The State Government of Odisha has also recommended for inclusion of communities 
which have phonetic variations of the communities in the existing list of Scheduled Tribes, 
as under:— 


(i) Banda Paraja, Bonda Paraja, Bonda, Banda as sub-entry under Schedule 
Tribes "Bondo Poraja, Bonda Paroja, Banda Paroja" at Sl. No.3; 


(ii) Durua, Dhurua, Dhurava as subsect of Dharua, Dhuruba, Dhurva at 
SL. No. 7; 


(iii) Kaur, Kunwar, Kaonr, Kuanr, Konwar, Kuanar, Kaanr, Koanr, Kuanwar as 
synonym of Scheduled Tribes "Kawar, Kanwar" at Sl. No. 28; 


(iv) Inclusion of Kui (Kandha) as a new sub-entry under the Scheduled Tribe 
Khond and Kandha Kumbhar community as a subsect of Kandha Scheduled Tribe at 
SL. No. 3]; 


(v) Uram, Oram, Uraon, Dhangara and Oraon Mudi communities as synonyms 
of Oraon listed at Sl. No. 53; 


(vi) Bareng Jhodia Paroja, Penga Paroja, Pengu Paroja, Porja, Selia Paroja, as 
synonym of Scheduled Tribe Paroja at Sl. No. 55; 


(vii) Rajual, Rajuad as synonym of Scheduled Tribe Rajuar at Sl. No. 57; 
(viii) Saara as synonym under Saora, Savar, Saura, Sahara, etc. at Sl. No. 59. 


7. The State Government of Odisha has also recommended for inclusion of communities 
as new entry, as under:— 


(i) Muka Dora, Mooka Dora, Nuka Dora, Nooka Dora with area restriction (in 
undivided Koraput District which includes Koraput, Nowrangapur, Rayagada and 
Malkangiri districts) at Sl. No. 63; 


(ii) Konda Reddy, Konda Reddi at SI. No. 64. 


8. On the basis of recommendation of the State Government of Odisha and after 
consultation with the Registrar General of India and the National Commission for Scheduled 
Tribes and National Commission for Scheduled Castes, it is proposed to modify the lists of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in respect of the State of Odisha by amending 
the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 950 and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) 
Order, 950. 


9. The Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) Orders (Amendment) 
Bill, 2024 proposes to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 950, in the Schedule 
in Part XIII.-Odisha and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950, in the Schedule, 
in Part XII.—Orissa,— 


(A) In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 950, in the Schedule, in 
Part XIII.—Odisha, entries 87 and 88 shall be omitted; 


(B) (a) for PART XII.—Orissa, the following shall be substituted, namely:— 
"Part XII.—Odisha"; 


(b) for entry 6, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— 
"6. Bhuiya, Bhuyan, Pauri Bhuyan, Paudi Bhuyan"; 


(c) in entry 8, after "Tamaria Bhumij", the following entry shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
"Tamodia Bhumij, Tamudia Bhumij, Tamundia Bhumij, Tamulia Bhumij, 
Tamadia Bhumij, Tamadia, Tamaria, Tamudia"; 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr [I— 


(d) for entry 9, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— 
"9. Bhunjia, Chuktia Bhunjia"; 


(e) in entry 3, after "Banda Paroja", the following entry shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"Banda Paraja, Bonda Paraja, Bondo, Bonda, Banda"; 
(f) for entry 7, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— 
"7, Dharua, Dhuruba, Dhurva, Durua, Dhurua, Dhurava"; 
(g) in entry 28, after "Kanwar", the following entry shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Kaur, Kunwar, Kaonr, Kuanr, Konwar, Kuanar, Kaanr, Koanr, Kuanwar"; 
(h) in entry 3, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— 


"3l. Khond, Kond, Kandha, Kandha Kumbhar, Nanguli Kandha, 
Sitha Kandha, Kondh, Kui, Kui (Kandha), Buda Kondh, Bura Kandha, Desia 
Kandha, Dungaria Kondh, Kutia Kandha, Kandha Gauda, Muli Kondh, Malua 
Kondh, Pengo Kandha, Raja Kondh, Raj Khond"; 


(i) in entry 47, after "Mankidi", the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Mankidia"; 

(j) in entry 53, after "Uran", the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Uram, Oram, Uraon, Dhangara, Oraon Mudi"; 

(k) in entry 55, after "Solia Paroja", the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Bareng Jhodia Paroja, Penga Paroja, Pengu Paroja, Porja, Selia Paroja"; 

(I) in entry 57, after "Rajuar", the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Rajual, Rajuad"; 

(m) in entry 59, after "Vesu Saora", the following shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Saara"; 

(n) after entry 62, the following shall be inserted, namely:— 


"63. Muka Dora, Mooka Dora, Nuka Dora, Nooka Dora (in undivided 
Koraput District which includes, Koraput, Nowrangapur, Rayagada and 
Malkangiri districts) 


64. Konda Reddy, Konda Reddi". 


0. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects. 


New DELHI; ARJUN MUNDA. 
The 2nd February, 2024. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill seeks to amend the lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the 
State of Odisha by amending the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 950 and the 
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950. The amendment in the lists of Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes relating to the State of Odisha may entail some additional 
recurring and non-recurring expenditure on account of benefits to be provided to the persons 
belonging to the communities proposed in the Bill under the continuing schemes meant for 
the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes. 


2. Itis not possible to estimate the likely additional expenditure to be incurred on this 
account at this stage. However, the expenditure, if any, shall be accommodated within the 
approved budgetary outlay of the Government. 


P.C. Mody, 
Secretary-General. 


PUBLISHED BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, RAJYA SABHA, UNDER RULE 68 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE AND 
CONDUCT OF BUSINESS IN THE RAJYA SABHA AND UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, 
MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-0002 


MGIPMRND—645GI—05.02.2024 


