रजिस्ट्री te डी० Uer—( TH) 04/0007/2003—26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


प्यारत का Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-27082026-275844 
CG-DL-E-27082026-275844 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — asl 
PART II — Section | 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


Ae 39] नई दिल्‍ली, बृहस्पतिवार, अगस्त 27, 2026/भाद्र 5, 948 (शक) 
No. 39] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, AUGUST 27, 2026/BHADRA 5, 948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 27th August, 2026/Bhadra 5, 948 (Saka) 
THE ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS REGISTRATION OF 
SOCIETIES REGULATION, 2026 
No. |] oF 2026 


Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic 

of India. 

A Regulation to consolidate the law relating to the registration and regulation of 
societies in the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands for 
promotion of art, fine arts, charity, craft, culture, education, literature, 
philosophy, political education, religion, sports, science, any public or 
charitable purpose and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


In exercise of the powers conferred by article 240 of the Constitution, the 
President is pleased to promulgate the following Regulation made by her:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


l. (J) This Regulation may be called the Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
Registration of Societies Regulation, 2026. 


(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Administrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


2. In this Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Administrator” means the Administrator of the Union territory of 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands appointed by the President under article 239 of 
the Constitution; 


(b) “bye-laws” means the bye-laws of a society; 


(c) “document” includes register of members, books of account, returns, 
annual returns, other statutory registers, summons, notice, requisition, order, 
other legal processes, whether issued or kept in pursuance of this Regulation 
or any other law for the time being in force in the Union territory of Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands; 


(d) “financial year” means the period commencing from the Ist day of 
April of a year and ending with the 3lst day of March of the following year; 


(e) “General Body” means the body of all members of a society; 


(f) “Governing Body” means the Executive Committee or the Managing 
Committee constituted or elected by the members of the General Body and 
responsible for the management of day-to-day affairs of the society; 


(g) “Government” means the Administration of the Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands headed by the Administrator; 


(h) “major” means a person who has completed the age of eighteen 
years; 


(i) “member” means a person who fulfils the eligibility criteria for 
becoming a member of a society, as specified in this Regulation and has been 
admitted as a member of the society in accordance with its bye-laws; 


(7) “Memorandum” means the memorandum of association of a society 
in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation; 


(k) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
and the expression “notified” shall be construed accordingly; 


(2) “office bearer” means and includes the President, Vice-President, 
Secretary, Joint Secretary, Manager, Treasurer or any other member of the 
Governing Body empowered under the bye-laws to give directions in regard 
to the conduct of the business of the society; 


(m) “Official Gazette” means the Official Gazette of the Union territory 
of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; 


(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made by the 
Administrator under this Regulation; 


(०) “public notice” means a notice published in at least one or two 
newspapers having wide circulation in the area, of which one shall be in 
vernacular language and the other shall be duly displayed on the notice board 
of the office of the Registrar; 


(p) “Registrar” means the Registrar of societies appointed under 
sub-section (2) of section 4; 


(4) “Registrar General” means the Registrar General appointed by the 
Government under sub-section (/) of section 4; 


(r) “rules” means the rules made under this Regulation; 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(s) “society” means a society duly registered under the provisions of this 
Regulation; 


(t) “special resolution” means a resolution passed in a meeting of the 
General Body, in which at least forty per cent. of the members entitled to vote 
are present and the resolution is approved by three-fifths of the members so 
present and voting; 


(u) “Union territory” means the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands. 


CHAPTER II 
AIMS AND OBJECTS OF SOCIETY 
3. Any seven or more persons associated for— 


(a) any literary, scientific or charitable purpose, including charitable 
societies, military orphan funds or societies established at several presidencies 
of India; 


(b) societies established for the promotion of science, literature or fine arts; 
(c) instruction; 
(d) the diffusion of useful knowledge or political education; 


(e) the foundation or maintenance of libraries or reading rooms for 
general use among members or open to the public; 


(f) public museums and galleries of paintings and other works of art; 


(g) collections of natural history, mechanical and_ philosophical 
inventions; 


(A) instruments or designs; 


(i) the promotion of conservation and sustainable use of natural 
resources such as land, water, forests and wildlife; and 


(j) the formation of welfare of associations of flats, tenements, 
condominiums or floor space owners, 


may, by subscribing their names to a Memorandum and filing the same with the 
Registrar, form themselves into a society under this Regulation. 


CHAPTER III 
AUTHORITIES OF SOCIETY 


4. (/) The Administrator may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, 
appoint an officer, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
as the Registrar General, who shall exercise such powers and perform such duties 
and functions, as are conferred upon him by or under this Regulation. 


(2) The Registrar General may, by an order, appoint an officer of the 
Government at such level or cadre, as may be prescribed, as Registrar and other 
officers as Additional Registrar or Joint Registrar or Deputy Registrar or Assistant 
Registrar to assist the Registrar in the discharge of his functions and empower them 
to exercise such powers and perform such duties and functions, as may be assigned 
to them, from time to time. 


(3) The officers appointed under this section shall exercise powers, discharge 
duties and perform functions under the overall administrative control and 
superintendence of the Government. 


Aims and 
objects of 
society. 


Registrar 
General, other 
officers and their 
powers. 


Application for 
registration of 
society and 
society not to be 
registered with 
identical names. 


Certificate of 
registration. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


CHAPTER IV 
REGISTRATION OF SOCIETY 


5. (J) An application for approval of the name as well as registration of a 
society shall be filed with Registrar, in whose jurisdiction the registered office of 
the society is situate, in such form, including particulars, accompanied by fee and in 
such manner, as may be prescribed: 


Provided that if the proposed name is identical with that by which any other 
existing society has been registered or, in the opinion of the Registrar, so nearly 
resembles such name as to be likely to deceive the public, the Registrar shall refuse 
to register the name. 


(2) No society shall be registered with a name which contravenes the 
provisions of the Emblems and Names (Prevention of the Improper Use) Act, 950. 


(3) No society shall be registered with the previous approval of the 
Government in writing, with a name which contains any of the following expression, 
namely:— 


(a) Co-operative or Land Development; 
(b) Reserve Bank; 


(c) Union or State or National or International or Universal or any word 
expressing or implying the sanction, approval or patronage of the Central 
Government or any State Government or the Union territory Administration; 


(व) Municipal or Panchayat or Chartered; and 


(e) Investigation Bureau or any word which suggests or is calculated to 
suggest connection with any municipality, statutory, investigating or 
intelligence agency or other local authority. 


6. (/) If the Registrar after scrutiny of the documents presented along with the 
application is satisfied that the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this 
Regulation and the rules made thereunder, he shall, enter the particulars of the 
society registered, in a register maintained by him in physical or electronic form and 
issue a certificate of registration in such form and manner, as may be prescribed. 


Explanation —F or the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “electronic 
form” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (7) of sub-section (/) 
of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000. 


(2) If the Registrar refuses to register a society, he shall state the reasons 
therefor and communicate the same to the applicant, within such period as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) Every society registered shall be assigned a distinct registration number. 


(4) Every existing society shall apply to the Registrar for obtaining a new 
registration number within a period of one year from the date of commencement of 
this Regulation or such further period, as the Government may, by notification, 
specify in such form and manner, as may be prescribed. 


(5) Where an existing society has not applied for obtaining a new registration 
number under sub-section (4) within the period specified therein, then it shall apply 
for obtaining new registration on payment of such fee, as may be prescribed, within 
a period of six months from the date of expiry of the period specified therein and if 
the society fails to apply for new registration number within the extended period, 
the registration of that existing society shall be treated as cancelled. 


(6) The certificate of registration shall be the conclusive proof that a society is 
duly registered unless proved otherwise. 


2 of 950. 


2 of 2000. 


9 of 932. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(7) Every society registered under this Regulation shall prominently display 
its name along with registration number outside its registered office or any other 
place where it is carrying on its business or operations, and shall have a seal with its 
name engraved thereon and the name of society, registration number and its 
registered office shall be mentioned in all documents executed in its favour or on its 
behalf. 


(8) Every society registered under this Regulation shall be a legal entity, by 
the name in which it has been registered, having perpetual succession and a common 
seal, with the power, subject to the provisions of this Regulation, to acquire, hold 
and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and to 
institute and defend suits and other legal proceedings and to do all other things 
necessary for the furtherance of the aims of the society for which it has been 
registered. 


7. (॥) Every society shall have a registered office, to which all communications 
and notices shall be addressed. 


(2) The information about every change in the name and address of the society 
shall be communicated to the Registrar within a period of thirty days from the date 
of change, who shall record the same in the certificate of registration and the register 
of societies. 


(3) The change of name shall not affect the rights and liabilities of the society 
or any legal proceedings by or against it. 


CHAPTER V 
MEMBERSHIP 
8. (/) A person shall be eligible to become a member of society, if he— 
(a) is a major on the date of admission; 
(6) subscribes to the aims and objects of the society; 
(c) has deposited the membership fee as provided in the bye-laws; and 


(d) is not an insolvent or of unsound mind or have not been convicted of 
an offence involving moral turpitude, punishable with imprisonment of one 
year or more. 


(2) A partnership firm, whether registered or not, or a body corporate of 
whatever description, shall not be eligible to be a member of a society. 


(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) shall prevent a partner as defined in 
section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act, 932 or a member or shareholder of a body 
corporate to become a member in his individual capacity. 


9. () Every society shall maintain a register of its members at its registered 
office and shall enter therein the particulars of admission or removal of any member 
or the cessation of any membership, within fifteen days of such admission or 
removal or the cessation of membership, as the case may be, in such form and 
manner, as may be prescribed. 


(2) Every society shall file a copy of the register of members maintained by it 
with the Registrar, if not filed at the time of registration, shall be filed with the 
Registrar within a period of sixty days from the date of registration. 


(3) The society shall file an updated list of members, duly certified by the 
authorised officer of the society, separately showing the inclusions and deletions, if 
any, every year within a period of sixty days of the close of the financial year in the 
office of the Registrar, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Change of name 
and address. 


Eligibility 
conditions for 
becoming a 
member. 


Register of 
Members. 


Cessation of 
membership. 


Memorandum. 


Amendment in 
Memorandum 
and bye-laws. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(4) The register of members shall be kept open at the registered office of the 
society and remain accessible to any officer of the office of Registrar, Registrar 
General or any member of the society during its business hours. 


(5) Every person admitted as a member on the date of declaration of elections, 
shall have the right to exercise his vote in person subject to his not being in arrears 
of membership fees or annual subscription, for a period as may be prescribed. 


(6) Every member shall have the right to inspect the books of account, books 
containing the minutes of proceedings of meetings on any working day during 
business hours after giving reasonable notice. 


0. A member admitted to a society shall cease to be so in the following 
circumstances, namely:— 


(a) upon submission and acceptance of his resignation; or 
(bd) if he fails to fulfil the eligibility condition provided under section 8; or 


(c) upon his failure to pay membership fee or annual subscription fee 
continuously for such period, as may be determined by the Registrar General; or 


(d) upon the death of a member: 


Provided that in case of a housing society or a resident welfare association 
registered as a society for the operation, management and maintenance of facilities 
for the residents or civic amenities of any defined area, the nominee or the legal heir 
shall be enrolled as a member subject to fulfilment of qualifications as laid down in 
the bye-laws and the provisions of this Regulation. 


CHAPTER VI 
MEMORANDUM AND BYE-LAWS OF SOCIETY 
. (/) The Memorandum shall state— 
(a) the name of the society; 
(5) the aims and objects of the society; 


(c) the names, addresses and occupations of the members of the first 
Governing Body to whom the management of its affairs is entrusted under the 
bye-laws; and 


(d) the place and the island in which the registered office of the society 
is situated. 


(2) The Memorandum and bye-laws, certified to be a true copy by not less 
than three members shall be filed with the Registrar at the time of registration of 
society. 


2. (J) A society may, by a special resolution, amend the provisions of its 
Memorandum with respect to— 


(a) change in the name of society; or 


(6) change in the aims and objects of the society, as permissible under 
this Regulation. 


(2) A society may amend its bye-laws by a special resolution. 


(3) Any special resolution passed under sub-section (/) or (2) shall be filed 
with the Registrar within thirty days from the date of approval thereof and if he is 
satisfied that it is in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation and the rules 
made thereunder, he may register such change, which shall have no effect until it 
has been so registered. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(4) If the Registrar refuses to register a change in the Memorandum or the 
bye-laws under sub-section (3), he shall communicate the reasons therefor in writing 
within a period of sixty days of filing of the special resolution by the society, and 
the special resolution passed by the society in that case shall have no effect. 


(5) If the Registrar fails to communicate the reasons for refusal within sixty 
days, the special resolution shall be deemed to have been registered by him. 


(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation or the rules made 
thereunder, if the Registrar considers that an amendment of the Memorandum or 
bye-laws is necessary or desirable to bring the same in conformity with the provisions 
of this Regulation or rules made thereunder, he may, by an order in writing, direct the 
society to make such amendment within such time, as may be specified, in such order 
and the same shall be final and binding on the society and its members. 


CHAPTER VII 
GENERAL BODY AND GOVERNING BODY 


3. (/) The total number of persons admitted as members of a society in 
accordance with the provisions of this Regulation shall constitute its General Body. 


(2) Every society shall provide in its bye-laws the composition of its General 
Body, its powers, functions and duties, the periodicity of and the quorum for the 
meetings, the manner of recording of its proceedings and all other matters relating 
to the affairs of such General Body. 


(3) The quorum for the meeting of the General Body shall not be less than 
forty per cent. of the total members entitled to vote and present in person, subject to 
a minimum of four members. 


(4) Every member shall have one vote and shall cast his vote in person or 
digitally. 


4. (/) An annual general meeting of the General Body, may be held as and 
when required: 


Provided that at least one meeting of the General Body shall be held in every 
financial year in which the annual accounts of the society, duly audited, shall be 
placed before the members for approval. 


(2) A clear notice of fourteen days of every meeting shall be given to the 
members of the General Body, before the date appointed for the meeting and a copy 
of such notice along with the business to be transacted during the annual general 
meeting shall also be endorsed to the Registrar. 


5. (/) The members of the General Body shall elect the Governing Body (by 
whatever name called), consisting of not less than three and not exceeding 
twenty-one members. 


(2) The office-bearers shall comprise of the President, Secretary and Treasurer 
as a minimum, and other office bearers, as provided under the bye-laws. 


(3) The society shall file the list of the elected office bearers with the Registrar 
within a period of thirty days of holding of the elections for the Governing Body, in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The tenure of the Governing Body shall not exceed three years and the 
matters pertaining to re-election of any office bearer shall be regulated in accordance 
with the bye-laws. 


(5) Every society shall maintain a register showing the names, addresses and 
occupation of the persons elected as office bearers and shall file the same with the 
Registrar,— 


(a) a copy of the register within a period of thirty days from the date of 
election of the office bearers; 


General Body. 


Meetings of 
General Body. 


Governing 
Body, office 
bearers and their 
powers, 
functions and 
duties. 


Meeting of 
Governing 
Body. 


Record of 
proceedings. 


Supply of 
balance-sheet or 
statement of 
accounts. 


Acquisition of 
movable and 
immovable 


property. 


Property how 
vested. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(6) a notice of every change in the office bearer within a period of thirty 
days, from the date of such change; and 


(c) the details of the office bearers along with the annual return. 


(6) The constitution of the Governing Body, elected for the first time or 
thereafter, shall be valid upon approval thereof by the Registrar and its tenure shall 
commence from the date of such approval. 


(7) The Registrar shall communicate its approval of constitution of the 
Governing Body and other matters within a period of thirty days from the date of 
receipt of application for approval, failing which, it shall be deemed to be approved. 


6. (/) The meetings of the Governing Body may be held as and when 
required: 


Provided that the Governing Body shall meet once every quarter and hold at 
least four meetings in a financial year. 


(2) A clear notice of three days of every such meeting shall be given by the 
Secretary of the Governing Body to the office bearers before the date appointed for 
the meeting: 


Provided that the Governing Body may meet at shorter notice, wherever so 
required, with the consent of at least fifty per cent. of its members. 


7. (/) The society shall maintain record of the minutes of proceedings of 
every meeting of the General Body and Governing Body in the proceedings book 
separately maintained for this purpose and such minutes shall be signed by the 
President and Secretary of the society. 


(2) In case the minutes of the meeting are not signed by the President for any 
reasons, whatsoever, the Governing Body may authorise any of the office bearer to 
sign such minutes. 


(3) The minutes of every meeting of the Governing Body or the General Body, 
as the case may be, shall be placed for its confirmation in the succeeding meeting 
of such body. 


(4) Any resolution passed by the Governing Body or the General Body, during 
any of its meetings, which is not consistent with the provisions of this Regulation or 
the rules made thereunder or the bye-laws, shall be invalid. 


(5) No act or proceedings of a society or any of its office bearer shall be 
deemed to be invalid merely on the ground of any vacancy or defect in the 
constitution of the society. 


8. Every society shall supply a copy of the balance-sheet or a statement of 
account together with the report of the auditor to every member of the General Body 
along with the notice of the annual general meeting and it shall also be placed on 
the website of the society. 


CHAPTER VIII 
PROPERTY AND FUNDS OF THE SOCIETIES 


9. A society registered under this Regulation may acquire movable or 
immovable property, on free-hold or lease basis, out of its funds or donations or 
grants or loans obtained, in accordance with its bye- laws. 


20. (/) All property, movable and immovable, belonging to a society, whether 
acquired before or after its registration, if not vested in the trustees, shall vest in the 
society, and any such property may be referred to as the property of such society in 
any legal proceedings: 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


Provided that in case a housing society or a resident welfare association 
registered as a society for the operation, management and maintenance of facilities 
for the residents or civic amenities of any defined area, the property may vest in the 
members or their successor-in-interest who have contributed for acquisition of such 


property. 


(2) Where a society accepts a gift or donation of money or property of any 
other kind from any person or institution for a specific purpose, it shall use the 
money or such property gifted or donated or any part thereof only for the purpose 
for which it has been so gifted or donated and for no other purpose. 


2. (J) A society registered under this Regulation shall be competent to sell, 
transfer or alienate any of its immovable properties, if— 


(a) the immovable property is acquired from the Government or any of 
its instrumentalities or a municipal body or gram panchayat or any other 
authority, with the prior permission of the Government in writing; 


(6) the immovable property is acquired by means of a conditional gift or 
conditional donation from any source, in accordance with such conditions, 
subject to the prior permission of donor or his authorised representative, and 
in case the donor is not alive and has left no such authorised representative, 
with the prior permission of the Registrar in writing; 


(c) any other immovable property acquired by the society out of its own 
resources or funds or borrowings, with the prior permission of the General 
Body, by a special resolution. 


(2) The Governing Body shall determine the reserve price of any immovable 
asset, which shall not be less than the applicable circle rates, before its disposal, so 
as to ensure that it is not sold or transferred at an undervalued consideration. 


(3) The proceeds from the transfer or sale of any immovable property of the 
society, wherever conducted in accordance with the provisions contained in this 
section, shall be immediately deposited in the account of the society. 


(4) Where any office bearer of the Governing Body contravenes the provisions 
contained in sub-sections (/), (2) and (3), the Registrar shall be competent to take 
any or all of the following actions, namely:— 


(a) where the amount of consideration is not deposited in the account of 
the society within three working days, direct such office bearer to pay interest 
out of his own pocket at the rate of twenty-four per cent. per annum for the 
period it remained in his possession but such period shall in no case be more 
than thirty days; 


(b) where the immovable asset has been sold or transferred at an 
undervalued price, recover the difference assessed on the basis of circle rates 
from the erring office bearer and deposit the same in the society’s account; and 


(c) where the immovable asset has been disposed of without the 
permission as required under sub-section (/) or without complying with the 
conditions applicable, recover the amount, along with any additional amount 
as assessed on the basis of circle rates, from the concerned office bearer and 
deposit the same with the allotting authority. 


(5) Where the recovery of any amount is involved from any person in the 
course of enforcement of sub-section (4), and the person concerned do not deposit 
the amount within the period allowed, the Registrar shall be competent to recover 
the amount as arrears of land revenue. 


(6) Nothing under this section shall absolve the office bearer from criminal 
action. 


Restrictions on 
sale or transfer 
of immovable 
property. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


a of 22. Every society, to such extent, and under such conditions, as may be 
os permitted under its bye-laws, from time to time, invest or deposit any portion of its 
funds not immediately required,— 


(a) in immovable properties; 

(5) in securities of the Government or in National Savings Certificates 
or other securities of the Government of India; 

(c) in the Post Office Savings Banks Account; or 

(d) in a special account opened by the society for the purpose in— 


(i) a Scheduled Bank as authorised or notified by the Reserve Bank 
of India; 


(ii) a Co-operative Bank situated in the Union territory; or 
(iii) such other mode of investment, as may be notified. 
CHAPTER IX 
ACCOUNTS, AUDIT, FILING OF DOCUMENTS 
Books of 23. (/) Every society shall keep proper books of account such as cash book, 
ete ledger, and the like as required by Income-tax laws or the books as per standards 


laid down by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, at its head office or 
such other places as may be determined by the Registrar General with respect to,— 


(a) all sums of money received and expended by the society; and 
(5) the assets and liabilities of the society. 


(2) The books of account, returns and registers shall be verified and signed by 
at least two office bearers, authorised by the Governing Body. 


(3) The books of account shall be open to inspection during the business hours 
by the Registrar General, Registrar or any officer authorised by them. 


Audit. 24. (/) Every society shall get its annual accounts audited from an auditor who 
is amember of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, constituted under the 
Chartered Accountants Act, 949 or the auditor of the Union territory, Co-operative 
Department. 


(2) The auditor shall not be a member of the Governing Body or family 
member of any of the office bearer. 


Annual and 25. (/) Every society shall file the following returns, in the prescribed form, 
other returns. with the Registrar within thirty days of holding the annual general meeting,— 


(a) a list of the members duly certified by the President and the 
Secretary, as on the 3lst March of the year, separately showing the deletions 
and additions during the previous year, if any; 


(6) a list of the office bearers along with their names, addresses and 
occupations separately showing the deletions and additions during the 
previous year, if any; 


(c) an annual report on the working of the society by the Governing Body 
duly certified by the President and Secretary; 


(d) a copy of each of the balance-sheet, receipt expenditure statement 
and the auditor’s report duly certified by the auditor; and 


(e) a copy of the special resolution, if any passed. 


(2) Any society which is required to submit any statement or returns under 
sub-section (/) fails to do so, the Registrar may depute an officer to prepare the 
necessary statement or return: 


38 of 949. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l] 


Provided that in such cases, it shall be competent for the Registrar to 
determine, with reference to the time involved in the work and the emoluments of 
the officer deputed to do it, the charges which the society concerned shall pay to the 
Registrar General or Registrar and to direct its recovery from the society. 


CHAPTER X 
AMALGAMATION AND DIVISION 


26. (/) Any two or more societies, after passing special resolutions for 
amalgamating with each other, shall move an application along with copy of 
resolutions, in such form as may be prescribed for obtaining approval of the 
Registrar and after getting the approval, shall amalgamate together as one society. 


(2) Any society, after passing special resolution for division of a society, shall 
move an application in such form as may be prescribed along with the copy of 
resolution, for obtaining approval of the Registrar and after getting the approval, 
shall stand divided. 


(3) The special resolution shall contain proposals for the division of the assets 
and liabilities of the society among the new societies, relationship of the parent 
society with the divided societies, if any, and may specify the areas of operation of 
and the members who may constitute each of the new societies: 


Provided that before division, the society shall settle all the claims and 
liabilities or divide the assets and liabilities amongst the societies on pro-rata basis. 


(4) No amalgamation or division of a society under sub-section (/) or 
sub-section (2), as the case may be, shall have any effect until and unless the new 
society or societies is duly registered. 


(5) Upon the registration of the new amalgamated society or the divided 
societies, as the case may be, the assets and liabilities of the original registered 
society or societies shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be transferred to 
and become the assets and liabilities of the new society or societies in the manner 
specified in the special resolution. 


CHAPTER XI 
INQUIRY AND SUPERSESSION OF THE GOVERNING BoDy 


27. (/) The Registrar General or the Registrar may, by written order, require 
any society to furnish in writing such information or document or explanation as 
provided in the order within such time, not being less than two weeks from the date 
of receipt of such order. 


(2) On receipt of the order under sub-section (/), it shall be the duty of the 
society to furnish such information or documents or explanation as specified in the 
order. 


28. (/) Where the Registrar General or the Registrar is satisfied that,— 


(a) the records, registers or the books of account are likely to be 
tampered with or destroyed and the funds and the property are likely to be 
misappropriated or misapplied; or 


(6) the Governing Body is reconstituted at a general meeting and the 
outgoing members of the Governing Body refused to hand over charge of the 
records and property of the society to those entitled to receive such charge; or 


(c) the office bearers, where the elections of the Governing Body have 
not been held by the due date, are likely to misuse such documents, funds, 
records or are reluctant to hand over the records to the officer appointed for 
managing the affairs of the society, as an interim measure under section 3, 


Amalgamation 
or division of 
societies. 


Power to call for 
information or 
explanation. 


Power to seize 
records, etc. 


Power to 
inquire. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


he may issue an order directing a person duly authorised by him in writing to seize 
and take possession of such documents, funds, records and property whereupon the 
office bearers responsible for custody of such documents, record, funds and property 
shall give delivery thereof to the person so authorised. 


Explanation——For the purposes of this clause, the expression “due date” 
means the date on which the term of a Governing Body of a society expires and by 
which the elections of the successor body should be completed. 


(2) In order to secure compliance of the order under sub-section (/), the 
Registrar may take or cause to be taken such steps and use or cause to be used such 
minimum force, including recourse to police force, as may deem appropriate. 


29. (/) Where on the information received or gathered under section 27 or on 
the application of a majority of the office bearers or on the application of not less 
than one-third of the members of the General Body, as the case may be, or, if so 
moved by the Government or Deputy Commissioner or the Registrar General or 
Registrar is of the opinion that the affairs of a society are being so conducted as to 
defeat the aims and objects of the society or its Governing Body is guilty of 
mismanaging its affairs or of any breach of fiduciary or other like obligations or to 
defraud its creditors, he may, either himself or by any person authorised by him in 
that behalf, hold an inquiry into the affairs of the society. 


(2) An application to the Registrar General or Registrar under sub-section (/) 
shall be supported by such evidence, as he may require for the purpose of showing 
that the applicant has good reason for making an application for an inquiry. 


(3) The Registrar General or the Registrar may require the applicants to furnish 
such security as he thinks fit as the cost of the proposed inquiry, before the inquiry 
is ordered. 


(4) All expenses incidental or preliminary to the inquiry shall, where such 
inquiry is held,— 


(a) on application, be defrayed by the applicants thereof or out of the 
assets of the society or by the members of the society, in such proportion as 
the Registrar may, by an order in writing direct; and 


(6) on a reference from the Deputy Commissioner of the Union territory 
or the Registrar be defrayed out of the assets of the society and shall be 
recoverable as arrears of land revenue. 


(5) A person holding an inquiry shall have, at all reasonable times, free access 
to all the documents and shall have power to call upon any office bearer to produce 
any of the document, as he may direct. 


(6) It shall be the duty of all office bearers, who were or are holding office, to 
furnish to the person holding inquiry with all the information or documents in their 
possession. 


(7) A person holding an inquiry may summon and examine any person on oath 
who, he has reason to believe, has knowledge of any affairs of the society and may 
summon any person to produce any books of account or documents belonging to him 
or in his custody, if the person holding inquiry has reason to believe that such books 
of account or documents contain any entries relating to transactions of the society. 


(8) A person holding an inquiry may, if in his opinion it is necessary for the 
purpose of inquiry, seize any or all the documents: 


Provided that any person from whose custody such documents are seized shall 
be entitled to a receipt thereof and make copies thereof. 


(9) If the inquiry is held by a person, other than the Registrar then he shall 
send the report to the Registrar along with his recommendations: 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


Provided that if such inquiry is held by the Registrar himself, he shall forward 
the report to the Registrar General along with his recommendations. 


(J0) The inquiry report shall be communicated to the society and the 
applicants, if any. 


30. The Registrar shall consider the inquiry report along with the 
recommendations of the person holding inquiry, if any, and take any of the 
following steps, namely:— 


(a) where no irregularities, whatsoever, of procedural or material nature, 
are found to have been committed by the Governing Body, he shall order 
closure of the inquiry along with information thereof to the society and 
complainants, if any; 


(6) where the irregularities or violations committed by the society are 
found to be of procedural nature, which are rectifiable, he shall direct the 
society to take recourse to such corrective measures within such time, as he 
may deem appropriate; or 


(c) where the irregularities or violations committed by the society are 
found to be of a serious or material nature, he shall pass any other appropriate 
order to meet the ends of justice. 


3. (/) Where, based on inspection, inquiry or audit under this Regulation, the 
Registrar submits a report or recommendation indicating that the Governing Body 
or a society is not functioning in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation 
or is acting against the interest of its members, the Registrar shall forward such 
report or recommendation to the Registrar General. 


(2) Upon receipt of the report, if the Registrar General is of the opinion that a 
prima facie case is made out for supersession of the Governing Body, he shall issue 
a show cause notice indicating the proposed action, consider the response of the 
society, and if so requested, provide an opportunity of hearing, before passing 
appropriate order. 


(3) The Registrar General, after considering the reply, shall pass an order and 
may appoint an Officer to manage the affairs of the society with such directions as 
deemed appropriate and the orders passed by the Registrar General in this behalf 
shall be final. 


(4) The Officer appointed under sub-section (3), shall be a Group “B” 
Officer or of equivalent rank in the service of the Government or any statutory 
authority or such person who may have retired from a Group “B” or 
equivalent position from the Government or the Central Government or a statutory 
authority. 


(5) Where a retired person is appointed as the Officer, the Registrar General 
may fix the honorarium or remuneration to be paid to the Officer during the course 
of his appointment at such rates as may be prescribed and direct such expenditure 
to be defrayed out of the funds of the society. 


(6) The Officer appointed under sub-section (3) may hold office for a period 
which shall not exceed one year in the first instance, but whose term may be 
extended for such further period, as considered necessary, subject to the same not 
exceeding three years in total. 


(7) On the appointment of the Officer under sub-section (3), the Governing 
Body shall cease to exercise any powers and discharge and perform any functions 
or duties conferred or imposed on it under this Regulation or the bye-laws. 


(8) The Officer shall exercise all the powers of the Governing Body and 
perform all such functions or duties during the course of his appointment as 
provided in the bye-laws, subject to any directions from the Registrar General. 


Action on 
inquiry report. 


Supersession of 
Governing Body 
and appointment 
of Officer. 


Removal of 
defunct society 
and cancellation 
of registration. 


l4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(9) The Officer may, before the expiry of his term, take necessary action to 
hold the election of the Governing Body, if so required. 


(/09) If the Officer is, for reasons beyond his control, not able to hold the 
election of the Governing Body or fails to convene a meeting of the General Body, 
as the case may be, or in spite of such meeting having been convened, the General 
Body fails to elect the Governing Body, the Officer shall forthwith send a report to 
the Registrar who may pass such orders, as may be considered necessary or 
expedient, either extending the term of appointment of the Officer for a further 
period or, if satisfied that public interest so necessitates, for the dissolution of the 
society. 


(//) The Registrar may, if he thinks appropriate, appoint a committee to advise 
and assist the Officer so appointed for exercise of the powers and discharge of the 
duties and functions conferred or imposed on him under this Regulation. 


(/2) Where an order of dissolution is passed under sub-section (/0), further 
action shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation. 


(/3) The members of the committee appointed under sub-section (//) shall 
have such qualifications, as may be prescribed and shall hold such office during the 
pleasure of the Registrar. 


CHAPTER XII 
SUSPENSION, CANCELLATION AND DISSOLUTION 


32. (7) Where the Registrar has reasonable cause to believe that a society is 
defunct and is not carrying on business or operations, he shall issue a show cause 
notice to such society, at its registered office to show cause as to whether it is 
carrying on its business or operations and directing it to file such documents or 
returns, within a period of ninety days, from the date of issuance of notice. 


(2) Where the defunct society responds to such notice within specified period 
and submits the requisite documents or informs along with evidence that it is 
carrying on business or operations, the Registrar shall, after due verification of 
records, pass an appropriate order. 


(3) If the Registrar receives a reply from the defunct society to the effect that 
it is not carrying on any business or operations, he may direct the society to convene 
a meeting of its General Body and pass a special resolution for its dissolution after 
settling all its liabilities and thereafter apply for dissolution of the society, 
whereupon it shall be incumbent upon such society to carry out such directions, 
within specified period. 


(4) Where the Registrar does not receive any reply within specified period, he 
shall cause a public notice to be issued stating that on the expiration of such period 
as may be specified in such notice, the registration of such defunct society shall be 
suspended. 


(5) If no response is received from the defunct society, its member, creditor or 
claimant within the specified period, the Registrar shall order suspension of 
registration of such society and after passing of such order, the society shall not be 
competent to carry on any business. 


(6) An order under sub-section (5) suspending the registration of the society 
shall be notified through a public notice for the information of general public. 


(7) The society, member, creditor or claimant aggrieved with such suspension, 
may, within a period of three months from the date of order of suspension, submit a 
representation to the Registrar. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY I5 


(8) The Registrar, on being satisfied that the society at the time of its 
suspension, was carrying on business or operations or otherwise and it is just and 
equitable that the name of the society be restored to the register, may revoke the 
suspension. 


(9) The society whose registration is restored shall be deemed to have 
continued in existence, as if its registration had not been suspended. 


(20) No claims, whatsoever, shall be valid and entertained against a society on 
expiry of a period of three months from the date of suspension of its registration. 


(//) If no representation against the suspension order is received within a 
period of three months from the date of suspension of registration, the Registrar 
may, unless contrary is shown, strike out the name of the society from the register 
and cancel its registration. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this section “defunct society” means a 
society which is not carrying on any business or operation or has not filed its annual 
or other returns with the Registrar continuously for such period, as may be notified. 


33. A society, which has no assets or liabilities to its account and is not 
desirous of carrying on with its business or operations, may, after passing a special 
resolution, apply for cancellation of its registration to the Registrar and the Registrar 
shall, after giving a public notice of not less than ninety days inviting objections, 
strike out its name from the register of societies, after considering objections, if any. 


34. (/) The Registrar may, if he is satisfied that,— 


(a) the society has contravened any of the provisions of this Regulation 
or the rules made thereunder; or 


(0) the society is declared insolvent; or 


(c) the business of any such society is conducted fraudulently or not in 
accordance with its bye-laws or the aims and objects specified in its 
Memorandum; or 


(d) it is carrying on any unlawful activity or allowing unlawful activity 
to be carried on in the premises under its control, 


he may order an inquiry to be conducted by any other officer authorised by him. 


(2) On receipt of inquiry report under sub-section (/), the Registrar may, give 
a show cause notice to the society specifying briefly the grounds of the proposed 
cancellation. 


(3) The Registrar shall also issue a public notice inviting objections, if any, as 
to why the registration of society shall not be cancelled and after considering the 
objections filed by society and public, the Registrar may cancel the registration. 


35. When the registration of a society is cancelled, the society shall forthwith 
cease to carry on its business, except in so far as it may be required for the beneficial 
winding-up of its affairs, for which purpose it shall pass a special resolution and 
dissolve itself in the manner as provided in this Regulation: 


Provided that the liability of office bearer shall continue and may be enforced 
as if the registration of society has not been cancelled. 


36. (/) Where the registration of a society is cancelled, the Registrar shall— 


(a) direct the society to complete the process of its dissolution, collect 
all its receivables, and settle all its liabilities, provide the details of any of its 
assets left over after settlement of the liabilities and submit a proposal for 
transfer of its left-over assets to any other society in existence with identical 
aims and objects; 


Cancellation of 
registration of 
society with no 
assets and 
liabilities. 


Cancellation of 
registration upon 
inquiry. 


Effect of 
cancellation of 
registration. 


Procedure on 
cancellation of 
registration. 


l6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(b) assess the credentials of a society to whom any such assets are 
proposed to be transferred by the society under clause (a) and may either 
approve such proposal or direct the society to place such assets at the disposal 
of the Deputy Commissioner; 


(c) constitute a committee of members of such society to carry out the 
process of dissolution of the society where there is no Governing Body or 
General Body to carry out the directions under clauses (a) and (8); 


(d) be competent to complete the dissolution of the affairs of the society 
of his own or by appointing any of his subordinates to do the needful or 
associate any two members from any other society in existence for this 
purpose. 


(2) If on dissolution and after settlement of all the liabilities, a society is left 
with any movable or immovable assets, the Registrar shall, in the first instance, 
make efforts to transfer all such assets to any other society in existence with identical 
aims and objects in operation against a proper receipt, failing which, all such assets 
shall vest in the custody of the Deputy Commissioner. 


(3) Where any asset is placed at the disposal of the Deputy Commissioner, he 
may either direct the transfer thereof to a society in operation with identical aims 
and objects or use such assets preferably for the same purpose or for any other public 


purpose. 
Dissolution by 37. (४) A society may resolve to dissolve itself by passing a special resolution 
special in a meeting of the General Body convened for the purpose. 


resolution. 
(2) On passing of the special resolution under sub-section (/), the Governing 
Body shall take all necessary steps for settlement of all claims and liabilities, as it 
may consider appropriate in accordance with its bye-laws and if there are no 
bye-laws, in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation. 


(3) If any dispute arises amongst the members of the society, the Governing 
Body, or the special committee, regarding the winding-up of the affairs of the 
society, it shall be referred to the Registrar for such directions, as he may consider 
appropriate: 


Provided that the special resolution for dissolution of the society shall not be 
deemed to be a matter in dispute. 


(4) If the Central Government or Government or any of its instrumentalities is 
a member of or a contributory to or otherwise interested in any society, such society 
shall not be dissolved without the consent of the Central Government or 
Government, as the case may be. 


(5) After completion of all necessary formalities, the Governing Body shall 
send a report to the Registrar, mentioning about the surplus assets, if any. 


(6) The Registrar shall thereupon cause a public notice issued at the expense 
of the society inviting objections for dissolution of society from any person 
interested in the affairs of the society within the period specified in the notice, which 
shall be not less than three months. 


(7) If no objection is received from any claimant, creditor or member of the 
society within three months from the date of issue of such public notice, and after 
the surplus assets, if any, have been disposed of under section 39, the Registrar shall 
make an order confirming the dissolution and thereupon the society shall stand 
dissolved and the Registrar shall record the order of dissolution in the register 
maintained in his office and strike off the name of the society from such register. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(8) If any objection is received from any claimant or creditor or member or 
any other interested person within the period provided under sub-section (7), the 
Registrar shall not make an order confirming the dissolution of the society unless 
he is satisfied that the relevant claim or liability have been duly settled and the 
surplus assets, if any, have been disposed of as provided in this Regulation. 


38. (/) Where the Government consents to dissolve a society under section 37 
or where the registration of a society is cancelled and it is found to be fit for 
dissolution under section 32, the Registrar General or the Registrar, as the case may 
be, shall order dissolution of such society in accordance with the procedure provided 
in this Regulation. 


(2) Upon dissolution of a society under sub-section (/), the Registrar General 
or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall take action for winding-up the affairs of 
the dissolved society in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation. 


39. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 36, after the settlement 
of claims and liabilities of society, where any surplus assets are left, such assets shall 
not be paid to or distributed amongst the members of the society, but shall be taken 
over and vest in the custody of Government: 


Provided that in case of a housing society or a resident welfare association is 
registered as a society, the operation, management and maintenance of facilities for 
the residents or civic amenities of any defined area, the successor-in-interest shall 
step in the shoes of original member, subject to fulfilment of qualifications as laid 
down in the bye-laws of the society and the provisions of this Regulation. 


(2) The Government shall place such assets at the disposal of the Deputy 
Commissioner, who may,— 


(a) in the first instance identify any other society in operation with 
identical aims and objects and transfer such assets to such society; 


(5) use such assets, preferably for the purpose for which such assets were 
created; or 


(c) for any other public purpose, as deemed appropriate. 


(3) The records of accounts shall be maintained for a period of three years 
from the date of dissolution and in case any matter pertaining to any such society is 
pending before any court, such records shall be maintained till the final disposal of 
such matter by the competent court. 


CHAPTER XIII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 


40. If a society fails to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of 
this Regulation, then the society in default shall be liable to a penalty which may 
extend to two thousand rupees, and in case of a continuing default or contravention, 
with penalty which may extend to one hundred rupees for each day during which 
such default or contravention continues. 


4l. Where any society fails to rectify the defects as directed by the Registrar 
and where no appeal has been preferred to the Registrar General under 
sub-section (/) of section 49 or where such appeal has been preferred and the 
Registrar General has not annulled, reversed or modified the order, the Registrar 
may take steps to have the defects rectified and may recover the cost, which were 
incurred for rectification of such defects, from the officers of the society who, in his 
opinion, have failed to rectify the defects. 


Dissolution and 
winding-up by 
Registrar. 


Disposal of 
assets. 


Penalty for non- 
compliance. 


Registrar to 
recover cost 
from officers of 
society. 


Penalty for 
falsifying any 
document. 


Penalty for 
furnishing false 
information or 
disobeying 
summons, 
requisition or 
other order or 
direction. 


Crediting of 
penalties 
imposed under 
this Regulation. 


Adjudication 
mechanism 
against penalty. 


Power of 
Registrar to 
condone delay 
in certain cases. 


Legal 
representation 
and authority. 


Enforcement of 
Judgment. 


Appeal and 
review in case of 
matters, other 
than penalties. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


42. If an office bearer or any employee of the society knowingly or willingly 
makes or causes to be made any false entry in, or any omission from any register, 
account, balance-sheet, or other document, required to be maintained by a society 
under this Regulation, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to five 
thousand rupees and may be removed from the membership of the society. 


43. If any office bearer knowingly or willingly makes a false return or 
furnishes false information or wilfully or without any reasonable reason, disobeys 
any summons, requisition, or other lawful order or direction issued under the 
provisions of this Regulation or withholds or fails to furnish any information 
lawfully required from him by the Registrar or Registrar General or person 
authorised in this behalf under the provisions of this Regulation, he shall be liable 
to a penalty which may extend to five thousand rupees, and in the case of a 
continuing default or contravention, with penalty which may extend to two hundred 
rupees for every day during which such default or contravention continues. 


44. The penalties under this Chapter shall be imposed by the Registrar General 
or Registrar or any officer authorised in this behalf by the Registrar General or 
Registrar, and such sum of penalties shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


45. Any party aggrieved by the penalty imposed in accordance with the 
provisions of sections 40, 42 and 43, shall have the following recourse, namely:— 


(a) the society concerned may make an appeal, against any penalty 
imposed under sections 40, 42 and 43, to the Registrar General within a period 
of two months from the date of the imposition of such penalty; 


(6) the Registrar General may, in deciding the appeal, annul, reverse, 
modify or confirm the order of the Registrar; and 


(c) where the society fails to rectify the defects as directed by the 
Registrar and where no appeal has been made to the Registrar General under 
clause (a) or where on the appeal so made, the Registrar General has not 
annulled, reversed or modified the order, the Registrar may himself take steps 
to have the defects rectified, and may recover the cost from the officers of the 
society who, in his opinion, have failed to rectify the defects. 


46. The Registrar may, upon an application in writing received from any 
society and on sufficient cause being shown, allow further time to such society to 
comply with any of the provisions of this Regulation on payment of such late fees, 
as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS 


47. (/) The committee or any office bearer of the society authorised in this 
behalf by its bye-laws, may bring or defend any action or other legal proceedings 
touching or concerning any property or any right or claim of the society and may 
sue or be sued in its name. 


(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall abate due to any vacancy or change 
in the position of the President, the Secretary or any office bearer authorised under 
sub-section (/). 


48. The judgment, which shall be delivered against any office bearer of the 
society, shall not be enforced against such office bearer or his property, either 
movable or immovable, but shall be enforced against the property of the society. 


49. (J) Any person or society aggrieved by an order of the Registrar may, 
prefer an appeal to the Registrar General within a period of sixty days from the date 
of issuance of such order. 


45 of 2023. 
49 of 988. 


47 of 2023. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(2) Any person or society aggrieved by an order of the Registrar General, may 
file an application before the Government within a period of sixty days from the 
date of issuance of such order. 


(3) Any person or society who fails to file the aforesaid appeal or application, 
as the case may be, within the period of sixty days, and if the society or person has 
shown sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or application within such 
period, that appeal or application may be entertained even after the expiry of the 
said period, but not later than another sixty days. 


(4) The decision of the Government shall be final and binding on the parties. 


(5) Every appeal or application referred to in this section shall be in such form 
and accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed. 


(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an order passed by the 
Registrar or the Registrar General may be reviewed by such prescribed authority, 
on an application filed by the aggrieved party within a period of ninety days from 
the date of issuance of such order. 


50. Every officer exercising or authorised to exercise powers under this 
Regulation or the rules made thereunder shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 
and clause (c) of section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 988. 


5l. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
Registrar General or any officer or official subordinate to him or acting under his 
authority, in respect of anything done by or purported to have been done by him in 
good faith under this Regulation. 


52. No act or proceedings of a society or any of its office bearer, shall be 
deemed to have been invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or defect in the 
organisation of the society. 


53. Any notice, order or requisition meant for a society or for the Governing 
Body thereof, to be issued by the Registrar or the Registrar General or any other 
person or body related to it, shall be served on the President or Secretary of the 
society, and such services shall be effectual as if the same had been served on every 
member. 


54. All documents filed by a society with the Registrar under this Regulation 
shall be deemed to be public documents within the meaning of section 74 of the 
Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023. 


55. The Government may, as soon as possible, introduce e-governance for 
effective and efficient administration of the provisions of this Regulation, and upon 
implementation of such a solution, all or part of the transactions, forms, payments, 
and other services under this Regulation, may be administered in the electronic or 
online mode. 


56. Save as otherwise provided in the Regulation, the provisions of this 
Regulation shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other laws of the Union territory, for the time being in 
force. 


57. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in 
respect of any matter which the Registrar, the Registrar General, or any other 
authority empowered under this Regulation is required to determine; and no 
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action 
taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Regulation. 


Registrar 
General and 
other officers to 
be public 
servants. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Acts or 
proceedings not to 
be invalidated by 
certain defects. 


Mode of service 


of notice or 
order. 


Public 
document. 


E-governance. 


Governance. 


Bar of 
jurisdiction of 
civil courts. 


Settlement of 
disputes, 
distribution of 
surplus, fee and 
recovery of 
dues. 


Power to issue 
directions. 


Power to make 


tules and laying. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Removal of 
difficulties. 


Repeal and 
saving 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


58. (/) Any dispute relating to membership, including admission, termination 
or rights of members, shall be decided by the Registrar or such authority as may be 
specified under the rules and the decision of the Registrar in this regard shall be 
binding, subject to appeal as provided under section 49. 


(2) The utilisation or distribution of any surplus, dividend or profit among the 
members shall be subject to the conditions and limits as may be prescribed ensuing 
transparency and equitable benefit-sharing. 


(3) The fee payable for registration, filing of documents, inspection, 
certification or any other service rendered under this Regulation shall be in such 
manner, as may be prescribed. 


(4) Any amount due to the Government, the Registrar or the society under this 
Regulation, including penalties or prescribed fees, shall be recoverable as arrears of 
land revenue in such manner as may be prescribed. 


59. The Government shall be competent to issue such directions to any society, 
as it may deem appropriate, for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this 
Regulation and the rules made thereunder. 


60. (/) The Administrator may, by notification, make rules not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Regulation, for carrying out the purposes of this 
Regulation. 


(2) Every rule made under this Regulation shall be laid, as soon as after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of session immediately following the session or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in 
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


6l. The provisions of this Regulation shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in 
force in the Union territory. 


62. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Regulation, the Administrator may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, 
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Regulation, as 
may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two 
years from the date of commencement of this Regulation. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 


63. (/) The Societies Registration Act, 860, in its application to the Union 
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands is hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or 
purported to have been done or taken under the Act hereby repealed shall, in so far 
as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Regulation, be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Regulation. 


(3) Subject to the provisions under sub-section (4) of section 6, any society 
registered at any place in the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands under 
the Societies Registration Act, |860, shall be deemed to have been registered under 
this Regulation, and its principal office shall be deemed to be the registered office 
for the purposes of this Regulation: 


2! of 860. 


2! of 860. 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2. 


Provided that— 


(i) the Memorandum and the bye-laws of any such society, to the extent 
they are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Regulation and the rules 
made thereunder, shall be brought in conformity with the provisions of this 
Regulation within a period of two years from the date of commencement of 
this Regulation or within such further period as the Government may, by 
notification, allow and thereafter, to the extent of such repugnancy or 
inconsistency, be deemed to be void and shall have no effect; 


(ii) any officer elected or appointed to and holding office immediately 
before the commencement of this Regulation shall continue to hold such office 
until the expiry of his term of office or until such office is lawfully terminated. 


(4) Nothing under this Regulation shall affect any right, privilege, obligation, 
liability or punishment provided under the repealed Act: 


Provided that any investigation or proceedings, including proceedings for 
dissolution, or the supersession of the Governing Body or appointment of an 
Administrator commenced before the coming into force of this Regulation, shall be 
continued and conducted in accordance with the provisions contained in this 
Regulation. 


(5) The mention of particular matters referred to in this section shall not be 
held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses 
0 of 897. Act, 897, with regard to the effect of repeal. 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054. 
GORAKHA Disitally signed 


by GORAKHA 
NATH NATH YADAVA 
Date: 2026.08.27 


YADAVA - 3::48:04 +05'30" 


MGIPMRND—653GI(S4)—27-08-2026. 


