रजिस्ट्री सं" डी" एल० 


(एन)04/0007/2003---23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


Fo 
The Gazette of Gudia 


Osh. -S7. Wet. -37.-082023-24802 
CG-DL-E-082023-24802 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग व --- खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 22] नई दिल्‍ली, बृहस्पतिवार, अगस्त 0, 2023/ श्रावण 9, 945 (शक) 
No. 22] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, AUGUST 0, 2023/SRAVANA 9, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


RAJYA SABHA 


The following Bill has been introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the l0th August, 2023:— 


Butt No. LVI or 2023 


A Bill to consolidate and amend the law relating to Post Office in India and to provide for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (7) This Act may be called the Post Office Act, 2023. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) "Director General" means the Director General of Postal Services appointed 
by the Central Government and includes any officer authorised by the Central 
Government to perform the duties of the Director General; 


Services to be 
provided by 
Post Office. 


Exclusive 
privilege in 
respect of 
postage 
stamps. 


Addresses and 
postcodes. 


Power to give 
effect to 
arrangements 
with other 
countries. 


Recovery of 
sums due in 
respect of 
services 
provided by 
Post Office. 


Official mark 
to be evidence 
of certain 
facts denoted. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) "item" means an indivisible article which the Post Office accepts for providing 
a service; 


(c) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 


(d) "Post Office" means the Department of Posts and includes every house, 
building, room, place or any other asset used by the Post Office for providing any 
service; 


(e) "prescribe" means prescribe by rules made under this Act and the expression 
"prescribed" shall be construed accordingly; 


(f) "regulations" means the regulations made under this Act. 


3. (7) The Post Office shall provide such services as the Central Government may 
prescribe. 


(2) The Director General may make regulations— 


(a) in respect of activities necessary to provide services referred to in 
sub-section (/); and 


(9) to fix charges for, and the terms and conditions in respect of, services 
referred to in sub-section (/). 


(3) Any service provided by the Post Office shall be subject to any other law for the 
time being in force. 


4. (/) The Post Office shall have the exclusive privilege of issuing postage stamps. 


(2)The Director General may make regulations relating to the supply and sale of 
postage stamps and postal stationery. 


(3) In this section, the expressions— 


(a) "postage stamp" means any stamp provided by the Central Government, in 
any form, physical or digital, for denoting sums payable in respect of such service 
provided by the Post Office, as may be prescribed and includes stamps affixed, printed, 
embossed, embedded, impressed, or otherwise indicated on an item; 


(b) "postal stationery" means stationery, issued by the Post Office such as 
envelopes, letter cards, postcards, bearing imprinted stamps or inscriptions indicating 
that sum payable in respect of a service provided by the Post Office has been prepaid. 


5. (/) The Central Government may prescribe standards for addressing on the items, 
address identifiers and usage of postcodes. 


(2) In this section, "postcode" means a series of digits, letters or digital code or a 
combination of digits, letters or digital code used to identify a geographic area or location, 
and ease the process of sorting and delivery of items and for other purposes. 


6. The Central Government may make rules to give effect to arrangements made with 
any foreign country or territory for services provided by the Post Office between India and 
the said foreign country or territory. 


7. (L) Every person who avails a service provided by the Post Office shall be liable to 
pay the charges in respect of such service. 


(2) If any person refuses or neglects to pay the charges referred to in sub-section (/), 
such amount shall be recoverable as if it were an arrear of land revenue due from him. 


8. The Central Government may prescribe the conditions for denoting the official 
marks on items to be used as prima facie evidence of the facts so denoted. 


6 of 898. 


6 of 898. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


9. () The Central Government may, by notification, empower any officer to cause any 
item in course of transmission by the Post Office to be intercepted, opened or detained in 
the interest of the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign states, public order, 
emergency, or public safety or upon the occurrence of any contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force. 


(2) The Central Government may cause any item referred to in sub-section (/) to be 
disposed of in such manner as it deems appropriate. 


(3) The Central Government may, by notification, empower any officer of the Post 
Office to deliver an item, received from within or beyond the limits of India and reckoned to 
contain anything liable to duty or which is suspected to contain any prohibited item to such 
customs authority or any other authority as may be specified in the said notification, and 
such customs authority or any other authority shall deal with such item in accordance with 
the provisions of any law for the time being in force. 


0. (/) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, the Post 
Office shall not incur any liability except such liability as may be prescribed with regard to 
a service provided by the Post Office. 


(2) No officer of the Post Office shall incur any liability with regard to a service 
provided by the Post Office, unless the officer has acted fraudulently or wilfully caused 
loss, delay or mis-delivery of service. 


ll. The Central Government may, by notification, authorise, either absolutely or 
subject to conditions, the Director General to exercise any of the powers conferred upon the 
Central Government by this Act, other than the power to make rules. 


i2. The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 


3. The Director General may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, by 
notification, make regulations for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


4. Every rule or regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both 
Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 


5. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty: 

Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


6. (/) The Indian Post Office Act, 898 is hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act by sub-section (/), all rules, notifications 
and orders, made or purported to have been made under the Indian Post Office Act, 898, 
shall, in so far as they relate to matters for which provision is made in this Act and are not 
inconsistent therewith, be deemed to have been made under this Act and shall continue in 
force unless and until they are superseded by any rules or notification or order made under 
this Act. 


Power to 
intercept, 
open or detain 
any item or 
deliver item to 
customs 
authority. 


Exemption 
from liability. 


Delegation of 
power, other 
than rule- 
making powers 
to Director 
General. 


Power to 
make rules. 


Power to 
make 
regulations. 
Laying of 
rules and 
regulations in 
Parliament. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


The Indian Post Office Act, 898 was enacted in |898 with a view to govern the 
functioning of the Post Office in India. This Act primarily addresses mail services provided 
through the Post Office. Over the years, services available through the Post Office have 
diversified beyond mails and the Post Office network has become a vehicle for delivery of a 
variety of citizen centric services which necessitated the repeal of the said Act and enactment 
of new law in its place. Accordingly, it is proposed to bring the Post Office Bill, 2023 which 
addresses these changes and provides for a simple legislative framework to facilitate evolution 
of the post office into a network for delivery of citizen centric services. 


2. The Post Office Bill, 2023 seeks to repeal the Indian Post Office Act, 898 and to 
consolidate and amend the law relating to the Post Office in India and to provide for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


3. The Bill, inter alia, seeks to provide that— 


(a) the Post Office shall provide such services as the Central Government may 
by rules prescribe; 


(b) the Director General of Postal Services shall make regulations in respect of 
activities necessary to provide those services and fix the charges for such services; 


(c) the Post Office shall have the exclusive privilege of issuing postage stamps; 


(d) the Central Government shall have power to give effect to the arrangements 
made with any foreign country or territory; 


(e) every person shall be liable to pay charges for availing any service provided 
by the Post Office and if such person refuses or neglects to pay any charge due to him 
it shall be recoverable as land revenue; 


(f) the Central Government may prescribe the conditions for denoting the official 
mark on postal item to be used as prima facie evidence of the fact so denoted; 


(g) the Central Government may, by notification, empower any officer to intercept, 
open or detain any item in the interest of the security of the State, friendly relations 
with foreign states, public order, emergency, or public safety or upon the occurrence of 
any contravention of any of the provisions of any law for the time being in force; 


(A) the Post Office and officers of the Post Office shall be exempted from any 
liability by reason of any loss, mis-delivery, delay, or damage in course of any service 
provided by the Post Office except such liability as may be prescribed. 


4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; 


The 8th August, 2023. ASHWINI VAISHNAW. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill, if enacted would not involve any financial expenditure either recurring or 
non-recurring from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 

Clause |2 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government to make rules. The 
matter on which rules may be made, inter alia, relate to—(a) the services to be provided by 
the Post Office under sub-clause (/) of clause 3; (b) standards for addressing on the items, 
address identifiers and usage of postcodes under sub-clause (/) of clause 5; (c) rules to give 
effect to arrangements made with any foreign country or territory for services provided by 
the Post Office between India and the said foreign country or territory under clause 6; (d) the 
conditions for denoting the official marks on items to be used as prima facie evidence of the 
facts so denoted under clause 8; (e) the liability of the Post Office with regard to a service 
provided by the Post Office under sub-clause (/) of clause 0. 


2. Clause |3 of the Bill confers powers upon the Director General to make regulations 
providing for—(q) the activities necessary to provide services of the Post Office, terms and 
conditions, and to fix charges for these services under sub-clause (2) of clause 3; (b) matter 
relating to the supply and sale of postage stamps and postal stationery under sub-clause (2) 
of clause 4. 


3. Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the rules and regulations made under the Bill shall 
be laid, as soon as they are made, before each House of Parliament. 


4. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made are matters of 
administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The 
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


P.C. MODY, 


Secretary-General. 


PUBLISHED BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, RAJYA SABHA, UNDER RULE 68 OFTHE RULES OF PROCEDURE 
AND CONDUCT OF BUSINESS IN THE RAJYA SABHA. ee 


Mohan 


