रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल० -(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


JN क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-05042025-262316 
CG-DL-E-05042025-262316 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं० 14] नई दिल्‍ली, शनिवार, अप्रैल 5, 2025/चैत्र 15, 1947 (शक) 
No. 14] NEW DELHI, SATURDAY, APRIL 5, 2025/CHAITRA 15, 1947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the Sth April, 2025/Chaitra 15, 1947 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
5th April, 2025 and is hereby published for general information:— 
THE WAQF (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2025 
No. 14 oF 2025 
[5th April, 2025.] 


An Act further to amend the Waqf Act, 1995. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 


as follows:— 
1. (J) This Act may be called the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2025. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
43 of 1995. 2. In section 1 of the Waqf Act, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Amendment of 


Act), in sub-section (/), for the word “Waqf”, the words “Unified Wagqf seeders 
Management, Empowerment, Efficiency and Development” shall be substituted. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Amendment of 3. In section 2 of the principal Act, after the proviso, the following proviso 
section 2. : rt 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided further that nothing in this Act shall, notwithstanding any 
judgement, decree or order of any court, apply to a trust (by whatever name 
called) established before or after the commencement of this Act or 
statutorily regulated by any statutory provision pertaining to public 
charities, by a Muslim for purpose similar to a waqf under any law for the 
time being in force.”. 


Amendment of 4. In section 3 of the principal Act,— 
section 3. 


(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(aa) “Aghakhani waqf’ means a waqf dedicated by an 
Aghakhani waqif;’; 


(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
‘(ca) “Bohra waqf” means a waqf dedicated by a Bohra waqif;’; 
(iii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(da) “Collector” includes the Collector of land-revenue of a 
district, or the Deputy Commissioner, or any officer not below the 
rank of Deputy Collector authorised in writing by the Collector;’; 


(iv) after clause (7), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(fa) “Government Organisation” includes the Central 
Government, State Governments, Municipalities, Panchayats, attached 
and subordinate offices and autonomous bodies of the Central 
Government or State Government, or any organisation or Institution 
owned and controlled by the Central Government or State Government; 


(fb) “Government property” means movable or immovable 
property or any part thereof, belonging to a Government 
Organisation;’; 


(v) in clause (2), the words “, either verbally or” shall be omitted; 
(vi) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(ka) “portal and database” means the waqf asset management 
system or any other system set up by the Central Government for the 
registration, accounts, audit and any other detail of waqf and the 
Board, as may be prescribed by the Central Government;’; 


(vii) for clause (/), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 

‘(J “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;’; 
(viii) clause (p) shall be omitted; 

(ix) in clause (r),— 

(a) in the opening portion, for the words “any person, of any 
movable or immovable property”, the words “any person showing or 
demonstrating that he is practising Islam for at least five years, of any 
movable or immovable property, having ownership of such property 
and that there is no contrivance involved in the dedication of such 
property,” shall be substituted; 

(b) sub-clause (7) shall be omitted; 


(c) in sub-clause (iv), after the word “welfare”, the words 
“, or maintenance of widow, divorced woman and orphan, if waqif so 
intends, in such manner, as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government,” shall be inserted; 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(d) in the long line, for the words “any person”, the words “any 
such person” shall be substituted; 


(e) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:— 


“Provided that the existing waqf by user properties 
registered on or before the commencement of the Wagqf 
(Amendment) Act, 2025 as waqf by user will remain as waqf 
properties except that the property, wholly or in part, is in 
dispute or is a government property;”. 


5. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“3A. (1) No person shall create a waqf unless he is the lawful owner 
of the property and competent to transfer or dedicate such property. 


(2) The creation of a waqf-alal-aulad shall not result in denial of 
inheritance rights of heirs, including women heirs, of the waqif or any other 
rights of persons with lawful claims. 


3B. (1) Every waqf registered under this Act, prior to the 
commencement of the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall file the details 
of the waqf and the property dedicated to the waqf on the portal and 
database, within a period of six months from such commencement: 


Provided that the Tribunal may, on an application made to it by the 
mutawalli, extend such period of six months under this section for a further 
period not exceeding six months as it may consider appropriate, if he satisfies 
the Tribunal that he had sufficient cause for not filing the details of the waqf on 
the portal within such period. 


(2) The details of the waqf under sub-section (/), amongst other 
information, shall include the following, namely:— 


(a) the identification and boundaries of waqf properties, their use 
and occupier; 


(6) the name and address of the creator of the waqf, mode and 
date of such creation; 


(c) the deed of waqf, if available; 
(d) the present mutawalli and its management; 
(e) the gross annual income from such waqf properties; 


(f) the amount of land-revenue, cesses, rates and taxes annually 
payable in respect of the waqf properties; 


(g) an estimate of the expenses annually incurred in the 
realisation of the income of the waqf properties; 


(A) the amount set apart under the waqf for— 


(7) the salary of the mutawalli and allowances to the 
individuals; 


(7) purely religious purposes; 
(ii) charitable purposes; and 
(iv) any other purposes; 
(7) details of court cases, if any, involving such waqf property; 


(7) any other particular as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


Insertion of new 
sections 3A, 3B, 
3C, 3D and 3E. 


Certain 
conditions of 
wadf. 


Filing of details 
of waqf on 
portal and 
database. 


Wrongful 
declaration of 
waaf. 


Declaration of 
protected 
monument or 
protected area as 
waqf to be void. 


Bar of 
declaration of 
any land in 
Scheduled or 
Tribal area as 
waqf. 
Amendment of 
section 4. 


Amendment of 
section 5. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


3C. (J) Any Government property identified or declared as waqf 
property, before or after the commencement of this Act, shall not be deemed 
to be a waqf property. 


(2) If any question arises as to whether any such property is a 
Government property, the State Government may, by notification, designate 
on Officer above the rank of Collector (hereinafter referred to as the 
designated officer), who shall conduct an inquiry as per law, and determine 
whether such property is a Government property or not and submit his report 
to the State Government: 


Provided that such property shall not be treated as waqf property till 
the designated officer submits his report. 


(3) In case the designated officer determines the property to be a 
Government property, he shall make necessary corrections in revenue 
records and submit a report in this regard to the State Government. 


(4) The State Government shall, on receipt of the report of the designated 
officer, direct the Board to make appropriate correction in the records. 


3D. Any declaration or notification issued under this Act or under any 
previous Act in respect of waqf properties shall be void, if such property was a 
protected monument or protected area under the Ancient Monuments 
Preservation Act, 1904 or the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains Act, 1958, at the time of such declaration or notification. 


3E. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for 
the time being in force, no land belonging to members of Scheduled Tribes 
under the provisions of the Fifth Schedule or the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution shall be declared or deemed to be waqf property.”. 


6. In section 4 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the marginal heading, the marginal heading “Survey of augaf.” 
shall be substituted; 


(6) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(1) Any survey of augaf pending before the Survey Commissioner, 
on the commencement of the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall be 
transferred to the Collector having jurisdiction and the Collector shall 
make the survey in accordance with the procedure in the revenue laws of 
the State, from the stage such survey is transferred to the Collector, and 
submit his report to the State Government.” 


(c) sub-sections (/A), (2) and (3) shall be omitted; 


(d) in sub-section (4), in the opening portion, for the words “Survey 
Commissioner’, the word “Collector” shall be substituted; 


(e) in sub-section (5), after the words “Sunni waqf”, the words “or 
Aghakhani waqf or Bohra waqf” shall be inserted; 


(f) sub-section (6) shall be omitted. 
7. In section 5 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (3)”, 
the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (/)” shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (2), after the words “Shia auqaf’, the words “or 
Aghakhani augaf or Bohra auqaf’ shall be inserted; 


7 of 1904. 
24 of 1958. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(2A) The State Government shall upload the notified list of 
auqaf on the portal and database within ninety days from the date of 
its publication in the Official Gazette under sub-section (2). 


(2B) The details of each waqf shall contain the identification, 
boundaries of waqf properties, their use and occupier, details of the 
creator, mode and date of such creation, purpose of waqf, their present 
mutawallis and management in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government.”; 


(d) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The revenue authorities, before deciding mutation in the 
land records, in accordance with revenue laws in force, shall give a 
public notice of ninety days, in two daily newspapers circulating in the 
localities of such area of which one shall be in the regional language 
and give the affected persons an opportunity of being heard.”; 


(e) in sub-section (4), after the words “time to time”, the words ता 
the portal and database” shall be inserted. 


8. In section 6 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(7) after the words “Sunni waqf’, the words “or Aghakhani waqf 
or Bohra waqf” shall be inserted; 


(ii) the words “and the decision of the Tribunal in respect of such 
matter shall be final” shall be omitted; 


(iii) in the first proviso, for the words “one year”, the words “two 
years” shall be substituted; 


(iv) for the second proviso, the following proviso shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“Provided further that an application may be entertained by 
the Tribunal after the period of two years specified in the first 
proviso, if the applicant satisfies the Tribunal that he has sufficient 
cause for not making the application within such period:”; 


(8) in sub-section (3), for the words “Survey Commissioner”, the word 
“Collector” shall be substituted. 


9. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(7) after the words “Sunni waqf’, the words “or Aghakhani waqf or 
Bohra waqf” shall be inserted; 


(ii) the words “and the decision of the Tribunal thereon shall be final” 
shall be omitted; 


(iii) in the first proviso, for the words “one year” wherever they occur, 
the words “two years” shall be substituted; 


(iv) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further that”, the 
following shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Provided further that an application may be entertained by the 
Tribunal after the period of two years specified in the first proviso, if 
the applicant satisfies the Tribunal that he had sufficient cause for not 
making the application within such period: 


Provided also that’’. 


Amendment of 
section 6. 


Amendment of 
section 7. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Amendment of 10. In section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following 
section 9. : : 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(2) The Council shall consist of — 
(a) the Union Minister in charge of waqf—Chairperson, ex officio; 


(0) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall be from the 
House of the People and one from the Council of States; 


(c) the following members to be appointed by the Central 
Government from amongst Muslims, namely:— 


(i) three persons to represent Muslim organisations having 
all India character and national importance; 


(ii) Chairpersons of three Boards by rotation; 


(iii) one person to represent the mutawallis of the waqf 
having a gross annual income of five lakh rupees and above; 


(iv) three persons who are eminent scholars in Muslim law; 


(d) two persons who have been Judges of the Supreme Court or 
a High Court; 
(e) one Advocate of national eminence; 


(f) four persons of national eminence, one each from the fields 
of administration or management, financial management, engineering 
or architecture and medicine; 


(g) Additional Secretary or Joint Secretary to the Government of 
India dealing with waqf matters in the Union Ministry or 
department—member, ex officio: 


Provided that two of the members appointed under clause (c) shall 
be women: 


Provided further that two members appointed under this sub-section, 
excluding ex officio members, shall be non-Muslim.” 


Amendment of 11. In section 13 of the principal Act, for sub-section (24), the following 
30901 1: sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(2A) The State Government may, if it deems necessary, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, establish a separate Board of Augaf for 
Bohras and Aghakhanis.”. 


Amendment of 12. In section 14 of the principal Act,— 


section 14. 
“_ (a) for sub-sections (1), (1A), (2), (3) and (4), the following 
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(1) The Board for a State and the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi shall consist of, not more than eleven members, to be nominated 
by the State Government,— 


(a) a Chairperson; 


(0) () one Member of Parliament from the State or, as the 
case may be, the National Capital Territory of Delhi; 


(7) one Member of the State Legislature; 


(c) the following members belonging to Muslim 
community, namely:— 


(7) one mutawalli of the waqf having an annual 
income of one lakh rupees and above; 


(7) one eminent scholar of Islamic theology; 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
(iii) two or more elected members from the 

Municipalities or Panchayats: 

Provided that in case there is no Muslim member available 
from any of the categories in sub-clauses (i) to (iii), additional 
members from category in sub-clause (iii) may be nominated; 

(d) two persons who have professional experience in 
business management, social work, finance or revenue, 
agriculture and development activities; 

(e) Joint Secretary to the State Government dealing with 
the waqf matters, ex officio; 

(f) one Member of the Bar Council of the concerned State 
or Union territory: 

Provided that two members of the Board appointed under 
clause (c) shall be women: 

Provided further that two of total members of the Board 
appointed under this sub-section, excluding ex officio members, shall 
be non-Muslim: 

Provided also that the Board shall have at least one member each 
from Shia, Sunni and other backward classes among Muslim 
Communities: 

Provided also that one member each from Bohra and Aghakhani 
communities shall be nominated in the Board in case they have 
functional auqaf in the State or Union territory: 

Provided also that the elected members of Board holding office 
on the commencement of the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2025 shall 
continue to hold office as such until the expiry of their term of office. 

(2) No Minister of the Central Government or, as the case may 
be, a State Government, shall be nominated as a member of the Board. 

(3) In case of a Union territory, the Board shall consist of not 
less than five and not more than seven members to be nominated by 
the Central Government under sub-section (/).”; 

(6) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(6) In determining the number of members belonging to Shia, 
Sunni, Bohra, Aghakhani or other backward classes among Muslim 
communities, the State Government or, as the case may be, the Central 
Government in case of a Union territory shall have regard to the 
number and value of Shia, Sunni, Bohra, Aghakhani and other 
backward classes among Muslim auqaf to be administered by the 
Board and appointment of the members shall be made, so far as may 
be, in accordance with such determination.”’; 


(c) sub-section (8) shall be omitted. 


13. In section 16 of the principal Act,— 


(7) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(a) he is less than twenty-one years of age; 


(aa) in case of a member under clause (c) of sub-section (/) of 
section 14, he is not a Muslim;”; 


(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 


“(d) he has been convicted of any offence and sentenced to 
imprisonment for not less than two years;”. 


Amendment of 
section 16. 


Amendment of 
section 17. 


Omission of 
section 20A. 


Amendment of 
section 23. 


Amendment of 
section 28. 


Amendment of 
section 30. 


Amendment of 
section 32. 


Amendment of 
section 33. 


Amendment of 
section 36. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


14. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the words 
“shall meet”, the words “at least once in every month” shall be inserted. 


15. Section 20A of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


16. In section 23 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(1) There shall be a full-time Chief Executive Officer of the Board to 
be appointed by the State Government and who shall be not below the rank 
of Joint Secretary to the State Government.”. 


17. In section 28 of the principal Act, for the words “be responsible for 
implementation of the decisions of the Board which may be”, the words 
“implement the decision of the Board within forty-five days from the date it is” 
shall be substituted. 


18. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words and 
figures “section 76 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872”, the words and figures 
“section 75 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023” shall be substituted. 


19. In section 32 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2), in clause (e), the Explanation and the proviso 
shall be omitted; 


(0) in sub-section (3), the words “and the decision of the Tribunal 
thereon shall be final” shall be omitted. 


20. In section 33 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (4), in the proviso, the words, brackets and figure 
“and the Tribunal shall have no power to make any order staying pending 
the disposal of the appeal, the operation of the order made by the Chief 
Executive Officer under sub-section (3)” shall be omitted; 


(b) sub-section (6) shall be omitted. 
21. In section 36 of the principal Act,— 


(a) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(1A) On and from the commencement of the Wagqf 
(Amendment) Act, 2025, no waqf shall be created without execution 
of a waqf deed.” 


(b) in sub-section (3),— 
(7) in the opening portion, for the words “in such form and manner 


and at such place as the Board may by regulation provide”, the words 
“to the Board through the portal and database” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(f) any other particulars as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.”; 


(c) in sub-section (4), the words “or if no such deed has been executed 
or a copy thereof cannot be obtained, shall contain full particulars, as far as 
they are known to the applicant, of the origin, nature and objects of the 
waqf” shall be omitted; 


(d) for sub-section (7), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(7) On receipt of an application for registration, the Board shall 
forward the application to the Collector having jurisdiction to inquire 
the genuineness and validity of the application and correctness of any 
particulars therein and submit a report to the Board: 


1 of 1872. 
47 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Provided that if the application is made by any person other than 
the person administering the waqf, the Board shall, before registering 
the waqf, give notice of the application to the person administering the 
waaf and shall hear him if he desires to be heard. 


(7A) Where the Collector in his report mentions that the 
property, wholly or in part, is in dispute or is a Government property, 
the waqf in relation to such part of property shall not be registered, 
unless the dispute is decided by a competent court.”; 


(e) in sub-section (8), the proviso shall be omitted; 


(f) after sub-section (8), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(9) The Board, on registering a waqf, shall issue the certificate 
of registration to the waqf through the portal and database. 


(10) No suit, appeal or other legal proceeding for the 
enforcement of any right on behalf of any waqf which have not been 
registered in accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall be 
instituted or commenced or heard, tried or decided by any court after 
expiry of a period of six months from the commencement of the Waqf 
(Amendment) Act, 2025: 


Provided that an application may be entertained by the court in 
respect of such suit, appeal or other legal proceedings after the period 
of six months specified under this sub-section, if the applicant satisfies 
the court that he has sufficient cause for not making the application 
within such period.”. 


22. In section 37 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 
(i) in the opening portion, after the word “particulars”, the words “in 
such manner as prescribed by the Central Government” shall be inserted; 


(7) in clause (f), for the words “provided by regulations”, the 
words “prescribed by the Central Government” shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (3), after the words “land record office shall’, the 
words “before deciding mutation in the land records, in accordance with 
revenue laws in force, shall give a public notice of ninety days, in two 
daily newspapers circulating in the localities of such area of which one 
shall be in the regional language and give the affected persons an 
opportunity of being heard, then” shall be substituted. 


23. Section 40 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


24. In section 46 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 


(a) for the word “July”, at both the places where it occurs, the word 
“October” shall be substituted; 


(b) for the words “in such form and containing such particulars as may 
be provided by regulations by the Board of all moneys received”, the words 
“in such form and manner and containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, of all moneys received from any 
source” shall be substituted. 


25. In section 47 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 
(४) in clause (a),— 


(A) for the words “fifty thousand rupees”, the words 
“one lakh rupees” shall be substituted; 


Amendment of 
section 37. 


Omission of 
section 40. 


Amendment of 
section 46. 


Amendment of 
section 47. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(B) after the words “appointed by the Board”, the 
following shall be inserted, namely:— 


“from out of the panel of auditors prepared by the 
State Government: 


Provided that the State Government shall, while 
preparing such panel of auditors, specify the remuneration 
to be paid to such auditors;”; 


(ii) for clause (6), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(b) the accounts of the waqf having net annual 
income exceeding one lakh rupees shall be audited annually, 
by an auditor appointed by the Board from out of the panel of 
auditors as specified in clause (a);”; 


(iii) in clause (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that the Central Government may, by order, 
direct the audit of any waqf at any time by an auditor appointed 
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, or by any 
officer designated by the Central Government for that purpose.”; 


(6) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(2A) On receipt of the report under sub-section (2), the Board 
shall publish the audit report in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government.”; 


(c) in sub-section (3), both the provisos shall be omitted. 


Amendment of 26. In section 48 of the principal Act,— 
section 48. 


(a) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(2A) The proceedings and orders of the Board under 
sub-section (/) shall be published in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government.”; 


(6) in sub-section (3), the words, brackets and figure “and the Tribunal 
shall not have any power to stay the operation of the order made by the 
Board under sub-section (/)’” shall be omitted; 


(c) sub-section (4) shall be omitted. 


Insertion of new 27. After section 50 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
section 50A. inserted, namely:— 

Disqualification “SOA. A person shall not be qualified for being appointed, or for 
of mutawalli. continuing as, a mutawalli, if he— 


(a) is less than twenty-one years of age; 
(b) is found to be a person of unsound mind; 
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; 


(d) has been convicted of any offence and sentenced to 
imprisonment for not less than two years; 


(e) has been held guilty of encroachment on any waqf property; 
(f) has been on a previous occasion— 


(i) removed as a mutawalli; or 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


(ii) removed by an order of a competent court or Tribunal 
from any position of trust either for mismanagement or for 
corruption.” 


28. In section 51 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/A), in the second Amendment of 
1 of 1894. proviso, for the words and figures “the Land Acquisition Act, 1894”, the words Becomes: 
and figures “the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 


Ney Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013” shall be substituted. 


29. In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), the words “and the Amendment of 
decision of the Tribunal on such appeal shall be final” shall be omitted. section 32, 


30. In section 52A of the principal Act,— Amendment of 
section 52A. 


(a) in sub-section (/),— 
(i) for the words “rigorous imprisonment”, the word 
“imprisonment” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in the proviso, for the words “be vested in the Board”, the 
words “be reverted back to the waqf” shall be substituted; 


(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted; 
(c) sub-section (4) shall be omitted. 
31. In section 55A of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the proviso, Amendment of 


the words “and the decision of the Tribunal thereon shall be final” shall be section 55A. 
omitted. 


32. In section 61 of the principal Act,— Amendment of 
: हि section 61. 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(7) clauses (e) and (f) shall be omitted; 
(ii) for the long line, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“he shall, unless he satisfies the court or the Tribunal that 
there was reasonable cause for his failure, be punishable 
with a fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand 
rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.”; 


(b) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(A) Ifa mutawalli fails to— 


(i) deliver possession of any waqf property, if ordered by 
the Board or the Tribunal; 


(ii) carry out the directions of the Collector or the Board; 


(iii) do any other act which he is lawfully required to do by 
or under this Act; 


(iv) provide statement of accounts under section 46; 
(v) upload the details of waqf under section 3B, 


he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months and also with a fine which shall not be less than twenty 
thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.”; 


(c) in sub-section (5), for the words and figures “the Code of Criminal 
2 of 1974. Procedure, 1973”, the words and figures “the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
46 of 2023. Sanhita, 2023” shall be substituted. 
33. In section 64 of the principal Act,— Amendment of 


५ हे section 64. 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


Amendment of 
section 65. 


Amendment of 
section 67. 


Amendment of 
section 69. 


Amendment of 
section 72. 


Amendment of 
section 73. 


Amendment of 
section 83. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[Part II— 


(i) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(g) has failed, without reasonable excuse, to maintain regular 
accounts for one year or has failed to submit, within one year, the 
yearly statement of accounts, as required by section 46; or”; 


(ii) after clause (A), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(J is a member of any association which has been declared 
unlawful under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.”; 


(0) in sub-section (4), the words “and the decision of the Tribunal on 
such appeal shall be final” shall be omitted. 


34. In section 65 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “As 
soon as possible”, the words “Within six months” shall be substituted. 


35. In section 67 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(4) Any person aggrieved by the order made under sub-section (2) 
may, within ninety days from the date of the order, appeal to the 
Tribunal.”’; 

(5) in sub-section (6), in the second proviso, the words “and the order 
made by the Tribunal in such appeal shall be final” shall be omitted. 


36. In section 69 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (3), the second proviso shall be omitted; 


(6) in sub-section (4), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that no such order shall be made under this 
sub-section unless a written notice inviting objections from the person 
likely to be affected and general public, in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.”. 


37. In section 72 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “seven per cent.”, the words 
“five per cent. subject to a maximum amount as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government” shall be substituted; 


(0) in sub-section (7), the words “and the decision of the Board thereon 
shall be final’ shall be omitted. 


38. In section 73 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), the words “and the 
decision of the Tribunal on such appeal shall be final” shall be omitted. 


39. In section 83 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that any other Tribunal may, by notification, be 
declared as the Tribunal for the purposes of this Act.”; 


(6) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that if there is no Tribunal or the Tribunal is not 
functioning, any aggrieved person may appeal to the High Court 
directly.”; 


37 of 1967. 


1 of 1894. 


30 of 2013. 


1 of 1894. 


30 of 2013. 


1 of 1894. 


30 of 2013. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


(c) for sub-section (4), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(4) Every Tribunal shall consist of three members— 


(a) one person, who is or has been a District Judge, who 
shall be the Chairman; 


(0) one person, who is or has been an officer equivalent in 
the rank of Joint Secretary to the State Government—member; 


(c) one person having knowledge of Muslim law and 
jurisprudence—member: 


Provided that a Tribunal established under this Act, prior to the 
commencement of the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall continue 
to function as such until the expiry of the term of office of the 
Chairman and the members thereof under this Act.”; 


(d) in sub-section (4A), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that tenure of the Chairman and the member shall be 
five years from the date of appointment or until they attain the age of 
sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.”; 


(e) in sub-section (7), the words “final and” shall be omitted; 


(f) for sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(9) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal, may 
appeal to the High Court within a period of ninety days from the date 
of receipt of the order of the Tribunal.”. 


40. In section 91 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words and figures “the Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894”, the words and figures “the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act, 2013” shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (3), for the words and figures “under section 31 or 
section 32 of the Land Acquisition Act, 18947, the words and figures “under 
section 77 or section 78 of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency 
in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013” shall be 
substituted; 


(c) in sub-section (4),— 

(i) for the words and figures “under section 31 or section 32 of 
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894”, the words and figures “under 
section 77 or section 78 of the Right to Fair Compensation and 


Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act, 2013” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words “shall be declared void if the Board”, the words 
“shall be kept in abeyance relating to portion of the property claimed 
by the Board, if the Board” shall be substituted; 


(iii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the Collector after hearing the parties 
concerned shall make the order within one month of the 
application of the Board.”. 


41. In section 100 of the principal Act, for the words “Survey 


Commissioner’, the word “Collector” shall be substituted. 


Amendment of 
section 91. 


Amendment of 
section 100. 


Amendment of 
section 101. 


Omission of 
section 104. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 107. 


Application of 
Act 36 of 1963. 


Omission of 
sections 108 and 
108A. 


Insertion of new 
section 108B. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
make rules. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


42. In section 101 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading and in sub-section (/), for the words 
“Survey Commissioner” occurring at both the places, the word “Collector” 
shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-sections (/) and (2), for the words and figures “section 21 
of the Indian Penal Code”, at both the places where they occur, the words, 
brackets and figures “clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023” shall be substituted. 


43. Section 104 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


44. For section 107 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“107. On and from the commencement of the Waqf (Amendment) 
Act, 2025, the Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to any proceedings in relation 
to any claim or interest pertaining to immovable property comprised in a waqf.”. 


45. Sections 108 and 108A of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


46. After section 108A as so omitted of the principal Act, the following 


section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“108B. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing powers, the Central Government may make rules for all or any of 
the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the waqf asset management system for the registration, 
accounts, audit and other details of waqf and Board under clause (ka), 
and the manner of payments for maintenance of widow, divorced 
woman and orphan under sub-clause (iv) of clause (r), of section 3; 


(6) any other particulars under clause (/) of sub-section (2) of 
section 3B; 


(c) the manner in which details of waqf to be uploaded under 
sub-section (2B) of section 5; 


(व) any other particulars under clause () of sub-section (3) of 
section 36; 


(e) the manner in which the Board shall maintain the register of 
auqaf under sub-section (/) of section 37; 


(f) such other particulars to be contained in the register of augaf 
under clause (f) of sub-section (/) of section 37; 


(g) form and manner and particulars of the statement of accounts 
under sub-section (2) of section 46; 


(A) the manner for publishing audit report under sub-section (2.4) 
of section 47; 


(7) the manner of publication of proceedings and orders of Board 
under sub-section (2A) of section 48; 


() any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 


45 of 1860. 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.”. 


47. In section 109 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— Amendment of 
section 109. 
(a) clause (ia) shall be omitted; 


(5) clause (iv) shall be omitted; 


(c) in clauses (via) and (vib), for the word and figures “section 31” at 
both the places where they occur, the word and figures “section 29” shall be 
substituted; 


(d) after clause (xviii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(xviiia) the manner of giving notice inviting objections under 
proviso to sub-section (4) of section 69;”. 


48. In section 110 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clauses (f) and (g) Amendment of 
shall be omitted. section 110. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 
KSHITIZ _ Distallysianed by 


KSHITIZ MOHAN. 


MGIPMRND—4GI(S4)—5-4-2025. MOHAN  2asissosar 


