रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल. (एन) 04/0007/2003---05 REGD. NO. D. L. 0५) 04/0007/2003—05 


Che Gazette of India 


OY. SH. -ST. We. -AT.-0622023-250445 
CG-DL-W-0622023-250445 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


साप्ताहिक 
WEEKLY 


a. 7] नई दिल्ली, नवम्बर 9—ATaFAT 25, 2023, शनिवार/कार्तिक 28--अग्रहायण 4, 945 
No. 7] NEW DELHI, NOVEMBER 9—NOVEMBER 25, 2023, SATURDAY/ KARTIKA 28-AGRAHAYANA 4, 945 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह पृथक संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके 
Separate Paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation 


भाग प---खण्ड ३----उप-खण्ड (iii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (iii) 


केन्द्रीय अधिकारियों (संघ राज्यक्षेत्र प्रशासनों को छोड़कर) द्वारा जारी किए गए साधारण आदेश और अधिसूचनाएं 


Orders and Notifications issued by the Central Authorities (Other than the Administrations of Union 
Territories) 
भारत निर्वाचन आयोग 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्‍ली, 22 नवम्बर, 2023 


आ.अ. 764.—are प्रतिनिधित्व अधिनियम, 7957 (954 का 43) की धारा 06 के अनुसरण में, भारत 
निर्वाचन आयोग वर्ष 2074 की निर्वाचन याचिका संख्या 06 में माननीय उच्च न्यायालय, इलाहाबाद के दिनांक 
42 सितम्बर, 2023 के निर्णय को Wager प्रकाशित करता है। 


[फा.सं. 82/उ0प्र0-लो0स0/06/2044(इला.)] 
आदेश से, 
पवन दीवान, सचिव 


734 GI/2023 (383) 


384 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : NOVEMBER 25, 2023/AGRAHAYANA 4, 945 [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 22nd November, 2023 


O.N. 6l.—In pursuance of section 06 of the Representation of the People Act, 95 (43 of 95), the 
Election Commission of India hereby publishes the Judgement dated !2" September, 2023 of the Hon’ble High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in Election Petition No. 06 of 20I4. 


[F.No. 82/UP-HP/06/204(Alld.)] 
By Order, 
PAWAN DIWAN, Secy. 


IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD 
Sse ese ek 
ELECTION PETITION NO. 6 OF 204 
(Under Section 80, 80-A, 8! of the Representation of People Act, 95) 
DISTRICT : BIJNOR 
Rajender Kumar, 
S/o Kewal Singh, 
R/o H.No. 62, Nai Basti, 
B-4, Bijnor, District Bijnor. 
4४% ०३४ ate Sins Mare उदरोई ak Election Petitioner 
Versus 
Kunwar Bhartendra Singh, 
S/o Raja Devendra Singh, 
R/o 07, Kila Sahanpur, Bijnor, 
District Bijnor. 
........ Respondent 
AFR 
Neutral Citation No. - 2023: AHC:76763 


HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD 
Court No. - 48 


ELECTION PETITION No. - 6 of 204 
Rajender Kumar en Petitioner 


Through : Sri Utkarsh Srivastava, Adv. 


Kunwar Bhartendra Singh ----, Respondent 
Through : K.R. Singh, Adv. 
sesesese sek 


[भाग II—ave 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 25, 2023/अग्रहायण 4, 945 385 


CORAM : HON'BLE SAURABH SHYAM SHAMSHERY, J. 


l. In present election petition this Court has passed following order on 29" August, 2023: 


“Order on Restoration Application No. 9 of 2023 


l. This is an application for recall of the order dated 04th August, 2023, whereby the election 
petition were dismissed for want of prosecution. 


2. Cause shown for absence of learned counsel for election- petitioner, is sufficient. The order 
dated 04th August, 2023 is recalled and the election petition is restored to their original number. 
This application is accordingly allowed. 


Order on Memo of Petition 


I. Heard Sri Utkarsh Srivastava, learned counsel for election petitioner and Sri K.R. Singh, 
Advocate for returned candidate. 


2. Learned counsel appearing for returned candidate-respondent at the outset submits that since this 
election petition is pending for last more than nine years and in between relevant period of 
returned candidate has already been over and even thereafter the term of next Lok Sabha is likely 
to be over within few months, therefore, there are certain judgments of Supreme Court as well 
as this Court that at this stage entire exercise would be academic. He further submits that since 
petitioner has challenged rejection of his nomination form on ground being improper and illegal, 

therefore, it would be a futile exercise to hear the election petition on merit. Learned counsel has 
placed reliance on Supreme Court’s judgments in Loknath Padhan vs. Birendra Kumar Sahu, AIR 
49724 SC 505; Kashi Nath Mishra vs. Vikramadiya Pandey and others (996) 9 SCC 735 as well 
as this Court’s judgment in Chandra Mohan Shukla vs. Anil Dhirubhai Ambani and others, 

2070079) ADJ 63 (LB) and Prempal Singh vs. Satya Pal Singh Baghel and others, (2020) 0 
Supreme (All) 658. 


3. Learned counsel for election petitioner submits that there are specific averments in election 
petition that nomination form submitted by returned candidate was a forged document, which 
contains false declaration also, therefore, it would be an offence under Section 725-4 of 
Representation of People Act, /957 and in case contention of election petitioner found true, the 
legal consequence would fall which shall include adverse effect on benefit granted to returned 
candidate so far as pension etc. are concerned and punitive consequence under Article /04 of the 
Constitution would also fall. He submits that judgments cited by learned counsel for returned 
candidate are distinguishable on facts of the case. Learned counsel for petitioner has read out the 
averments made in election petition specifically para बज as well as reasons given by Returning 
Officer while accepting nomination form of returned candidate. 


, 


4. Putup on I2th September, 2023 for orders on above issue.’ 
2. The issue raised before this Court is, whether due to efflux of time this election petition, which is arising out of a 
dispute of General Election-204, when not only tenure of that Lok Sabha was already over in 209 but tenure of 
present Lok Sabha is about to be over in 2024, i.e. within few months, has become infructuous or if survives, it would 
only for an academic purpose? 


3. In order to appreciate the rival submissions on above referred issue, few facts which are not in dispute are 
necessary to refer hereinafter. 


4. The Election Petitioner-Rajender Kumar, an active member of a National Political Party (Bhartiya Janta Party) 
for last few decades, was set up as a candidate from 04-Bijnor Parliamentary Constituency of District Bijnor, Uttar 
Pradesh for Parliamentary Election of year 20!4. He accordingly submitted his Nomination Form alongwith party 
symbol accompanied by Form A and Form B in accordance with provisions of Election Symbols (Reservation and 
Allotment) Order, 968. 


5. It appears that Returned Candidate was later on set up as a candidate for above referred Parliamentary 
Constituency and he also submitted Nomination Form alongwith all requisite documents. 


6. The Election-Petitioner filed objections to Nomination Form submitted by Returned Candidate being set up by 
same National Political Party. However, the Returning Officer vide order dated 24" March, 204 rejected objections 
of Election-Petitioner and Nomination Form of Returned Candidate was accepted. 


7. Rest is history, since Respondent-Kunwar Bhartendra Singh, was declared a Returned Candidate by defeating 
his nearest rival by more than 2.5 lacs votes and he in capacity of Member of Parliament from 04-Bijnor 
Parliamentary Constituency, has participated in proceedings of Parliament as well as undertaken other responsibilities 
as and when entrusted upon him. 


386 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : NOVEMBER 25, 2023/AGRAHAYANA 4, 945 [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


8. Tenure of 6 Lok Sabha came to an end in 209 and thereafter fresh election was conducted and respondent has 
again participated as a candidate of said National Political Party, however, this time he lost. It is also not in dispute 
that tenure of current Lok Sabha ([77 Lok Sabha) is likely to conclude within few months. 


9. During arguments the Court has interacted with Election-Petitioner and Returned Candidate and found that there 
are no personal grudges between them, rather they have supported each other during their political career. The 
Election-Petitioner or his family members were also supported asand when they were set up for any other election by 
same National Political Party and they are still good political friends. 


0. As referred above the Election-Petitioner is mainly aggrieved that his Nomination Form submitted being a duly 
set up candidate by said National Political Party was erroneously rejected by the Returning Officer as well as there 
was no reason for National Political Party to set up respondent/Returned Candidate as it’s candidate when he was 
already set up as candidate and this act has dented his public image, not only in his political constituiency but 
otherwise also. 


Il. Sri Utkarsh Srivastava, learned counsel for Election-Petitioner, has urged that cause still survives and even today 
legal consequence of this Election-Petition would fall. He also submitted that the judgments relied upon by Returned 
Candidate are distinguishable on facts. An application under Order VII Rule |! C.P.C. filed by Returned Candidate 
was dismissed on 08.04.2022 and an Special Leave Petition against the order was filed before Supreme Court as well 
as this Court has framed following three issues on 3.04.2022: 


“(i) Whether the nomination paper of the election petitioner was improperly rejected by the Returning 
Officer in view of Section 7907०) of the Representation of People Act, /957 ? 


(ii) Whether the Returning Officer had committed illegality in accepting the nomination paper of 
the Returned candidate and by improper acceptance of the nomination paper of the Returned 
candidate, the result of the election, in so far as it concerns the Returned candidate has been 
materially affected ? 


(iii) To what relief, if any, is the election petitioner entitled to ?” 


i2. Per contra, Sri K.R. Singh, learned counsel appearing for Returned Candidate/ sole respondent, on the strength of 
judgments cited, has submitted that it would be only a futile exercise to proceed to decide the present election 
petition, which may be curtailed at this stage. 


3. In order to consider the above referred submissions, the Court proceed to consider the judgments cited before this 
Court. 


4. Supreme Court in Kashi Nath Mishra vs. Vikramaditya Pandey and others (998) 8 SCC 735 by a short order 
dismissed an election petition on the ground that term of assembly has expired by efflux of time and thereafter another 
election was also held and another assembly was constituted. For reference the said order is reproduced hereinafter: 


“I. This appeal arises from Election Petition No. 4 of 7997 filed under Section 64 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 79547, The appellant had challenged the election of the second 
respondent to the U.P. Legislative Assembly from the 227 Ballia Assembly Constituency in 
District Ballia. The election petition was dismissed. The term of the Assembly has expired by 
efflux of time; thereafter, another election has been held and another Assembly constituted. 


2. Under these circumstances, the appeal having become infructuous is dismissed. No costs.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 


5. Next judgment is in Loknath Padhan vs. Birendra Kumar Sahu, AIR 974 SC 505 wherein Supreme Court has 
held as under: 


“6. Weare, therefore, of the view that, the Orissa Legislative Assembly being dissolved during the 
pendency of this appeal, it is now wholly academic to consider whether the respondent was 
disqualified under Section 9A at the date of nomination and since that is the only ground on which 
election of the respondent is challenged, we think it would be futile to hear this appeal on merits. We 
accordingly dismiss the appeal with no orders as to costs all throughout.” (Emphasis supplied) 


6. A Coordinate Bench of this Court in Chandra Mohan Shukla vs. Anil Dhirubhai Ambani and others, 200(0) 
ADJ 63 (LB) has held that: 


“22. Keeping in view the submission made by learned counsel for the parties it appears that 
whenever in a petition, which includes election petition, the relief claimed with regard to main issue 
involved becomes redundant or infructuous then for other relief courts may exercise its discretion and 
may not proceed further in case right of the plaintiff or dependent satisfied or no grievance remained 
pending against defendant or respondents because of the change circumstances. Court may use its 


[भाग II—ave 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 25, 2023/अग्रहायण 4, 945 387 


discretion to drop the proceeding and may not proceed further in a matter even if, some relief of 
academic nature stand survive. In the present case, admittedly the term of respondent no. I to 4 
expired and vacancy has been filled up by fresh election accordingly even if the impugned 
provision is struck down or the case of Kuldip Nayar (supra) is distinguished because of larger 
bench neither the petitioner will have any gain nor respondent no. I to 4 will suffer from any loss like 
loss of office as the member of Rajya Sabha. The things remain for adjudication would be the 
validity of impugned provision after taking into account the judgement of Kuldip Nayar(supra). 
Observation made by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Rajeev Gandhi that time of the court is 
precious one and academic exercise is not warranted unless still some relief may be granted to 
petitioner or the appellant may be followed. 


23. In view of above, there appears to be no good ground to proceed further in the matter to make 
academic exercise with regard to impugned provision. I leave the question under Relief no. I open for 
adjudication in case warranted in some other case if raised by a person. 


24. The election petition does not survive. Dismissed keeping the issue open for adjudication in some 
other case.” (Emphasis supplied) 


7. Another Coordinate Bench of this Court in Prempal Singh vs. Satya Pal Singh Baghel (2020) 0 Supreme (All) 


658 has held that: 


“23. In P.H. Pandian vs. P. Veldurai and another (203) /4 SCC 685), an appeal under Section //6-4 
of the Representation of the People Act, 7957 was filed questioning the judgment and order made 
in the election petition in ELP.No.] of /996 on 29.72./999, In this case, the Apex Court has 
observed that though fresh elections have since been held to Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly and 
to an extent this appeal has been rendered infructuous, the manner in which the election petition 
was dealt with by the High Court causes us concern and that necessitates our making reference to 
some salient facts. Ultimately, the Apex Court has observed that it is a settled practice of 
Supreme Court not to pronounce upon matters which are only of an academic interest. Once 
the charge of corrupt practice fails, rest of the appeal would be rendered infructuous because 
fresh elections have already taken place and the old Assembly is no longer in existence. Even if 
the appellant was to succeed on the issue that the returned candidate had a subsisting contract 
with the Panchayat Union and the State Government and was, therefore, disqualified to be chosen for 
the seat under Section 9-4 of the Representation of the People Act, 7957, it would only be of an 
academic interest. 


24.Whenever in a petition, which includes election petition, the relief claimed with regard to main 
issue involved becomes redundant or infructuous then for other relief courts may exercise its 
discretion and may not proceed further in case right of the plaintiff or dependent satisfied or no 
grievance remained pending against defendant or respondents because of the change of circumstances. 
The court may use its discretion to drop the proceeding and may not proceed further in a matter 
even if, some relief of academic nature stand survive. 


25.In the present case, admittedly the respondent 70.4 submitted his resignation on 4.6.2079 from 
the Tundla Constituency and the same has been accepted by the competent authority on the same 
date. The notification was issued on 4.6.2079 to give effect to the said resignation since 4.6.2049 
and thus the vacancy of Member of Legislative Assembly for Tundla Constituency has arisen. The 
Secretariat of Legislative Assembly, U.P has also notified the said vacancy to the Election 
Commission of India for conducting the bye-election for filling up the said post and therefore, the 
relief no.l, as claimed by the petitioner, has become infructuous. It is consistent view of Hon'ble 
Supreme Court that time of the court is precious one and academic exercise is not warranted unless 
still some relief may be granted to petitioner or the appellant may be followed. No allegations are 
levelled in the election petitions on corrupt practice and therefore, this Court finds that there is no 
impediment or obstacle in dismissing this petition as the prayer itself has become infrucutous. 


26.In view of the aforesaid discussion and in the light of the aforesaid decisions of Apex Court, I 
am of the considered view that nothing further survives in this matter. The aforesaid applications 
preferred by the respondent #0. 4 for dismissing the Election Petition 7१०5. /2 of 2077 and ।3 of 2077 as 
infructuous, are allowed.” (Emphasis supplied) 


8. In the present election petition the relief sought by Election-Petitioner was to declare the result of Returned 
Candidate to be null and void and set aside the order dated 24.03.20l4 whereby objections filed by petitioner were 
rejected and Nomination Form of Returned Candidate was accepted. No consequential relief was sought, i.e., for fresh 


election. 


368 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : NOVEMBER 25, 2023/AGRAHAYANA 4, 945 [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


9. I have carefully perused the reasons given by Returning Officer while rejecting Nomination Form of Election- 
Petitioner and for reference, relevant part of it is extracted as below: 


“A revised notice in Form B, in favour of Kunwar Bhartendra Singh has been given by Bhartiya Janata Party. 


Kunwar Bhartendra Singh has already made a declaration in his nomination paper that he has been set up by the Bhartiya 
Janta Party. 


Undersigned is satisfied about the genuineness of the Revised Form B. Hence, the nomination paper filed by the 
present candidate declaring himself to be a candidate set up by the Bhartiya Janta Party stands rejected.” 


20. Aforesaid reasons given by Returning Officer were only based on subsequent Form B submitted by Returned 
Candidate. Similarly the objections filed on behalf of Election-Petitioner which was rejected by Returning Officer on 
the same day, i.e., 24.03.20l4 though referred that Returning Officer is barred from accepting any other form of 
communication regarding rescinding of notice as valid, except from notice in Form B submitted by prescribed time 
and for that he has placed reliance on Compendium of Instructions and as such affidavit sworn by authorised person 
of the party in favour of revised candidate has limited legal standing from the point of nominations. Returning Officer 
further held that it cannot be denied that still it holds evidentiary value to support the contents of revised Form B 
submitted by Returned Candidate, i.e., the respondent herein, on the day of nomination, particularly in the face of 
doubts being expressed by the objectors on the genuineness of the revised Form B. Returning Officer further held that 
he cannot ignore the evidentiary value of the said affidavit, in summary inquiry, particularly, to prima facie prove the 
genuineness of revised Form B submitted by Returned Candidate and thus he accepted the Nomination Form of 
revised candidate. 


2l. The above referred reasoning does not contain any element of fraud or forgery in submitting Nomination Form 
by the Election-Petitioner being set up a candidate by said National Political Party. Returning Officer has rather given 
more evidentiary value to the affidavit as well as revised Form B submitted by the Returned Candidate that his form 
was also genuine. The issue, whether a political party has power or not to set up another candidate and procedure 
thereof would be an academic question. 


22. Learned counsel for Election-Petitioner has argued that legal consequence would fall if this election petition is 
allowed but in my considered opinion this argument has no legal basis and for that I have carefully perused Section 
25A of Representation of People Act, 95 (hereinafter referred to as “Act, /9577 which prescribes penalty for 
filing false affidavit. In this regard a brief reference of paragraphs no. 56, 57, 58 and 59 of election petition would be 
relevant to the extent that the contents thereof do not effectively alleged that it was a case of false affidavit rather a 
case was set up that to issue a subsequent Form B was beyond power, therefore, according to my considered view no 
legal consequence would fall on Returned Candidate under Section 25A of Act, 95 if this election petition is 
allowed. 


23. [have also carefully perused Article l04 of the Constitution, which provides penalty for sitting and voting before 
making oath or affirmation under Article 99 or when not qualified or when disqualified. However, according to my 
considered opinion the facts of present case do not fall under the said provision since Returned Candidate has 
subscribed an oath or affirmation to set up or set out under third schedule after duly elected in election and there was 
no allegation that election was not conducted properly. The only dispute was that whether Nomination Form of 
Election- Petitioner was rejected wrongly or not and Nomination Form of Returned Candidate was rightly accepted or 
not as evident from issues framed in this election petition on 3.04.2022. Subsequent proceedings or process of 
election have not been disputed. Therefore, no legal consequence would fall on the ground also even this election 
petition is allowed. 


24. In view of above discussion, the above referred judgments become relevant wherein a consistent view has been 
taken that due to efflux of time especially when subsequent election of Lok Sabha was also held, to adjudicate election 
petition at this stage would be a futile exercise and it would only for academic purpose. 


25. At this stage para 4 of the judgment passed by Supreme Court in Dhartipakar Madanlal Agarwal vs. Rajiv 
Gandhi: (987) Supp. SCC 93, would be relevant to extract hereinafter: 

“4. The election under challenge relates to /967, its term expired in /964 on the dissolution of the Lok 

Sabha, there- after another general election was held in December, 7/964 and the respondent was 

again elected from 25th Amethi Constituency to the Lok Sabha. The validity of the election held in 

4964 was questioned by means of two separate election petitions and both the petitions have been 

dismissed. The validity of respondent's election has been upheld in Azhar Hussain v. Rajiv Gandhi, AIR 

4966 SC I253 and Bhagwati Prasad v. Rajiv Gandhi, (/966) 4 SCC 78. Since the impugned election 

relates to the Lok Sabha which was dissolved in /9684 the respondent's election cannot be set aside 

in the present proceedings even if the election petition is ultimately allowed on trial as the 

respondent is a continuing member of the Lok Sabha not on the basis of the impugned election held 

in 4964 but on the basis of his subsequent election in /964, Even if we allow the appeal and remit 


[भाग II—ave 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 25, 2023/अग्रहायण 4, 945 389 


the case to the High Court the respondent's election cannot be set aside after trial of the election 
petition as the relief for setting aside the election has been rendered infructuous by lapse of time. In 
this view grounds raised in the petition for setting aside the election of the respondent have been 
rendered academic. Court should not undertake to decide an issue unless it is a living issue between 
the parties. If an issue is purely academic in that its decision one way or the other would have no 
impact on the position of the par- ties, it would be waste of public time to engage itself in deciding it. 
Lord Viscount Simon in his speech in the House of Lords in Sun Life Assurance Company of 
Canada v. Jervis, (7944) AC I] observed: 

"I do not think that it would be a proper exercise of the Authority which this House possesses to 
hear appeals if it occupies time in this case in deciding an academic question, the answer to which 
cannot affect the respondent in any way. It is an essential quality of an appeal fit to be disposed of 
by this House that there should exist between the parties a matter in actual controversy which the 
House undertakes to decide as a living issue." 

These observations are relevant in exercising the appellate jurisdiction of this Court.” (Emphasis 
supplied) 
26. The outcome of above discussion is that this election petition does not survive since it would be a futile exercise to 
adjudicate the same at this stage after not only term of Lok Sabha 204-20i9 was over but term of subsequent Lok 
Sabha 209-2024 is likely to be over within few months. 


27. Before parting with judgment, it would be necessary to observe that delay in deciding election petition would 
result sometimes in loss of a legal battle of an Election-Petitioner. However, for that Election-Petitioner as well as 
the Court has to be more careful and has to take endeavor to decide election petition at the earliest so that it may not 
render infructuous due to efflux of time. However, in present case, even Election-Petitioner appears to be slow in 
pursuing the election petition, as evident from order sheet. 


28. As referred above, I have opportunity to have conversation with Election-Petitioner and Returned Candidate and 
as referred earlier the relations between both parties are cordial so much as that they still visit each other’s house and 
also support each other as and when required in elections or otherwise. It also appears that said National Political 
Party has still confidence on both the parties. 


29. The Court finds that Election-Petitioner is more conscious of his public image which is not an incorrect 
approach since a socially and politically active person who engaged with people of his area always wants to carry a 
good public image and good fan following. A political person is normally image conscious since it always carry 
with him. It appears that Election-Petitioner is carrying an impression that since his Nomination Form was rejected 
by Returning Officer, it amounts to be a dent on his public image that he has undertaken something illegal or there 
was something fishy in his Nomination Form. However, as referred above, from bare perusal of order passed by the 
Returning Officer, the impression does not appear to be true. Therefore, the impression of Election-Petitioner is 
baseless which is also supported and evident by subsequent events, when both parties have admitted that said 
National Political Party has still confidence on Election- Petitioner and his family members and party has set up his 
family members in other elections as its candidate. 


30 It is an old saying that in a political life, there are no permanent enemies or friends. Both Election-Petitioner and 
Returned Candidate have declared themselves to be a dedicated workers of the said National Political Party and it 
also appears that this election petition was filed only to clear a cloud of doubt which might have created by rejection 
of Nomination Form of Election-Petitioner. As referred above, this was only a misconception of the Election- 
Petitioner. 

3. In the end this order is concluded by reproducing a saying of an unknown author, “Great rivalries don't have to be 
built on hatred. They are built on respect, on a respect for excellence”. 


32. इस स्तर पर निम्न संस्कृत सुभाषितानि का उल्लेख करना भी उचित रहेगा: 
“चन्दनं शीतलं लोके, चन्दनादपि चन्द्रमा:। 
चन्द्रचन्दनयोर्मध्ये शीतला साधु संगति:।।” 
(इस दुनिया में चन्दन को सबसे अधिक शीतल माना जाता है, पर चन्द्रमा चन्दन से भी शीतल 
होता है, लेकिन एक अच्छा मित्र चन्द्रमा और चन्दन दोनों से शीतल होता है) 


33.With aforesaid observations, this election petition stands dismissed. 


sd/- 
SAURABH SHYAM SHAMSHERY, J. 
Order Date :-2.09.2023 
AK 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-l0064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-0054. 


MANOJ KUMAR it 
VERMA 3 


