रजिस्ट्री सं" डी" Were 


(एन)04/0007/2003----23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


Wed s, Vista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-20092023-248832 
CG-DL-E-20092023-248832 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग 1-- खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


संग 24) नई दिल्‍ली, मंगलवार, सितम्बर 19, 2023/ भाद्रपद 28, 1945 (शक) 
No. 24] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 19, 2023/BHADRA 28, 1945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में first पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 19th September, 2023:— 


Butt No, 124 oF 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-eighth Short title and 
Amendment) Act, 2023. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. Inarticle 239AA of the Constitution, in clause (2), after sub-clause (9), the following Amendment of 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:— article 239AA. 


“(ba) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi. 


(bb) As nearly as may be, one-third of the seats reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall be 
reserved for women. 


(bc) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats to be filled by 
direct election in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
(including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes) 
shall be reserved for women in such manner as Parliament may by law determine.”. 


Insertion of new 
article 330A. 


Reservation of 
seats for 
women in the 
House of the 
People. 


Insertion of new 
article 332A. 


Reservation of 
seats for women 
in the 
Legislative 
Assemblies of 
the States. 


Insertion of new 
article 334A. 


Reservation of 
seats for women 
take effect. 


Amendment not 
to affect 
reservation in the 
House of the 
People, the 
Legislative 
Assembly of a 
State or the 
Legislative 
Assembly of the 
National Capital 
Territory of Delhi. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


3. After article 330 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:— 


“330A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the House of the People. 


(2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (2) 
of article 330 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes. 


(3) As nearly as may be, one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women 


belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats 


to be filled by direct election to the House of the People shall be reserved for women.”. 


4. After article 332 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely: — 


“332A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of 
every State. 


(2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats reserved under 
clause (3) of article 332 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes. 


(3) As nearly as may be, one-third (including the number of seats reserved for 
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) of the total number 
of seats to be filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of every State shall 
be reserved for women.”. 


5. After article 334 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:— 


“334A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provision of this Part or 
Part VIII, the provisions of the Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for 
women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the 
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall come into effect 
after an exercise of delimitation is undertaken for this purpose after the relevant 
figures for the first census taken after commencement of the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2023 have been published and 
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of fifteen years from such 
commencement. 


(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 239AA, 330A and 332A, seats reserved 
for women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the 
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall continue till such 
date as the Parliament may by law determine. 


(3) Rotation of seats reserved for women in the House of the People, the 
Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi shall take effect after each subsequent exercise of delimitation as 
the Parliament may by law determine. 


(4) Nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House of the 

People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National 

Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the then existing House of the 

People, Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National 

Capital Territory of Delhi.”. 

6. The amendments made to the Constitution by the Constitution (One Hundred and 
Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2023 shall not affect any representation in the House of 
the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the House of the People, the Legislative 
Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, 
as the case may be, in existence at the commencement of the said Act. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


After completing 75 years of Independence, the nation has begun its journey into 
Amritkal with a goal of becoming ‘Vikasit Bharat’ by 2047. Realisation of this goal will 
require contribution of all sections of society in the spirit of ‘Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, 
Sabka Vishwas, Sabka Prayas’. The role of women, constituting a half of the population, is 
extremely important in realisation of this goal. 


2. Government has taken a number of steps to bring ‘Nari Shakti’ to the forefront 
through women’s empowerment and women led development resulting in substantial 
improvement in financial independence of women and availability of equal access to education 
and health. Government has also emphasised ‘Ease of Living’, especially of women, through 
various initiatives including Ujjawala Yojana, access to toilets under Swachh Bharat Mission, 
financial inclusion through the Mudra Yojna, etc. However, true empowerment of women 
will require greater participation of women in the decision making process as they bring 
different perspectives and enrich the quality of legislative debates and decision-making. 


3. While women participate substantively in the Panchayat Raj institutions and 
municipal bodies, their representation in the State Legislatures as well as in Parliament is 
still limited, Providing for higher representation of women at State and National level has 
also been a long pending demand. There have been several efforts to introduce women’s 
reservation in the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies. The last such attempt was 
made in 2010, when the Rajya Sabha had passed a Bill for women’s reservation, but the same 
could not be passed in the Lok Sabha. 


4. In order to enable greater participation of women as public representative in policy 
making at State and National level, it is decided to introduce a fresh legislation for 
Constitutional amendment to provide for, as nearly as may be, one-third of total seats in the 
House of the People, the legislative assembly of every State and the Legislative Assembly 
of the National Capital Territory of Delhi to be reserved for women. 


5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New Delhi; ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL. 
The 18th September, 2023. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY _ [Part II— Sec. 2] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any expenditure, either recurring or 
non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 


AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. Kshitiz 


Mohan 


MGIPMRND—344GI(S3)—19-9-2023. 


