रजिस्ट्री ee Ge एल० -(एन)04/0007/2003--26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


JAN का रालपनतर 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-29072026-274898 
CG-DL-E-29072026-274898 
असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


a 6] नई दिल्‍ली, मंगलवार, जुलाई 28, 2026/श्रावण 6, 948 (शक) 
No. 6] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, JULY 28, 2026/SRAVANA 6, 948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में ft पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


RAJYA SABHA 


The following Bill has been introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 28th July 2026:— 


BILL No. LXXII OF 2026 


A Bill further to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 
2006. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 

l. (4) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development (Amendment) Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 


Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this 
Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act, 
shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Amendment of 
section 7. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 8. 


Memorandum of 
micro, small and 
medium 
enterprises. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


2. In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2,— 


(i) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(da) “Development Commissioner” means the administrative 
head of the office of Development Commissioner of the Government of 
India in the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises;’; 


(ii) in clause (g), the words, brackets, figures and letters “sub-clause (iii) 
of clause (a) or sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) of” shall be omitted; 


(iii) in clause (h), the words, brackets, figures and letters “sub-clause (7) 
of clause (a) or sub-clause (2) of clause (b) of” shall be omitted; 


(iv) in clause (7), after the word “Gazette”, the words ‘and the expression 
“notify” shall be construed accordingly’ shall be inserted; 


(v) in clause (0), the words, brackets, figures and letters “sub-clause (ii) 
of clause (a) or sub-clause (7) of clause (b) of” shall be omitted. 


3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (0), for the 
words “one officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of 
India”, the words “the Development Commissioner” shall be substituted. 


4. In section 7 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(Z) Notwithstanding anything contained in section | 3 of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, [95], the Central Government may, by 
notification, classify the enterprises as micro, small and medium enterprises, 
having regard to the provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5), and subject to such 
limits as it may consider necessary as to both of the following criteria, 
namely :— 


(a) investment in plant and machinery or equipment; and 
(b) turnover. 


Explanation |.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that in 
calculating the investment in plant and machinery, the cost of pollution 
control, research and development, industrial safety devices and such other 
items as may be specified, by notification, shall be excluded. 


Explanation 2.—It is clarified that the provisions of section 29B of the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 95 shall be applicable to the 
enterprises specified in this sub-section.”. 


5. For section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely :— 


“8. (/) The Central Government shall notify a national digital platform 
for free and voluntary filing of memorandum for registration of micro, small 
and medium enterprises, to empower and enable them to avail the benefits 
from the Central Government under the provisions of this Act in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(2) The State Government may notify a State digital platform for free 
and voluntary filing of memorandum for registration of micro, small and 
medium enterprises in the State, to avail the applicable benefits from the State 
Government in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government. 


27 of 2006. 


65 of 95]. 


65 of 95. 


32 of 2023. 


32 of 2023. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


Explanation.—F or the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified that 
the State Government may also provide to micro, small and medium 
enterprises registered under sub-section (/), applicable benefits under their 
Schemes.”. 


6. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words, brackets 


and figure “sub-section (/) of” shall be omitted. 


7. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 


namely :— 


‘I5A. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other 
law for the time being in force, every Central Public Sector Enterprise shall, 
in respect of procurement of goods or services from micro, small and medium 
enterprises, route the settlement of invoices through a Trade Receivables 
Discounting System platform, authorised by the Reserve Bank, in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government may, by notification, specify any 
other authority, body, or entity other than Central Public Sector 
Enterprise, in respect of procurement of goods or services from micro, small 
and medium enterprises, who shall thereafter route the settlement of invoices 
as provided for in sub-section (/), in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


(3) The State Government may, by notification, specify such State 
Public Sector Enterprise, any other authority, body, or entity, in respect of 
procurement of goods or services from micro, small and medium 
enterprises, who shall thereafter route the settlement of invoices 
as provided for in sub-section (/), in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government. 


Explanation —F or the purposes of this section, the expression “Trade 
Receivables Discounting System” means an electronic platform for 
facilitating the financing or discounting of trade receivables of micro, small 
and medium enterprises in accordance with the guidelines issued by the 
Reserve Bank from time to time.’. 


8. In section 8 of the principal Act (as substituted by section 62 read with the 


Seventh Schedule of the Mediation Act, 2023),— 


(a) in sub-section (3), after the words and figures “the Mediation 
Act, 2023”, the words, figures, brackets and letter “except the time-limit for 
completion of mediation provided under section 8 of that Act, and for the 
purposes of this Act, such time-limit shall be as per sub-section (34)” shall be 
inserted; 


(6) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(3A) The Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council or 
mediation service provider, as the case may be, shall complete the 
mediation within a period of ninety days from the date fixed for first 
appearance.”; 


(c) in sub-section (4), after the words “the Council shall”, the words 
“within a period of thirty days from the date of termination of mediation” shall 
be inserted; 


Amendment of 
section |4. 


Insertion of new 
section I5A. 


Mandatory 
settlement of 
receivables 
through Trade 
Receivables 
Discounting 
System. 


Amendment of 
section 8. 


Insertion of new 
section I8A. 


Enforcement of 
mediated 
settlement 
agreements and 
arbitral awards. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 9. 


Application for 
setting aside 
decree, award or 
mediated 
settlement 
agreement. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(d) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council 
or any institution or centre providing alternative dispute resolution 
services, as the case may be, shall make the award within a period of 
ninety days from the date of completion of pleadings.”; 


(e) for sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council 
or mediation service provider or any institution or centre providing 
alternative dispute resolution services shall have jurisdiction to act as a 
mediator or arbitrator under this section in a dispute between the 
supplier, whose official address as per the registration made under 
section 8, is located within its jurisdiction and a buyer located anywhere 
in India. 


(6) The Central Government may, by notification, establish an 
online mechanism for conducting online mediation or arbitration 
through audio-video and other electronic means, under this section. 


(7) The procedure and manner of online mechanism referred to in 
sub-section (6) shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this Act, the expression 
“audio-video and other electronic means” shall include use of any 
communication device for video conferencing, filing of pleadings, 
communication, recording of evidence, transmission of electronic 
communication, for the purposes of conduct of arbitral proceedings and 
any other matters incidental thereto.’. 


9. After section 8 of the principal Act (as substituted by section 62 read with 


the Seventh Schedule of the Mediation Act, 2023), the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“|84. (/) The mediated settlement agreement or arbitral award made by 
the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council itself or mediation 
service provider or any institution or centre providing alternative dispute 
resolution services to which a reference is made under section 8, may be 
recovered as an arrear of land revenue by the State Government through 
District Collector or Deputy Commissioner or any such authority notified by 
the State in this behalf, where the assets of the buyer is located. 


(2) The amount determined by the mediated settlement agreement or 
arbitral award shall constitute a valid and legally enforceable debt and is 
liable to be recognised under the provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 206.”. 


0. For section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


#]9, (7) No application for setting aside any decree, award, other order 
or mediated settlement agreement made under section I8 shall be entertained 
by any court unless the applicant (not being a supplier) has mandatorily 
deposited with it seventy-five per cent. of the amount in terms of the award or 
the mediated settlement agreement, as the case may be. 


32 of 2023. 


3] of 20I6. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(2) Pending disposal of the application to set aside the decree, award, 
other order or mediated settlement agreement, as the case may be, the court 
shall order that such percentage of the amount deposited shall be paid to the 
supplier, as it considers reasonable under the circumstances of the case: 


Provided that if the application has been pending for more than six months, 
the court shall order to pay to the supplier a sum equivalent to at least fifty per 
cent. of the amount awarded from the amount deposited by the applicant. 


(3) The application under sub-section (/) shall be filed within the 
jurisdiction of the court where official address of the supplier is located as 
referred to in section 8.”. 


ll. For section 20 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“20. (7) The State Government shall, by notification, establish adequate 
number of Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council, in addition to the 
existing Council, at such places, exercising such jurisdiction, and for such 
areas, as may be specified in that notification. 


(2) The Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council shall meet on 
regular basis for timely resolution of references made under section 8, at such 
intervals and in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed by the 
State Government. 


(3) The State Government may provide adequate infrastructure and 
resources, including physical infrastructure, digital systems and trained 
manpower, as may be necessary for effective and timely disposal of 
references, to the Council established under this section.”. 


i2. For section 2l of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“2. (7) The Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council shall 
consist of not less than three but not more than five members. 


(2) Each Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council constituted 
by the State Government shall include the following members, namely:— 


(a) an officer not below the rank of Joint Director as the 
Chairperson of the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation 
Council; and 


(6) one or more office-bearers or representatives of associations of 
micro or small industry or enterprises; and 


(c) at least one member from the field of law. 


(3) Subject to the provisions of sub- sections (/) and (2), the composition 
of the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council, the manner of filling 
vacancies of its members and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of 
their functions by the members shall be such, as may be prescribed by the State 
Government.”. 


3. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“22A. (/) Every Central Public Sector Enterprise or any other authority, 
body or entity, notified by the Central Government, shall disclose the details 
of invoices of micro, small and medium enterprises routed and settled 
through Trade Receivables Discounting System platform as referred to in 
sub-sections (/) and (2) of section 5A, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 20. 
Establishment of 
Micro and Small 
Enterprises 
Facilitation 
Council. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 2. 
Composition of 
Micro and Small 
Enterprises 
Facilitation 
Council. 


Insertion of new 
section 22A. 


Reporting of 
compliance. 


Substitution of 
new sections 27 
and 27A for 
section 27. 


Penalty for 
contravention of 
section 8 or 
section 22 or 
section 26. 


Adjudication of 
penalties. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(2) Every State Public Sector Enterprise or any other authority, body, or 
entity, notified by the State Government, shall disclose the details of invoices 
of micro, small and medium enterprises routed and settled through Trade 
Receivables Discounting System platform as referred to in sub-section (3) of 
section I5A, in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government.”. 


4. For section 27 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“27. (7) Whoever wilfully furnishes false information in the 
memorandum of registration filed under section 8 or fails to comply with the 
provisions of sub-section (2) of section 26 shall be— 


(a) warned at the first instance of non-compliance; 


(b) liable to penalty which shall not be less than one thousand 
rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees in case of second 
or subsequent instances of non-compliance. 


(2) Where a buyer contravenes the provisions of section 22, he shall be— 
(a) warned at the first instance of non-compliance; 


(b) liable to penalty which shall not be less than ten thousand 
rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees in case of second 
contravention; 


(c) punishable with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand 
rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees in case of third or 
subsequent contravention. 


(3) The penalties provided under this section shall be increased by 
ten per cent. of minimum amount of penalty provided therefor, after the expiry 
of every three years from the date of commencement of the Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises Development (Amendment) Act, 2026, as may be 
notified by the Central Government. 


27A. (/) For the purposes of adjudging the penalties under section 27, 
the Central Government shall appoint the Development Commissioner to be 
an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and imposing penalty in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government: 


Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed without giving the person 
concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 


(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the adjudicating officer under 
sub-section (/) may prefer an appeal to the Secretary to the Government of 
India in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government 
having administrative control of micro, small and medium enterprises, within 
a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such order in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period of thirty 
days if the appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had sufficient 
cause for not preferring the appeal within that period. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the party to the appeal an 
opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it may think fit. 


(5) An appeal under sub-section (2) shall be disposed of within a period 
of sixty days from the date of filing. 


(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer under sub-section (/) 
or by an order of the appellate authority under sub-section (4), is not deposited, 
the amount shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.”. 


5. In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(7) after clause (6), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ba) the form and manner to file memorandum for registration of 
micro, small and medium enterprises under sub-section (7) of 
section 8;”; 


(ii) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(da) the form and manner to route the settlement of invoices 
through Trade Receivables Discounting System platform under 
sub-sections (/) and (2) of section 5A; 


(db) the procedure and manner of online mechanism under 
sub-section (7) of section 8; 


(dc) the form and manner to disclose the details of invoices of 
micro, small and medium enterprises under sub-section (/) of 
section 22A;”; 


(iii) after clause (e), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ea) the manner of holding inquiry and imposing penalties under 
sub-section (/) of section 27A; 


(eb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the appellate 
authority against the order of adjudicating officer under sub-section (2) 
of section 27A;”. 


6. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clauses (a) and 


(5), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely :— 


“(a) the form and manner to file memorandum for registration of micro, 
small and medium enterprises under sub-section (2) of section 8; 


(5) the form and manner to route the settlement of invoices 
through Trade Receivables Discounting System platform under sub-section 
(3) of section 5A; 


(c) the intervals and procedure for meeting of the Micro and Small 
Enterprises Facilitation Council under sub-section (2) of section 20; 


(d) the composition of the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation 
Council, the manner of filling vacancies of the members and the procedure to 
be followed in the discharge of their functions by the members of that Council 
under sub-section (3) of section 2]; 


(e) the form and manner to disclose the details of invoices of micro, 
small and medium enterprises under sub-section (2) of section 22A; and 


Amendment of 
section 29. 


Amendment of 
section 30. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


(f) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed under this 
Act.”. 


Saving. 7. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, anything done or any 
action taken or any notification issued under the principal Act, shall in so far as it is 
consistent with the provisions of this Act, continue to be in force unless and until 
revoked, and shall have effect as if it had been done, taken or issued under the 
corresponding provision of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (the said 
Act) was enacted to provide for facilitating the promotion, development and 
enhancing the competitiveness of micro, small and medium enterprises. Micro, 
small and medium enterprises are the key drivers of economic growth, generate 
employment and foster innovation. They contribute significantly to our Gross 
Domestic Product, exports, and are the backbone of India’s economy. 


2. Over the years, the micro, small and medium enterprises landscape has 
undergone a change due to technological advancements, emergence of information 
technology enabled systems and changing legal landscape which require that the 
Act be amended to facilitate growth of micro, small and medium enterprises. 


3. In view of the above, it is inter alia proposed to amend the said Act to— 


(a) provide for notifying a national digital platform for free and 
voluntary registration of micro, small and medium enterprises; 


(b) address the liquidity issues of micro, small and medium enterprises 
by mandating all Central Public Sector Enterprises to route the settlement of 
invoices through Trade Receivables Discounting System for procurement of 
goods and services from micro, small and medium enterprises. Provision has 
also been made empowering States to adopt similar provision for their Public 
Sector Enterprise; 


(c) facilitate the State Governments to establish additional Micro and 
Small Enterprises Facilitation Council by rationalising their composition; 


(d) prescribe timelines to ensure faster adjudication of delayed payment 
disputes of micro and small enterprises; 


(e) provide recovery of the mediated settlement agreement or the arbitral 
award as arrear of land revenue; 


(f) empower the courts to order for payment at least fifty per cent. of the 
awarded amount to the micro and small enterprises suppliers, if the application 
to set aside decree, award or order is pending for more than six months; 


(g) decriminalise offences regarding contravention of certain 
provisions, replacing conviction-based fines with graded penalties by 
including warning at the first instance. 


4. The proposed amendments shall incentivise the growth of the micro, small 
and medium enterprises, enable them to scale up and become champions of growth. 
This will augment Ease of Doing Business and promote compliance. 


5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; JITAN RAM MANJHI. 
The 24th July, 2026. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (Amendment) 
Bill, 2026, if enacted is not likely to involve any expenditure of recurring or 
non-recurring nature from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


P.C. MODY, 
Secretary-General. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ll 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend section 29 of the Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, which empower the Central 
Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-section (2) of 
the said section specifies the matters in respect of which rules may be made. These 
matters include— 


(7) the form and manner to file memorandum for registration of micro, 
small and medium enterprises under sub-section (/) of section 8; (ii) the form 
and manner to route the settlement of invoices through Trade Receivables 
Discounting System platform under sub-sections (/) and (2) of section 5A; 
(iii) the procedure and manner of online mechanism under sub-section (7) of 
section 8; (iv) the form and manner to disclose the details of invoices of 
micro, small and medium enterprises under sub-section (/) of section 22A; (v) 
the manner of holding inquiry and imposing penalties under sub-section (/) of 
section 27A; (vi) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the appellate 
authority against the order of adjudicating officer under sub-section (2) of 
section 27A. 


2. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 30 of the Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, which empower the State 
Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-section (2) of 
the said section specifies the matters in respect of which rules may be made. These 
matters include— 


(i) the form and manner to file memorandum for registration of micro, 
Small and medium enterprises under sub-section (2) of section 8; (ii) the form 
and manner to route the settlement of invoices through Trade Receivables 
Discounting System platform under sub-section (3) of section 5A; (iii) the 
intervals and procedure for meeting of the Micro and Small Enterprises 
Facilitation Council under sub-section (2) of section 20; (iv) the composition 
of the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council, the manner of filling 
vacancies of the members and the procedure to be followed in the discharge 
of their functions by the members of that Council under sub-section (3) of 
section 2; (2) the form and manner to disclose the details of invoices of micro, 
small and medium enterprises under sub-section (2) of section 22A. 


3. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practical to provide for 
them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of 
a normal character. 


P.C. Mody, 
Secretary-General. 


PUBLISHED BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, RAJYA SABHA, UNDER RULE 68 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 


Digtaly signed 
GORAKH ६/6000॥ 
| 


YADAVA 0253040550 


MGIPMRND—470GI(S4)—28-07-2026. 


