रजिस्ट्री We डी" एल"--(एन)04/0007/200 3---24 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—24 


The Gazette of Gudia 


Ooh. -Sl. Wet. -37.-2082024-256503 
CG-DL-E-2082024-256503 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग II— खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं" 0) नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, जुलाई 26, 2024/ श्रावण 4, 946 (शक) 
No. 0] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, JULY 26, 2024/SRAVANA 4, 946 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on 26th July, 2024:— 
Bill No. 48 of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act, 2005. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Short title and 
(Amendment) Act, 2024. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Amendment 2. In Section 3 of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005,— 
of section 3. 


“(a) in sub-section (7), for the words "one hundred days", the words "two 
hundred and fifty days" shall be substituted ; and 


(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


(2) Every person who has done the work given to him shall be entitled to 
receive wages at the rate of rupees seven hundred for each day of work or at 
such wage rate for each day of work as may be determined, whichever is higher.’’. 


42 of 2005. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 is a social 


security legislation that provides employment for rural population and ensuring minimum 
number of employment days. 


We all are aware that India is a Welfare State and Indian Constitution itself stipulates 
desirable implementation of the provision of Directive Principle of State Policy as enshrined 
in Part-IV of the Constitution. Even in Fundamental Rights as enshrined Part-III provides 
the right to a decent living, which is not possible without adequate means of living with 
gainful employment. 


The number of working days and wages being given under the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act is at present very less. Keeping in view, the 
current rate of inflation, the wages needs to be enhanced to an amount of rupees seven 
hundred per day and also there is need to enhance the number of days of employment 
under the Act to two hundred and fifty days. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DeLut; C.N. ANNADURAI 
July 3, 2024. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for increasing the number of days of employment of the 
registered persons from one hundred days to two hundred and fifty days under the Act. It 
also provides for ensuring minimum wage of registered persons to rupees seven hundred 
for each day of work. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten 
lakh crore per annum is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


No non-recurring expenditure is also likely to be involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


Bill No. 30 of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, |950. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) Short title. 


Act, 2024. 
22 of 950. 2. In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950, in Part XIV, Amendment 
Tamil Nadu, for entry 8, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— ae 


४ |8, Kuruma, Kuruman, Kurumba, Kurmbagounder, Kurumban and Kurumbar.”’. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Kurumans is aboriginal tribe of Tamil Nadu and are dwelling throughout the State 


of Tamil Nadu with their tradition, culture, custom, traits, etc. but still being denied the ST 
categorisation and other affirmative actions in the better interest of the tribe community. 


As per the article 366(25) of the Constitution of India, Scheduled Tribe means such 
tribe or tribal communities or parts of or groups within such tribe for the purpose of 
Constitution of article 342(2) to specify the Tribe. Kurumans synonyms are presently 
deprived and denied their constitutional rights being extended to tribes. The said community 
is tribal by birth, culture, customs, traits, as concluded, under an ethnographic detailed 
study by the Tribal Research Centre, Ooty, Tamil Nadu. Moreover, as early as Meckenzie 
Manuscript's |86, First India Surveyor General of India and other Tribal Literature viz. 
Madras General of Literature and Science support the Kurumans Tribes synonyms with 
common and generic name & culture, customs, history and origination, therefore, to be 
identified under ST Categorisation. 


In order to render the social justice and affirmative actions without further loss of 
time, this bill seeks to amend 'The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950' for inclusion 
of Kurumans synonyms names such as "Kuruma, Kuruman, Kurumba, Kurmbagounder, 
Kurumban, Kurumbar tribes" in the ST List in order to render social justice to oppressed 
and suppressed Kurumans & its synonyms names. That will ensure constitutional protection 
to the adivasi's Kurumans tribal synonyms against all sorts of socio-economic exploitation. 
Moreover it will confer all Constitutional and Legal Rights to Kuruman generic tribes as 
guaranteed under article 46 of the Constitution. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI C.N. ANNADURAI 
July 3, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill seeks to include Kuruma, Kuruman, Kurumba, Kurmbagounder, Kurumban 
and Kurumbar as the synonym name of Kurumans to the list of Scheduled Tribes with 
respect to the State of Tamil Nadu by way of amending the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) 
Order, 950. The Bill, if enacted, would involve recurring and non-recurring expenditure on 
account of the benefits to be given under the schemes and programmes of the Government 
meant for social, educational and economic development of the Scheduled Tribes. At this 
stage, it is not possible to mention the exact amount which may be incurred on this account. 
However, it is estimated that a sum of approximately rupees thirty-five crore is likely to be 
involved as a recurring expenditure per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seventy crore is also likely to be involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Bill No. 33 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for the setting up of a Commission to regulate and promote the 
development of Information Technology industry in the country and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Commission for Regulation and Development of Short title and 


Information Technology Industry Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government. 


(b) "Commission" means the Commission for Regulation and Development of 
Information Technology Industry established under section 3; and 


(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


commencement. 


Definitions. 


Establishment 
of 
Commission 
for Regulation 
and 
Development 
of 
Information 
Technology 
industry. 


Functions of 
the 
Commission. 


Appropriate 
government 
to provide 
facilities. 


Formulation 
of National 
Policy on 
setting up of 
Information 
Technology 
Parks. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
other law. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulty. 


Power to 
make rules. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


3.(/) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the Central Government shall by notification in the official gazette, establish a 
Commission to be known as the Commission for Regulation and Development of Information 
Technology Industry to regulate and expedite growth of information technology Sector in 
the country. 


(2)The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and four other members to be 
appointed by the Central Government having such qualifications as may be prescribed. 


(3)The Commission shall have such number of officers and staff as may be 
required for the efficient functioning of the Commission. 


(4) The conditions of service, salaries and allowances of Chairperson, members, officers 
and staff of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 


4. The Commission shall,— 


(i) take appropriate steps to set up information technology parks in cities 
with population of more than one million and in cities having potential for development 
of information technology parks; 


(ii) recommend to the Central Government regarding concessions or incentives 
to be given to the Information Technology industry for the promotion of export of 
hardware and software; and 


(iii) such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central Government, 
from time to time. 


5. The appropriate Government shall provide all assistance to the Commission in 
making available land free of cost infrastructural facilities including electricity, water and 
roads for setting up Information Technology parks in the cities as mentioned under 
section 4. 


6. (/) The Central Government shall, as soon as possible, but in no case later than six 
months from the commencement of this Act, by notification in the official Gazette, formulate 
a national policy on setting up of information technology parks. 


(2)The policy formulated under sub-section (/) shall be reviewed at least once in 
every three years or earlier, if such review is deemed necessary by the Central Government. 


7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the implementation of the provisions of the 
Act. 


8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other aw for the time in force. 


9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


0. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Information technology industry is one of the fastest growing industries of the 
country. There is tremendous potential for further growth of this industry. What is needed 
is the formulation of a proper policy and assistance from the Government. If these are put 
in place, there is no doubt that our country will rank number one in terms of export of 
software and hardware. 


At present, there is no clear policy for the development of information technology in 
the country. The Government does not give any assistance to the companies working in 
this field. Several foreign companies are willing to set up their offices in our country but due 
to lack of required infrastructure they prefer to stay away. As a result these companies go 
to other countries who offer better infrastructure. This industry can prove to be a major 
source of revenue for the Government and also provide immense employment opportunities 
to our people but so far the Government has not done much to tap the huge growth 
potential of Information Technology industry. 


Therefore, it is proposed that a National Commission on Information Technology be 
set up to regulate and promote the development of information technology industry in the 
country. It is also proposed that a national policy on information technology be formulated. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI C.N. ANNADURAT 
July 3, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ll 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Information Technology 
Commission for Regulation and Development of Information Technology Industry. It also 
provides for the composition of the Commission and salaries and allowances of the 
Chairperson and members of the Commission. Clause 4 provides that the Commission shall 
set up information technology parks in cities with population of one million or more. Clause 
5 provides that the appropriate Government shall provide all assistance to the Commission 
in setting up of information technology parks. Clause 7 provides for the Central Government 
to provide adequate funds. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the 
Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the expenditure in respect of Union 
territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated 
that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore will be involved. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |0 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


Bill No. 43 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for social security and welfare measure for artists and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Artists (Social Security) Act, 2024. Short title, 
extent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commencement. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the Context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) "artist" means a person who through his creative skill performs any activity 
concerned with the production, exhibition of imaginative designs, videos, sounds, 
actions or ideas including a person engaged in cinema industry either as an actor, 
dancer, singer, producer, photographer, editor or distributor of films or a group of 
persons who exhibit their skills in unison to produce or exhibit such designs, videos, 
sounds, action or idea but does not include a person who works under any State 
Government or the Central Government or in any Public Sector Undertaking under 
the control of the Central Government or a State Government; 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(6) "Board" means the National Artists Security Advisory Board constituted 
under section 4; 


(c) "cinema" means a feature film or a documentary or a short film; 


(4) "Fund" means the National Artists Welfare Fund constituted under 
section 6; and 


(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


Framing of 3. The Central Government may formulate, from time to time, suitable welfare schemes 
welfare for artists on the matters relating to— 

schemes for 

artists by the (a) insurance covering life and disability; 

Central 

Government. (b) health and maternity benefits; 


(c) provident fund; and 


(d) old age protection. 


Constitution 4. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
of the a Board to be known as the National Artists Social Security Advisory Board to exercise the 
National ‘ हे है : 
ree : powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act. 
rtists Social 
Securlty (2) The Board shall consist of the following, namely:— 
Advisory 
Board. (a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government; 
(6) two eminent artists to be nominated as members by the Central Government; 
and 
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India in-charge of the Ministry of Culture 
shall be the ex-officio member-Secretary to the Board. 
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of 
the Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(4) The Central Government shall make available to the Board such number of officers 
and staffas may be required for efficient functioning of the Board. 
Functions of 5. The Board shall,— 
the Board. 
(a) make recommendations to the Central Government to formulate and implement 
suitable schemes for the welfare of artists; 
(6) advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the 
administration of this Act as may be referred to it; 
(c) advise the Central Government regarding administration of the Fund; and 
(d) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central 
Government from time to time. 
Constitution 6. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a 


से National Fund to be known as the Artists Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
rtists 


Welfare Fund. 


Central 7. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
Government this behalf, credit such sums of money to the Fund as it may think fit for being utilized for 
ae the purposes of this Act 

funds. pe . 

Utilization of 8. The Fund shall be utilized to provide financial assistance to the artists for the 
Fund. following purposes:— 


(a) compensation in case of death or accident; 


(b) old age pension; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(c) disability assistance; 
(d) free healthcare facility to the artists and their family members; and 
(e) subsidized housing facilities. 


9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. 


0. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2)Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to 
make rules. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India isa welfare State and it is the duty ofthe State to ensure that all sections of 
the society are covered by a State sponsored social security network. On account of their 
unorganized nature of profession artists do not get adequate social security. There is 
practically no welfare scheme for their benefit. There is an urgent need to enact a legislation 
to provide for social security and welfare of the artists so that they can live a life of comfort 
and dignity. 


The present Bill provides for:— 
(a) empowering the Central Government to formulate welfare schemes for the artists; 


(6) constitution of a Board to be known as the National Artists Social Security Advisory 
Board to recommend the Government to formulate and implement suitable schemes for 
welfare of artists; and 


(c) constitution of a Welfare fund to be known as National Artists Welfare Fund in 
order to provide social security to the artists in the country. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; RAVI KISHAN 
June 4, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 provides for constitution of the National Artists' Social Security Advisory 
Board. Clause 6 provides for constitution of a Fund to be known as a National Artists 
Welfare Fund by the Central Government. Clause 7 provides for supply of fund by the 
Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is difficult to give an exact estimate of expenditure 
likely to be involved as the exact amount of expenditure likely to be involved will depend 
upon the number of schemes formulated by the Government. However, it is estimated that 
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is likely to be involved 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |0 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Act. Since the rules will relate to the matters of detail only. The delegation 
of legislative power is, of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


Bill No. 28 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for protection of traditional fishermen in the country and for 
welfare measures including life insurance coverage, healthcare, educational 
facilities to the children of traditional fishermen and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Traditional Fishermen (Protection and Welfare) Short title and 
Act, 2024. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) "accident" means an accident caused during the course of fishing activity 
including drowning; 


National 
Policy for the 
welfare of 
traditional 
fishermen. 


Constitution 
of the 
National 
Traditional 
Fishermen 
Welfare 
Authority. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(6)" appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government 
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(c) "Authority" means the National Traditional Fishermen Welfare Authority 
constituted under section 3; 


(व) "traditional fisherman" means a person who generation by generation earns 
his livelihood by catching fish from the fisheries and whose only source of income is 
the money he earns from selling such fish; 


(e) "fisheries" which includes the management, catching, processing and 
marketing of fish; 


(f) "Fund" means the Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund constituted under 
section 5; and 


(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year from the 
commencement of this Act, in consultation with the Government of the States having 
substantial population of fishermen, formulate, a national policy for the welfare of traditional 
fishermen and their families and protect their fishing rights and interests. 


4. (/) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in Official 
Gazette, constitute an Authority to be known as the National Traditional Fishermen Welfare 
Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both 
movable and immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


(3) The Authority shall consist of— 


(a) a Chairperson having adequate knowledge and professional experience in 
fisheries sector to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 


(6) a Deputy Chairperson with such qualification, to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(c) three members to represent traditional fishermen to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) four members to represent the Union Ministries of Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry & Dairying (Department of Fisheries), Finance, Planning and 
Labour and Employment, to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner 
as may be prescribed; 


(e) five members of Parliament, of whom three shall be from the House of the 
People and two shall be from the Council of States, to be nominated by the Presiding 
Officers of the respective Houses; and 


(f) four members to be nominated by the Government of the States on rotation 
basis in alphabetical order. 


(4) The term of Office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the 
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the 
service of the Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(6) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Gorakhpur in the State of 
Uttar Pradesh. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2] 


(7) The Authority may establish its offices at such other places, as it may deem 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(8) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such Officers and members of staffand 
with such terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed. 


5. (/) The Authority shall, subject to guidelines issued by the Central Government in Functions of 
this regard, in coordination with the State Governments take, steps for the overall welfare of the Authority. 
traditional fishermen including, removal of poverty and indebtedness, raising the 
standard of living and making easy availability of market for selling fish. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority 
shall,_— 


(a) implement the national policy for the traditional fishermen formulated under 
section 3; 


(6) maintain records of traditional fishermen in all villages and districts 
throughout the country; 


(c) maintain a district-wise register of traditional fishermen with such particulars 
and in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) provide modern tools and techniques for fishing to the traditional fishermen; 


(e) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to traditional fishermen 
cooperatives; 


(f) organize exhibitions, melas and such other activities to promote fisheries in 
different parts of the country; 


(g) make suitable arrangements for purchase of fishes by Government 
agencies on cash and carry basis; 


(A) encourage export of fish; and 


(i) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central 
Government from time to time. 


6. (J) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, Constitution 
constitute a Fund to be known as the Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund with a corpus of of the 
rupees five thousand crore. 22027 

ishermen 
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund Welfare Fund. 


in such ratio as may be prescribed. 


(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received by 
way of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise from individuals, body corporates, 
financial institutions, firms and partnerships. 


(4) The Fund shall be administered by a Board of Trustees, which shall be constituted 
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Fund shall be utilized for:-— 


(a) interest free loans to traditional fishermen for purchasing of boats, nets 
and life boat; 


(6) making ex-gratia payments at prescribed rates to each of the bereaved families 
of traditional fishermen who die in accident; 


(c) life insurance cover to the traditional fishermen and their families; 


(d) healthcare facilities to the traditional fishermen and their dependent 
family members; 


Miscellaneous 
Provisions. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
Funds. 


Annual 
Report. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law 
for time being 
in force. 


Power to 
make rules. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(e) financial assistance to the traditional fishermen for the purchase and repair 
of fishing nets, boats and other equipments required for fishing; 


(f) unemployment allowance during illness or financial crisis during lean periods; 


(g) providing educational facilities and vocational training to the wards of; 
traditional fishermen; and 


(A) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed. 
7. The appropriate Government shall,— 


(a) establish adequate number of schools and vocational training institutes 
and healthcare centres in and around the areas inhabitated by traditional 
fishermen for their benefit including their families and children; 


(0) protect the fishing rights and interests of the traditional fishermen; and 


(c) take such other measures as it may deem necessary for the protection and 
welfare of traditional fishermen. 


8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf, provide to the Authority such sums as may consider necessary for the 
efficient functioning of the Authority. 


9. () The Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, an 
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and 
submit it to the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall cause the report submitted to it under 
sub-section () to be laid before each House of Parliament. 


0. (/) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the date of the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be 
laid before each House of Parliament. 


l. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act. 


2. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
There are millions of traditional fishermen spread across various parts of our country. 
In the State of Uttar Pradesh the traditional fishermen are termed as 'nishad' or 'mallah'. Their 
main occupation and means of livelihood is catching fish and selling it in the market and 
they are doing this for generations. However, the fishermen and their families live in abject 
poverty nearly hand to mouth. There are many problems experienced by traditional fishermen, 
including a lack of skills, limited facilities, and extreme competition. 


For most of the traditional fishermen, it is their family profession which passes on 
from one generation to other and their entire families are involved in this profession. For 
them, fishing is the only source of their livelihood and prosperity. 


Since these poor fishermen are part and parcel of our society and ours being a welfare 
State, it is necessary that the fisherman too are provided with adequate insurance cover 
against accidents, healthcare, financial assistance in case of need, educational, vocational 
facilities for their children, etc. 


Urgent remedial measures have to be taken for the welfare and protection of traditional 
fishermen. It has, therefore, been proposed to establish the National Traditional Fishermen 
Authority and also the Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund to improve the lot of traditional 
fishermen and save them from starvation in various parts of our nation. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; RAVI KISHAN 
June 4, 2024. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to constitute the National Traditional Fishermen Welfare 
Authority. Clause 5 provides for certain steps to be taken by the Authority for welfare of 
traditional fishermen. Clause 6 provides for the constitution of the Traditional Fishermen 
Welfare Fund. Clause 7 provides for the appropriate Government to establish adequate 
number of schools and vocational training institutes and healthcare centres in and around 
the areas inhabitated by traditional fishermen for their benefit including their families. 
Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall provide Funds to the Authority. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is 
estimated that a sum ofrupees five hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure per 
annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be incurred. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause | 2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


Bill No. 58 of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
I. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024. Short title. 


2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, the existing entries 3 to 22 shall be Amendment 
re-numbered as entries from 4 to 23, respectively and before entry 4 as so re-numbered, the eae ee 
cnedule. 


following entry shall be inserted, namely:— 


"3. Bhojpuri.". 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Bhojpuri language which originated in the Gangetic plains of India is a very old and 
rich language having its origin in the Sanskrit language. Bhojpuri is the mother tongue of a 
large number of people residing in Uttar Pradesh, Western Bihar, Jharkhand and some parts 
of Madhya Pradesh as well as in several other countries. In Mauritius, this language is 
spoken by a large number of people. It is estimated that around one hundred forty million 
people speak Bhojpuri. Bhojpuri films are very popular in the country and abroad and have 
deep impact on the Hindi film industry. 


Bhojpuri language has a rich literature and cultural heritage. The great scholar 
Mahapandit Rahul Sankrityayan wrote some of his work in Bhojpuri. There have been some 
other eminent writers of Bhojpuri like Viveki Rai and Bhikhari Thakur, who is popularly 
known as the "Shakespeare of Bhojpuri". Some other eminent writers of Hindi such as 
Bhartendu Harishchandra, Mahavir Prasad Dwivedi and Munshi Premchand were deeply 
influenced by Bhojpuri literature. Bhojpuri language and its literature is gaining new heights 
because of the efforts made by various scholars. 


Many personalities with Bhojpuri background have achieved highest positions in 
the country. Various International Conferences have been organized to promote Bhojpuri. 
At present Indira Gandhi National Open University is planning to start a certificate course 
in Bhojpuri language. Recently, the Bhojpuri study centre had been established in Banaras 
Hindu University to propagate and develop the Bhojpuri language. In Uttar Pradesh and 
Bihar, movements have been initiated to give Bhojpuri language its due place. 


But it is unfortunate that the "Bhojpuri" language is yet to find a place in the Eighth 
Schedule to the Constitution. 


For the promotion of literacy and the development of this language, it is necessary 
that this language be included in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; RAVI KISHAN 
June 4, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


Bill No. 40 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for the constitution of Greenfield Infrastructure Board in each zone of the 
country to assess the availability of land in the respective zone and decide on 
the fitness of sites for development of a greenfield infrastructure project and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


. (J) This Act may be called the Greenfield Infrastructure Development Boards 
Act, 2024. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "Board" means the Greenfield Infrastructure Development Boards constituted 
under section 3; 


(6) "economically backward regions" means the under-developed regions in 
the country that demonstrate characteristics such as low levels of income as well as 
poor infrastructure and connectivity including but not limited to States like Bihar, 
Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Meghalaya; 


(2) "five year plan" means the plan to be created by the Greenfield Infrastructure 
Boards for their respective zones post the land survey including development 
landmarks, processes of commissioning projects, schemes and programmes of the 
Center and State Governments that may potentially be utilized for sanction of projects 
and systems and mechanisms of accountability; 


(व) "greenfield infrastructure" means the infrastructure developed on empty 
land or previously undeveloped land and a project whose commissioning, planning 
and construction process is carried out from the scratch and grass route level; 


(e) "infrastructure" means National Highways, ring roads, bypass, railway tracks, 
railway stations, regional air strips, under bridges and over bridges; 


(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 
(g) "zone" means the following six zones:— 


(i) North Zone comprising the States of Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Uttarakhand and Haryana; 


(ii) East Zone comprising the States of Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand and 
West Bengal; 


(iii) West Zone comprising the States of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Goa and 
Maharashtra, the South Zone comprising the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu; 


(iv) South Zone comprising the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Kerala and Tamil Nadu; 


(v) Central Zone comprising the States of Madhya Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh; and 


(vi) North East Zone comprising the States of Assam, Sikkim, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh. 


CHAPTER II 
GREENFIELD INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT BOARDS 


Constitution 3. (7) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 

of Boards. appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, Boards in each zone to be 
known as the Greenfield Infrastructure Development Boards in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) Each Greenfield Infrastructure Development Boards constituted under 
sub-section (/) shall consist of:— 


(a) at least ten and not exceeding fifteen Members of Parliament representing 
the States in the zone taken up to be nominated by the Central Government-members, 


ex officio; 


(b) at least five and not exceeding eight Members of the State Legislative 
Assembly to be nominated by the Central Government in consultation with State 
Government concerned-members, ex officio; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


(c) not exceeding ten representatives of the Central Government not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary or equivalent dealing with matters relating to infrastructure 
in the Ministries including but not limited to Road, Transport and Highways, Civil 
Aviation, Ports, Shipping and Waterways, Railways, Housing and Urban Affairs and 
Tourism to be nominated by the Central Government -members, ex officio; 


(d) not exceeding seven representatives of the State Governments not below 
the rank of Joint Secretary to that Government or equivalent dealing with matters 
relating to infrastructure to be nominated by the Central Government in consultation 
with the State Government -members, ex officio; and 


(e) not exceeding three specialists in the field of infrastructure and allied fields 
with a minimum experience of fifteen years in the respective zone to be nominated by 
the Central Government-members; 


(3) The Chairperson of the Boards shall be appointed from amongst the Members of 
Parliament in the Boards to be decided by consensus: 


Provided that the position of Chairperson shall not remain vacant for more than ten 
days. 


(4) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of enabling the Boards to perform 
functions under this Act, provide such number of officers and other employees as it may 
consider necessary. 


(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other functions, powers, terms and 
conditions of service of the officers and other employees appointed under sub-section (3) 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 


4. (/) Each Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 


Provided that the Board shall meet at least twice in a year: 


Provided further that the Board shall be allowed to meet even in the absence of the 
Chairperson with the next senior-most Member of Parliament presiding over the meeting: 


Provided also that the meetings shall be convened by an officer as designated by the 
Chairperson. 


(2) Each Board may invite the representatives responsible for development of 
infrastructure as it may consider appropriate for the discharge of its functions. 


(3) The expenditure incurred on the Boards shall be in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


5. Each Board shall— 


(a) commission a survey of all the land area in their respective zones, to ascertain 
the need and scope of Greenfield Infrastructure Projects in their zones to enhance 
connectivity in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(5) fix the priority of the development work to be undertaken particularly in 
economically backward regions in each zone and draw out five year plans with fixed 
priorities and landmarks of development, financing model suitability, tendering 
processes, structure of accountability and any other matter as it deemed fit; 


(c) identify schemes and programmes of the Central or the State Governments 
under which the project may be carried out and submit the proposal thereof to the 
respective Government who in turn shall be required to revert with the feasibility of 
the project within thirty days; 


(d) submit the five year plans to the Central Government; 


Meetings of 
the 
Committees. 


Function of 
the 
Committees. 


Dissemination 
of 
information 
by the 

Boards. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
other laws. 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make rules. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(e) facilitate coordinated action to commission the proposed projects while 
deciding the best financing model suitability as well as remove constraints of any 
kind in the implementation of the projects; 


(f) resolve matters related to provision of land and space in consultation with 
the respective Government for faster roll out of priorities; 


(g) identify issues for follow up in each Houses of Parliament, State Legislative 
Assemblies and Local Governments for timely achievement of five year plan objectives; 


(A) intensively monitor all time bound deliverables of the five year plans; 


() closely review the flow of funds including the funds allocated and released 
by both Central Government and the State Government, utilization and unspent 
balances for each project; 


(j) have the authority to summon and inspect any record for the purposes of 
looking into complaints/alleged irregularities received in respect of the implementation 
of the projects including complaints of mis-appropriation and diversion of funds and 
recommend follow-up action; and 


(k) refer any matter for enquiry or suggest suitable action to be taken in 
accordance with the rules which should be acted upon by the concerned authority 
within thirty days. 


CHAPTER III 
ACCOUNTABILITY OF THE BOARDS 


6. (J) The knowledge and information collected or generated by each Board, including 
but not limited to the five year plan shall be disseminated to all the stakeholders in written 
format by a designated officer as nominated by the Chairperson. 


(2) The meetings shall be recorded and made publicly available through a Management 
Information System (MIS) Portal to be developed by the Central Government in such manner 
as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the proceedings of the meetings shall be recorded and uploaded on the 
MIS portal not exceeding five days after the conclusion of any meeting of the Board bya 
designated officer as nominated by the Chairperson. 


(3) The Central Government shall monitor the five year plans developed by each 
Board and ensure that the targets are achieved. 


CHAPTERIV 
MISCELLANEOUS 


7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the Authority for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. 


8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the 
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force. 


9. (J) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the qualifications, experience, functions, powers, and terms and conditions 
of service of the officers and other employees of the Boards under sub-section (3) 
and (4) of section 3; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3] 


(b) the time and place of the meetings of the Committees and the procedure to 
be followed at such meetings under sub-section () of section 4 and the expenditure 
incurred on the meetings of the Boards under sub-section (3) of section 4; 


(c) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules. 


(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the 
rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the 
rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
States, cities and villages face immense economic, demographic and environmental 
challenges that prompt the public and private sectors to rethink their conduct of business. 


These challenges share an underlying need for modern, efficient and reliable infrastructure 
as well as optimal land use. 


With an enhanced expenditure on capital, there is a multiplier effect that leads to 
millions of jobs generated in building and maintenance of the infrastructure as well as scope 
for easier and faster migration. This also provides for more effective delivery of services 
through last mile connectivity. Moreover, by connecting supply chains, these infrastructures 
enhance trade, commerce, tourism and travel by reducing costs of logistics and facilitating 
connectivity. 


For the entire country to grow, we need to enhance connectivity at all levels of 
administration and governance which requires a reassessment of potential infrastructural 
spaces of development. The need is to create a Greenfield Infrastructure Board in each of 
the six zones of the country. 


Greenfield Infrastructure refers to the infrastructure developed on empty land or 
previously undeveloped land and a project whose commissioning, planning and construction 
process is carried out from the scratch and grass route level. 


The Board shall be entrusted with carrying out an initial survey and developing a 
plan with a five year perspective to identify areas where a greenfield project can be developed, 
fix priorities as per the need to enhance the connectivity in Economically Backward regions 
first as well as coordinate to remove constraints related to provision of land and space and 
monitor the flow of funds. The need is also to assess the Central, Centrally Sponsored or 
State schemes and programmes wherein the requisite infrastructure can be built and include 
the same in the plan. 


It is also necessary that each Board shall have representation from the Central and 
State Governments including the Members of Parliament and Members, Legislative 
Assemblies. The Boards shall be required to meet at least twice a year to monitor the 
progress of the projects. They shall also be required to submit the plans developed by them 
to the Central Government and record all meetings to disseminate the information to all 
stakeholders. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to assess the land in the entire country to identify areas for 
development of greenfield infrastructure to facilitate development of backward regions as 
well as support the entire economy through enhanced trade and commerce. 


Hence this Bill. 


New Delhi; RAJIV PRATAP RUDY 
June 8, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Greenfield Infrastructure 
Development Boards in each of the six zones in the country. It also provides for appointment 
of specialists, dedicated officers and other employees to each Board. Clause 7 of the Bill 
provides for the Central Government to provide adequate fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, 
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a 
recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore and fourty thousand per annum would be 
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty lakh is also likely to be incurred for 
survey. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules regarding the 
qualifications, experience, functions, powers, and terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and other employees of the Boards, the time and place of the meetings of the 
Boards and the procedure to be followed at such meetings, etc. As the matters in respect of 
which rules may be made by the Central Government are matters of procedure and 
administrative details only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


Bill No. 60 of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. For article 48A of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"48A. (/) The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment so 
as to ensure a pollution-free environment for its citizens and to safeguard the forests 
and wild life of the country. 


(2) The State shall, through such enforcement agencies as it consider necessary, strive 
hard to ensure that forty per cent. of the total geographical area of the country be covered 
under forest or areas covered by trees.". 


3. In article 5lA of the Constitution, for clause (g), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


"(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, 
rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures and to actively participate 
in the State's endeavour to promote the forest cover in the country to forty per cent. of 
the total geographical area.". 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Substitution 
of new article 
for article 
480. 


Protection and 
improvement of 
environment 
and safeguarding 
of forests and 
wild life. 


Amendment of 
article SIA. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Forests are key to all forms of life. They provide for the continuity of the world's 
biodiversity which is necessary for economic development, human livelihood, medical 
discoveries, and to provide environmental adaptive responses. Forests are also important 
because they stabilize climate, prevent soil erosion, watershed protection and provides 
habitat to thousands of life forms. Despite our dependence on forests, we are still allowing 
them to disappear. 


India accounts for about 2.4 per cent. of the total geographical area of the world and is 
also home to |7 per cent. of the world population. India is one of the richest countries in the 
world in terms of biodiversity making it one of the Mega-diverse countries accounting for 
nearly 8 per cent. of the species of the world. It is estimated that nearly |/3rd of Indian plants 
are endemic, being found nowhere else in the world. 


To promote this diversity and economic growth the National Forest Policy, l952 
emphasized on the extension of forest and tree cover by proposing that 33% of the total 
geographical area should be under forest tree cover. The National Forest Policy, 988 which 
was formulated four years before the Earth Summit |992 embodies the principles of sustainable 
forest management and mandated an increase in the forest/tree cover in the country to 33 per 
cent. of the land area. However, according to the India State of Forest Report (ISFR) 207, the 
total forest cover is 7, 08, 273 Sq. Km. which is only 2.54 per cent. of the total geographical 
area of the country. Forest and tree cover combined is 8, 02, 088 Sq. Km. and is 24.39 per cent. 
of the total geographical area. 


The Bill proposes to conserve the natural heritage of the country by preserving the 
remaining natural forests and at the same time also promote the increase in the forest cover 
with the vast variety of flora and fauna by ensuring that the State with active participation of 
the citizens will be able to preserve and promote the remarkable biological diversity and 
genetic resources of the country. It also enable the country to meet our climate change 
targets without any binding obligations. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; RAJIV PRATAP RUDY 
June 8, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


Bill No. 25 of 2024 


A Bill further to constitute District Development and Monitoring Committees in each 
district to promote efficient coordination among all elected representatives in 
Parliament, State Legislatures and Local Governments, including the Panchayati 
Raj Institutions and Municipal Bodies, for time bound development of districts 
through a streamlined model of monitoring and accountability for implementation 
of Central Sector and Centrally sponsored schemes in each district and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


. (/) This Act may be called the District Development and Monitoring Committee for Short title, 


Implementation of Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes Act, 2024. extent and 
commencement. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Constitution 
of 
Committees. 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "Central Sector Schemes" means poverty alleviation, social inclusion and 
livelihood generation programmes funded and implemented by the Central Government 
in States as per the national development agenda; 


(b) "Centrally Sponsored Schemes" means poverty alleviation, social inclusion 
and livelihood generation programmes funded partially by the Central Government 
and implemented by the States; 


(c) "Committees" means the District Development and Monitoring Committees; 
(d) "District" means the districts in a State; 


(e) "District Planning Committees" means the District Planning Committees 
formulated under article 243ZD of the Constitution; 


(f) "Lok Sabha" refers to the Lower House of the Parliament of India; 


(g) "Member of Parliament" means the elected representative of the people in 
the Parliament of India; 


(A) "MIS Portal" means the Management Information System developed by the 
Central Government wherein the records of the meeting are uploaded for display before 
all the relevant stakeholders; and 


i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
p p y 
CHAPTER II 
District DEVELOPMENT AND MONITORING COMMITTEE 


3. (J) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, Committees to be 
known as the District Development and Monitoring Committees of Central Sector and Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme, at the level of each district, consisting of the following members, 
namely:— 


(a) the Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha, elected from the district concerned to be 
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed-Chairperson, ex- 


officio: 


Provided that in case there are more than one Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha, 
representing the district, the senior-most Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha, shall be 
nominated as the Chairperson: 


Provided further that in case the district has more than one Parliamentary 
Constituency in Lok Sabha as its segment and the senior-most Member of Parliament, 
Lok Sabha, has been made the Chairperson in another district, the next senior-most 
Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha, shall be nominated as the Chairperson: 


Provided also that in case there is same seniority, the Member of Parliament, 
Lok Sabha, in whose Parliamentary Constituency the largest geographical area of the 
district falls shall be nominated as the Chairperson. 


(b) the other Members of Parliament, Lok Sabha, representing the district- 
Co-Chairpersons, ex-officio; 

(c) the District Magistrate-Member Secretary, ex-officio; 

(d) all Members of State Legislative Assembly elected from the district-Members, 
ex-officio; 


(e) not exceeding one representative of the State Governments to be nominated by the 
Central Government-Members, ex-officio; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


(f) all Mayors and Chairpersons of Municipalities in the respective districts- Members, 
ex-officio; 


(g)not exceeding five elected heads of the Gram Panchayats in the respective districts- 
Members, ex-officio; and 


(A) such other member as nominated by the Nominating Committee comprising the 
following members, namely:— 


(7) the Chairperson of the Committees; and 
(ii) the Co-Chairpersons of the Committees: 
Provided that at least one member of the Committees under clause (f) shall be woman: 


Provided further that at least two members of the Committees under clause (g) shall be 
women. 


(2) The Committees shall be constituted within a period of thirty days from the date of 
commencement of this Act: 


Provided that the position of Chairperson shall not remain vacant for more than thirty 
days. 


4. (/) The Committees shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules 
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings in the manner as may be 
prescribed: 


Provided that the Committees shall meet at least once in each quarter of a year. 


(2) The Member Secretary shall be responsible for convening the meeting of the 
Committee: 


Provided that the Committees shall meet even in the absence of the Chairperson with 
the next senior-most Co-Chairperson presiding over the meeting. 


(3)The Committees may invite the representatives responsible for implementation of 
the Centrally Sponsored Schemes or other stakeholders as it may consider appropriate for 
the discharge of its functions. 


(4)The expenditure incurred on the Committees shall be in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


5. The Committees shall— 


(a) ensure that all Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
as specified in the Schedule are implemented in accordance with their programme 
guidelines; 


(b) facilitate coordinated solutions to remove constraints of any kind in the 
implementation of the Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes; 


(c) resolve matters related to provision of land and space for faster roll out of 
priorities; 


(d) guide District Planning Committees about all the national programmes and 
their leveraged for transformation of the district; 


(e) identify issues for follow up for timely achievement of scheme objectives; 
(f) intensively monitor all time bound national initiatives for universal coverage; 


(g) recommend improvements in design of approved programmes and suggest 
mid-course corrections to address implementation constraints; 


(A) have the authority to summon and inspect any record to look into complaints 
and alleged irregularities received in respect of the implementation of the Central 


Meetings of 
the 
Committees. 


Functions of 
the 
Committees. 


Dissemination 
of 
information 
by the 
Committees. 


Ensuring 
timely and 
regular 
conduct of 
meetings. 


Power to 
amend 
Schedule. 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make rules. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes including complaints of wrong selection of 
beneficiaries, mis-appropriation and diversion of funds and recommend follow-up 
action thereto; 


(i) refer any matter for enquiry to the District Collector or CEO of the Zila 
Panchayat or Project Director of District Rural Development Agency (or Poverty 
Alleviation Unit) or suggest suitable action to be taken in accordance with the rules 
which shall be acted upon by the concerned authority within thirty days; and 


(7) closely review the flow of funds including the funds allocated and released by 
both Central Government and the State Government, utilization and unspent balances 
under each Scheme. 


CHAPTER III 
ACCOUNTABILITY OF THE COMMITTEE AND SOCIAL AUDITS 
6. It shall be the responsibility of the Member Secretary of the each Committees to,— 


(a) disseminate knowledge and information collected or generated by the 
Committees to all the stakeholders in written format in such manner as may be prescribed; 
and 


(b) made publicly available the recording of the meetings of the Committees 
through an MIS Portal developed by the Central Government in not exceeding five 
days after the conclusion of such meeting. 


7. (7) The Central Government shall monitor the conduct of the meetings of the 
Committees in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that if the meetings of the Committees may not be conducted, the Central 
Government shall urge the District Collectors to convene the meetings. 


(2) The Central Government shall nominate five officers who shall randomly select ten 
districts per representative each year and attend the meetings of the respective Committees. 


(3) The officers nominated under sub-section (2) shall report the progress and conduct 
of the meetings to the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The expenditure incurred by the officers shall be in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 


8. (/) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, 
it may, by notification, amend the Schedule and thereupon the Schedule, shall be deemed _ to 
have been amended accordingly. 


(2) The Central Government shall make the necessary amendment to the Schedule 
within fifteen days of introduction or discontinuation of any Central Sector Scheme or 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme. 


(3)A copy of every notification made under sub-section () shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 


9. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions 
of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the time and place of the meetings of the Committees and the procedure to be 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4] 


followed at such meetings under sub-section (l) of section 4 and the expenditure 
incurred on the meetings of the Committees under sub-section (3) of section 4; and 


(b) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules. 


(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


42 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


— 


\o ० nN N Nn KR (०२ N 


THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 5(a)] 


CENTRAL SECTOR AND CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES 


. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Program 
. Deen Dayal Antyodaya Yojana - NRLM 

. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya-Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) 
. National Social Assistance Progamme 

. Umbrella Programme for Development of Minorities 

. Umbrella Programme for Development of Other Vulnerable Groups 
. Umbrella Programme for Development of Scheduled Tribes 

. Umbrella Scheme for Development of Scheduled Castes 

. Prime Minister Jan Aarogya Yojana (by subsuming RSBY) 

. Blue Revolution 

. Border Area Development Programme 

. Environment, Forestry and Wildlife 

. Infrastructure Facilities for Judiciary 

. Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM)/National Rural Drinking Water Mission 
. Mission for Protection and Empowerment for Women 

. National Education Mission 

. National Health Mission 

. National Livelihood Mission - Ajeevika 

. Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna (PMAY) 

. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna 

. Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojna 

. Soil Health Card 

. e-National Agriculture Markets (E-NAM) 

. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) 

. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Rurban Mission 

. Swachh Bharat Mission 

. Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) 

. Digital India Land Records Modernization Programme (DILRMP) 
. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) 

. Urban Rejuvenation Mission: AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission 
. Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana (HRIDAY) 
. National River Conservation Plan-Other Basins 

. Fortification of Rice and its Distribution under Public Distribution System 


. Prime Minister Formalisation of Micro Food Processing Enterprises Scheme 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


. Safe Tourist Destination for Women 
. Strengthening Teaching-Learning and Results for States (STARS) 
. Development Programmes (Animal Husbandry) 


. Saksham Anganwadi and POSHAN 2.0 (Umbrella ICDS - Anganwadi Services, 


Poshan Abhiyan, Scheme for Adolescent Girls) 


. Mission Shakti (Mission for Protection and Empowerment for Women) 

. Mission VATSALYA (Child Protection Services and Child Welfare Services) 

. Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PMABHIM) 
. Digitalization of Primary Agriculture Cooperative Societies 

. Krishionnati Yojana 

. ASPIRE (Accelerating State Education Program to Improve Results) 

. Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman (PM POSHAN) 

. Prosperity through Cooperatives 

. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna 


. Revision of norms for Central Assistance released to States/ UTs for meeting 


expenditure on intra-state movement, handling of foodgrains and FPS dealers margin 
under NFSA 


. Green Revolution 
. National Programme of Mid Day Meal in Schools 
. India COVID-l9 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness Package 


(Phasell) (DBS) (CSS) 


. UmbrellaICDS 
. White Revolution 


. Beti Bachao Beti Padhao 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Government implements several Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes to supplement the efforts of the State Government financially. These are also 
implemented to align the objectives of the National Development Agenda with that of the 
State's as well as to ensure inclusive development of all States by targeting key structural 
objectives like poverty elimination, social inclusion and livelihood guarantee. 


However, it has been witnessed that the systems of compliance and accountability 
for efficient and time bound implementation of these schemes have been lacking. Many 
problems like appropriate dispensation of funds or governance problems with respect to 
availability of land, impede the potential progress of these schemes. 


Therefore, to strengthen these mechanisms and for the effective dispensation of public 
goods, the District Development and Monitoring Committees are being instituted. These 
committees comprise the Members of Parliament who would monitor the progress of the 
Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes in the districts of their constituencies. The 
Committees include representations from the District Collectors, Members of State Legislative 
Assemblies, State Governments, Municipalities and Gram Panchayats, hence, covering all 
wings of the Government to ensure coordination and alignment of objectives. 


The functions of these Committees include coordination between all wings of the 
Government to solve problems of governance, resolving matters of land and space, 
recommending improvements in system design of the schemes, looking into appropriate 
dispensation of funds and following up with the Parliament, State Assembly and Local 
Government. 


The present Bill institutes mechanisms to ensure accountability of the Committees 
themselves. The minutes of the meeting are required to be recorded and uploaded on an MIS 
portal by the Central Government as well as information distributed to all the relevant 
stakeholders. Additionally, a randomized audit is also required to be conducted of a few 
districts each year to oversee whether the meetings are being conducted as per the prescribed 
mandate. 


It is important to note that the present Bill respects and keeps intact the division of 
power under the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India by having an advisory nature 
and a monitoring role of schemes with the Central Government's involvement. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for a smooth flowing system of accountability to 
effectively achieve universal coverage of all development schemes that have the involvement 
of the Central Government. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; RAJIV PRATAP RUDY 
June 8, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the District Development and 
Monitoring Committees at the district level by the Central Government. Clause 4 provide for 
the meetings of the Committees. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that about rupees four crores and eight 
lakh per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India. Clause 7 provides for 
deputing five officers from the Central Government to oversee the timely conduct of meetings 
of the Committee. In respect of this clause, an indicative recurring expenditure of about 
rupees eight lakh per annum is estimated. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty lakh is also likely to be involved. 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


Bill No. 27 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of a Permanent Bench of the High Court of 
Kerala at Thiruvananthapuram. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the High Court of Kerala (Establishment ofa Permanent 
Bench at Thiruvananthapuram) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the High Court of Kerala at 
Thiruvananthapuram and such Judges of the High Court of Kerala, being not less than five 
in number, as the Chief Justice of that High Court may, from time to time nominate, shall sit at 
Thiruvananthapuram in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested 
in that High Court in respect of cases arising in the district of Thiruvananthapuram and such 
other territories within that State as the President may by notification specify. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Establishment of 
a Permanent 
Bench of High 
Court of 

Kerala at 
Thiruvananthapuram. 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The principal seat of the Kerala High Court is at Ernakulam, which is situated at a 
distance of 200 kilometers from the State Capital, Thiruvananthapuram. Ever since the 


formation of the State of Kerala in [956, there has been a demand for the establishment of a 
permanent Bench at the State Capital. 


It has been observed that the State is a principal litigant in a majority of cases pending 
in the High Court of Kerala. This leads to the State Government incurring considerable 
expenditure on account of travelling allowance and leave allowance given to the Government 
employees for travelling from Thiruvananthapuram, the state capital to Ernakulam for 
depositions. 


Moreover, it has been the policy of the successive Governments that justice should be 
taken to the doors of the litigants and therefore the litigants should not be compelled to go 
long distance to the Court. In the interest of administration of justice, the court must be 
easily accessible to the litigants and witnesses. 


It will be, therefore, appropriate if a Bench of High Court is established at 
Thiruvananthapuram. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR 
June 8, 2024. 


40 of 209. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


Bill No. 26 of 2024 
A Bill to amend the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 20/9., 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) 
Amendment Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. After section 8 of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 209 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 


"8A. (/) Every Government establishment shall reserve at least one per cent. of 
the total vacancies for transgender persons in each category including General, the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes, meant to be 
filled by direct recruitment in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that if sufficient number of transgender persons are not available, such 
unfilled vacancies shall be filled by male or female candidates belonging to the same 
category in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) For the purpose of direct recruitment of transgender persons under sub-section 
(), there shall be a separate column of "Others" along with the male and female categories in 
the Gender Section of the application form for all such posts.". 


3. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"|३3७, Every educational institution funded or recognised by the appropriate 
Government including preschool, primary, secondary and higher education and 
universities (including a technical, trade, or vocational school) shall reserve at least of 
one per cent. of the total seats in each class or course for the transgender persons in 
such manner as may be prescribed.". 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new section 
8A. 


Reservation in 
Employment. 


Insertion of 
new section 
3A. 


Reservation in 
Educational 
Institutions. 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


For centuries, the transgender community has been ostracized across the world leading 
to denial of basic human rights that cisgender individuals enjoy. This extreme social exclusion 
has translated to increased marginalisation and limited access to opportunities. 


Offering a glimmer of hope, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India passed a landmark 
judgement on the April [5, 204 which acknowledged the rampant discrimination faced by 
the transgender community and recognised their constitutional rights to equality, liberty and 
dignity. As a means to uplift the trans people, the Court further directed the Central and State 
Governments to take proactive steps towards the advancement of their community. This 
included extending "all kinds of reservation in cases of admission in educational institution 
and for public appointments" as the community is "entitled to reservation in the matter of 
appointment, as envisaged under Article l6(4) of the Constitution". 


In 202l, the Central Government had moved a Cabinet note proposing to add 
transgender persons to the list of Other Backward Classes (OBCs). Although created with 
the right intentions of addressing the plight of the transgender community, the proposed 
legislation amounts to vertical reservation for the community which fails to account for the 
intersection between caste identities and the diverse notion of gender. 


Such an arrangement results in certain caste groups left with entrenched discrimination 
and stigma on both these accounts. According to a study conducted by the Centre for Law 
and Policy Research on the experience of intersectionality, Dalit transgender persons faced 
the most violence in school and were especially vulnerable to sexual violence at work with 
33 per cent. reporting sexual assault and harassment at work. They also faced harassment in 
their interactions with police officials: 23 per cent. of Dalit transgender persons were forcibly 
denuded or stripped by the police and 9 per cent. were sexually assaulted when they 
approached the police seeking assistance. It extended to matters pertaining to accessing 
public transport and public spaces as well such as parks (50 per cent.), police stations 
(46 per cent.) and Government hospitals (43 per cent.). Furthermore, 56 per cent. of Dalit 
transgender respondents were forced to engage in sexual activity to access shelter, food or 
gain employment. 


In the state of Karnataka, horizontal reservation has been implemented for transgender 
persons in the state civil services across all caste categories by providing | per cent. separate 
reservation for transgender persons within each 'vertical' SC/ST/OBC/General category. This 
adequately tries to redress the discrimination received by the community of complex social 
and economic dimensions. 


A policy of horizontal reservation recognises the intersectionality of caste, class and 
gender and the nuances of discrimination, creating an environment that is inclusive and 
allows every individual of the transgender community to thrive in every space of society. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR 
June 8, 2024. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5l 


Bill No. 56 of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In article 43A of the Constitution, for the words, ‘engaged in any industry’, the 
words, ‘engaged in any industry including labour engaged in plantation industry’ shall be 
substituted. 


Short title, 
and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of article 43A. 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Forty-second amendment Act, 976 was a seminal legislation that added many 
seminal worker and downtrodden friendly provisions to the constitution. One such Article 
hitherto inserted is the Article 43A. It seeks to promote the involvement of labour in the way 
industries and other enterprises are being run. It is well known that the plantation labour in 
India is one of the most marginalised sections amidst the labour community. Despite their 
whole lives dedicated to the upkeep of the plantation estates, they seldom get the fruits of 
their labour. They live in subhuman conditions with scant avenues for social mobility. There 
is aneed for an urgent intervention to make sure that they get a fair share of their labour by 
getting an opportunity to be part of the management. 


The Bill seeks to achieve this aim. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; DEAN KURIAKOSE 
June 2, 2024. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


Bill No. 63 of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fifth year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. After article 49 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:— 
"49A. The State shall endeavour to— 
(a) include lessons regarding secularism in the school and college 
curriculum; and 


(6) encourage exercises and social conventions that foster the unity and 
integrity of India by promoting a sense of fraternity that is firmly rooted in the 
secular ethos of the Republic.". 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new article 
490. 


Promotion of 
secularism. 


54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Indian model of secularism is very different from the European model of secularism. It 
is rooted in the ideals of cooperation and harmonious existence. The state is not completely 
separated from religion. Rather, the state treats every religion equally and promotes an 
atmosphere of harmonious co-existence. This is because, the founding fathers of the republic 
realised that the state has to play a pro-active role in maintaining the secular fabric of the 
country. The elected union government and other organs of the state should uphold the 
secular spirit of the constitution. But, the secular ethos of the Constitution is not something, 
that could be left to the vagaries of transient electoral majorities. The nature of Indian society 
must be protected by inculcating a spirit of fraternity amongst all communities that reside in 
India. To ensure this, a constitutional mandate must be placed over the elected governments 
to inculcate the spirit of secularism through school and college education. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; DEAN KURIAKOSE 
June 2, 2024. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 55 


Bill No. 34 of 2024 


A Bill to regulate and control the rabid animals for the prevention and control of rabies in 
the interest of the public health and for matters connected thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Rabies Control Act, 2024. Short title, 
: ae extent and 
(2) It extends to Union territories only. commencement. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires;— 


(a) 'animal' means any mammal of species naturally susceptible to rabies, except 
man; 


(b) 'authority' means the Licensing and Registering Authority constituted under 
section 7; 


(c) ‘authorised officer’ means an officer appointed by the Department to issue 
licence under this Act or to carry out any function under this Act as required; 


(d) ‘department’ means the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
under Union Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying; 


(e) 'dog' means an animal belonging to the species (Mammals) Canis familiarizes 
of the order of mammals Carnivora; 


(f) ‘exposed to rabies' means a person or an animal being bitten, scratched or 
licked by or having being other direct physical contact with a rabid dog or a dog or 
other animals suspected of being affected with rabies; 


(2) ‘infected area’ means an area which is declared to be an infected area for the 
purpose connected with the control and elimination of rabies by an order of the 
Department; 


(A) ‘licence’ means a licence granted under this Act and includes any permit, 
approval or other form of authorization; 


(7) ‘local authority’ means the members of the public authorized by the Department 
or the local Panchayat or local urban bodies of the area concerned; 


(7) 'notification' means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 


(k) 'owner' means every person who is the sole or part owner of any animal and 
includes any person who is in-charge of an animal, and the occupier of the premises on 
which any animal is found shall be deemed to be the owner of such animals until the 
contrary is proved; 


(0) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(m) 'stray dog' means any dog not kept in compliance with the regulations of 
rabies control; 


(n) 'vaccination' means the administration of all approved anti-rabies vaccine to 
an animal; 


(०) 'veterinary hospital' means an institution or centre by whatever name called 
where such animals are admitted for treatment; 


(p) veterinary officer' means an registered Veterinary Practitioner appointed by 
the Central Government to receive information about animals and car cases affected or 
suspected of being affected with specified diseases for the area in which the animal or 
carcass exists. 


Notice of 3. (J) Aperson who know or suspect that an animal is exposed to rabies or was at the 
Rabies or time of its death so affected, shall with all practicable speed, give notice to an officer of the 
on किक local authority, a health worker or to an officer-in-charge of the respective Police Station in 


such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The officers of the local authority, healthcare worker or officer-in-charge of the 
Police Station as the case may be, upon receipt of information, he shall immediately transmit 
the information received by him in the most expeditious manner in all cases to the Veterinary 
Officer. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 57 


4. Where the department believes or suspects that rabies exists in an area, may by 
order declare that area together with any adjoining area in to which he considers that there 
may be a possibility of rabies spreading to be an infected area for the purposes connected 
with the control and eradication of that disease. 


5. (/) The Veterinary Officer shall cause any dog or other animals bearing proof of valid 
vaccination having registration taken or certificate which has been exposed to rabies, to be 
re-vaccinated or to be detained at home, nuzzle and leash confinement for ninety days under 
veterinary surveillance. 


(2)The dog or other animals shall be presented twice a month before the Veterinary 
Officer. 


(3) A Veterinary Officer shall cause any stray dog or any other animal which has been 
exposed to,— 


(a) a dog or any other animals of suspected or unknown rabies status to be 
destroyed without payment or any compensation to the owner; 


(b) a known rabid dog or any other rabid animals to be destroyed for with under 
the powers conferred under sub-section (3). 


6. (/) The department may require that all dogs and other animals over the age of three 
months shall be vaccinated against rabies and that the vaccination shall be repeated every 
twelve months. 


(2) The vaccination shall be carried out by the Department at such place and as such 
time with the collaboration of the local authority. 


(3) Every owner shall present his dog or a pet animal for vaccination and the veterinary 
officer of the area concerned shall provide the owner with a certificate of vaccination in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) Any owner not presenting his dog or dogs for vaccination shall be guilty of an 
offence punishable under this Act. 


(5)Ifa dog is not vaccinated and is suspected to be exposed to rabies, it may be seized 
and kept under observation and if it starts to show symptoms, it could be destroyed for with 
under the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of section 5. 


7. (४) There shall be constituted an authority to be called the Licensing and registering 
authority consisting of such number of Veterinary Officers to cause registration of dogs over 
the age of three months and thereafter annually in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Every dog owner shall— 


(a) present the dog on its attaining the age of three months at such time and 
place as determined by the Department for registration and licensing of dogs; 


(b) produce a certificate that the dog had been vaccinated at the period of not 
more than twelve months; and 


(c) pay such registration and licensing fee as may be determined by the department 
by notification. 


(3) The Licensing and Registering Authority shall,— 
(a) provide the owner with a certificate of registration of the dog; and 
(b) provide distinguishing token collar as proof of registration. 


(4) Every adult dog shall be registered and licensed in every twelve months in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


Declaration of 
infected area. 


Determination 
or destruction 
of any dog or 
exposed to 
rabies. 


Vaccination of 
dogs and other 
animals in an 
infected area. 


Registration 
and licencing 
of dogs. 


58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(5) Any owner not presenting their dog or dogs for annual registration or licensing 
shall be guilty of an offence under this Act and shall be liable to a fine or rupees one hundred 
which may extend to rupees five hundred. 


(6) The license and the certificate of registration shall be renewed in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette— 
(a) ascertain first vaccination age of dogs; 
(b) declare time for providing booster dose; 
(c) prepare annual schedule of registration; 


(d) postpone registration schedules for want of vaccine stock for unavoidable 
circumstances. 


Seizure, 8. (J) A Veterinary Officer, an Officer of the local authority or Officer-in-charge of the 
detention and —_ respective Police Station may, after due notice has been given to the members of the public 
epee ee in the area, seize and detain or destroy any stray dog in the area duly applying the provisions 


animals not ies 
under control, "amely:—— 


(a) the local authority shall take all reasonable steps to draw the attention of 
members of the public in their area in the address or location of any place at which 
dogs seized under sub-section (/) to a period for three days unless claimed by or on 
behalf of its owner within that period; 


(b) an owner claiming his dog from a place of detention under the provisions of 
sub-section (/) shall be liable to appropriate penalties and fines if it is established that 
he has committed offences under sub-section (5) of section 7 of this Act; 


(c) where a dog seized under this section is not claimed by or on behalf of its 
owner within the period specified under clause (a) of sub-section (/) of section 8, the 
local authority may order it to be destroyed and disposed of its carcass; 


(d) where circumstances prevents a dog which is liable to be seized under this 
section from being so seized, it shall be lawful for a Veterinary Officer or an Officer of 
the local authority of Officer-in-charge of the respective Police Station to destroy the 
dog without seizing it; 

(e) the Department shall issue guidelines on the methods to be applied for 


destruction of stray dogs; 


(f) a Veterinary Officer of the local authority or Officer-in-charge of the respective 
Police Station may enter any land for the purpose of seizing and destroying a dog 
which is liable to be seized under this Act; and 


(g) the local authority shall be responsible for the collection and safe disposal of 
the carcasses of any dog destroyed under this Act. 


Offences. 9. Any person who contravenes any provisions of this Act shall be punishable with a 
fine of rupees five thousand or an imprisonment for a period of one month or with both. 


Power to 0. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision of this Act, the Government 
ee ; may, by general of special order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
ifficulties. 


inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary or expedient for 
the removal of the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from the 
commencement of this Act. 


Power to Il. (/) The Central Government may be, by notification, make rules to carry out all or 
make rules. any of the purposes of this Act. 


9780. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
tules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) charges to be levied for registration and vaccination. 


(b) manner of disposal of carcass and charge of its disposal. Cost of destruction 
of stray animals affected with rabies. 


(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of thirty days as aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, _ that 
any such modification or annulment shall be made without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under the rule. 


60 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Dogs have been the companions of humans for a long time. They deserve just and 


humane treatment. At the same time, they also deserve to be cared for at a place under good 
human supervision. If such a supervision is not available, they could turn into a menace. 


While individual dogs actually help humans and live in a symbiotic relationship, 
uncontrolled expansion of canine population could lead to their packs turning into more and 
more territorial and aggressive behaviour. There has been many documented cases in which 
dogs from such packs attacking humans without any provocation. In many States like Kerala 
and Jammu and Kashmir, stray dog menace has reached epic proportions. There are 
legislations on force in States like Sikkim where there are measures available to control the 
stray dog menace. Such a legislation also helps to control the population and ensure quality 
care to existing dog population. Instituting a mechanism to ensure control of canine population 
and also control spread of rabies is in the best interest of people and dogs living with them. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to regulate the destruction of rabid animals and for the 
prevention and control of the disease in the interest of the public health. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; DEAN KURIAKOSE 
June 2, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 6l 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Licensing and Registering 
Authority for the purpose of registration of dogs over the age of three months and thereafter 
annually. The Bill, therefore if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees ten crores will be 
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore is also likely to be involved. 


62 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |! of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 63 


Bill No. 6l of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. Inarticle 8l of the Constitution,— 


(a) in clause (/), after sub-clause (0), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"Provided that at least ten seats under clause (a) shall be reserved for the 
persons below the age of thirty-five years to be chosen by direct election, on 
rotation basis, in such manner as the Parliament may, by law, determine.". 


(b) after clause (3), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(3A). The reservation of seats for the persons below the age of thirty- 
five years to the House of the People under clause (/) shall come into effect from 
the next general election after the enactment of the Constitution (Amendment) 
Act, 2024.". 


Short title, 
and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of article 8l. 


64 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

India has more than 50 percent of its population below the age of twenty- five and more 
than 65 percent below the age of thirty-five. The country's median age is twenty-eight. India 
as a country is young. However, its leaders are not. The average age of an Indian 
parliamentarian is fifty-five. In particular, young citizens are an "excluded majority" with an 
insufficient presence. Today, those under the age of thirty-five represent more than half of 
the world's population but in political office, as elected representatives, they are a clear 
minority. This in itselfis a democratic deficit. 


If voters are seeking representatives who reflect their interests, they may choose 
candidates who are roughly their age. This proactive measure of reserving seats in the 
House of the People will send a signal to our youth that they also have a place in politics. 
Young adults need representatives whom they can relate to, and who are sensitive to their 
aspirations and motivated to raise issues that impact them as well. Our youth population is 
one of the largest in the world and this creates a demographic dividend that could play a 
significant role in making India a developed nation. 


As a young country, we should aim to include the youth in our legislative procedures 
and discussions, making them the custodians of their own future. They can be indispensable 
in crafting policies that are futuristic and take into account new and emerging challenges. If 
India desires to become a world leader, it must make a conscious effort to give its youth a 
chance to voice their opinions as an integral part of the House of the People. 


Thus, in order to facilitate greater participation of young Indians as public 
representatives in policy-making at the national level, it is imperative to introduce this 
constitutional amendment to provide for ten seats of the total number of seats in the House 
of the People for individuals under the age of 35 years who have presented themselves to 
the electorate in the general elections but failed to secure the election in their own right 
from a constituency. These ten unsuccessful candidates under the age of 35 years with the 
best voting percentage in their constituencies shall be deemed elected, and these ten seats 
would be considered reserved. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR 
June 26, 2024. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 65 


Bill No. 24 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for setting up of residential schools for children belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Residential Schools (for Scheduled Castes and Short title, 
Scheduled Tribes) Act, 2024. extent and 


commencement. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definition. 


Central 
Government 
to set up 
residential 
schools for 
the Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to provide 
land for 
setting up of 
residential 
schools. 


Residential 
schools to be 
a?liated to 
CBSE. 


Residential 
schools to 
have basic 
facilities. 


Power to 
make rules. 


66 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


wt 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "appropriate Government"' means 
in the case of a State, the Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 


3. () The Central Government shall set up a residential school in every area having 
such high population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes as it may deem 
appropriate. 


(2) The residential school shall cater to the schooling need of children belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes only. 


(3) The residential school shall conduct classes from nursery to twelfth standard. 


(4) The medium of instruction shall be English, Hindi and the language of the State in 
which the school is located. 


(5) No fees or other expenses, whatsoever, shall be charged from any student and the 
education shall be imparted free of cost to the children. 


4. The appropriate Government shall provide land free of cost for setting up of 
residential schools within its territorial jurisdiction and shall not charge any money for 
providing essential services like electricity and water. 


5. (/) The residential schools shall be affiliated to Central Board of Secondary 
Education, New Delhi and shall follow the curriculum prescribed by it. 


(2) The students shall also be given training in vocational courses of their choice. 


6. The residential schools shall have all basic infrastructure facilities like playground, 
library, laboratories, hostels, dining facilities, etc. 


7. (J) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
tule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 67 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Certain areas of our country have large population of the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes. But there are not enough educational facilities in those areas. The children 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, being generally poor, cannot 
afford good education in private schools and the number of good Government schools are 
limited in number. 


Therefore, it is proposed that free residential schools should be set up exclusively for 
children belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes with all facilities in those 
areas where the population the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes is significantly 
high. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; CHANDRA SHEKHAR AZAD 
June 26, 2024. 


68 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to set upresidential schools exclusively for children belonging 
to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in areas where their concentration is high. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred 
crore. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore would also be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 69 


Bill No. 39 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes 
and the Other Backward Classes in private sector and for matters connected 
therewith. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled 
Tribes and the Other Backward Classes in Private Sector Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2.In this, act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “private sector” means any organization, establishment, educational 
institutes or institution which is owned fully by private individual or corporation or 
limited company or an organization in which the Government of India or a State has no 
financial interest and wherein not less than twenty persons are employed; and 


(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3.(/) The Central Government shall give due encouragement to private sector to 
make provisions for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, 
the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes in their establishment/organisation. 


(2) The encouragement as provided in sub-section (/) may include— 
() special concessions under various existing Central schemes; and 
(ii) loans from nationalized banks at lower rate of interest. 


4. The Central Government shall cause an annual report to be laid before both the 
Houses of Parliament on the action taken under this Act. 


5.(/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Government 
provide 
incentives to 
Private Sector 
to make 
provisions for 
reservation. 


Annual report. 


Power to make 
rules. 


70 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

At present, reservation is available for persons belonging to the Other backward 
Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in service and posts under the 
Central Government. The number of posts and appointments in Government sector come 
down considerably, especially after the economic liberalization. Today, private sector has 
become more important and job oriented. In such scenario, the private sector is more involved 
in the nation building activities alongwith infrastructure and economical projects. People 
belonging to Other Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes find it very 
difficult to get into Government service due to availability of less number of posts. 


Under the provisions of article |6(4) and |6(4A) of the Constitution, Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSU) including Public Sector Banks under the Central Government and 
Financial Institutions are following the instructions issued by the Government of India 
mutatis mutandis. Implementation of the Provisions or reservation is a pre-requisite for 
such voluntary organizations, autonomous bodies/institutions etc. where the body receiving 
grant-in-aid, employs more than twenty people on regular basis and minimum fifty per cent. 
of its recurring expenditure is met by grant-in-aid of the Central Government and such body 
should be a registered society of any cooperative society and should be in receipt of rupees 
two lakh or more from the Consolidated Fund of India as annual grant-in-aid for general 
purpose. 


There are several schemes and special provision in the country for the welfare of the 
people belonging to the Other Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
However, in spite of all these measures, there has not been any big change visible in their 
socio-economic status. In this situation, their presence is very vital in the private sector in 
order to ensure their all-round development. 


At present, there is no provision for reservation of persons belonging to Other 
Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in private sector. However, the 
Government also cannot pressurise them to provide reservation. In such a scenario, the 
private sector can be incentivised to provide reservation to persons belonging to Other 
backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes by way of making provisions 
for concessions and special schemes. 


Hence this Bill. 


New Devi; CHANDRA SHEKHAR AZAD 
June 26, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY हि । 


Bill No. 54 of 2024 


A Bill to establish schools imparting education upto senior secondary level free of cost to 
all children in the country. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Establishment of Schools Upto Senior Secondary Short title, 
Level Act, 2024. extent and 


commencement. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Establishment 
of schools 
upto senior 
secondary 
level. 


Facilities to 
be provided to 
the students 
enrolled in 
schools. 


Duty of 
parents to 
send their 
wards to 
schools. 


Penalty. 


Grants by the 
Central 
Government. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
other laws. 


Power to 
make rules. 


72 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires — 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and 


(b) “child” means a boy or a girl who is below the age of eighteen years. 


3. (J) The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of schools upto 
senior secondary level to impart education to children from class first to senior secondary 
level. 


(2) For the purpose of sub-section (/), the appropriate Government may, if it deems 
necessary, upgrade any of the existing primary, middle or secondary school to senior 
secondary level. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (/), there shall be at least one senior 
secondary school per one thousand population in every area. 


4. The appropriate Government shall provide the following facilities to every child 
enrolled in a school established or upgraded under section 3:— 


(7) cost of admission and all other expenditure including tuition fee; 
(ii) books, notebooks and all other stationary items free of cost; 
(iii) free hostel facilities, whenever necessary; and 

(iv) scholarship in deserving cases. 


5. (/) It shall be compulsory for every parent to admit their wards in school for the 
purpose of education upto senior secondary level. 


(2) No person shall employ any child in any job which prevents him from attending 
school. 


6. Whoever prevents any child from getting education upto senior secondary level 
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months. 


7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide to the State Governments by way of grants such sums of money 
as the Central Government may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act. 


8. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law, for the time being in force in relation to any of the matters provided under this Act. 


9. (/) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State legislature. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 73 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

While a large number of primary, middle and secondary schools have been established, 
the students, especially in big cities, have to face hardships in securing admission to senior 
secondary schools because, in most of the cases, the last attended school imparts education 
upto primary, middle or secondary level. Students are compelled to run to district education 
office, schools and other authorities to get recommendations or relevant certificates to fulfil 
the formalities for admission in senior secondary schools. In such a situation, it is quite 
natural that the children as well as parents have to suffer mental agony. 


Therefore, it has become necessary in the public interest to provide for the establishment 
of schools imparting education from classes first to twelfth or upgrade the existing primary, 
middle or secondary level schools to senior secondary level. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; CHANDRA SHEKHAR AZAD 
June 26, 2024. 


74 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of adequate number of schools or 
upgrade the existing primary, middle or secondary level schools upto senior secondary lev- 
el. Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government shall bear the cost of admission and 
all other expenditure including providing of free of cost books, notebooks, stationary item, 
hostel facility and scholarship to the students enrolled in schools. Clause 7 provides that 
the Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments for establishment of 
schools. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seventy five crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 75 


Bill No. 5 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of an Airfare Regulatory Board for monitoring and 
regulation of airfare and for matters connected therewith. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


.(/) This Act may be called the Airfare Regulatory Board Act, 2024. Short title 
extent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commencement. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Establishment 
of the Airfare 
Regulatory 
Board. 


Functions of 
the Board. 


76 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “airline” means all commercial flights operating in the country either on 
domestic or international routes; 


(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases the Central Government; 


(c) “Board” means the Airfare Regulatory Board established under section 3; 
(d) “member” means a member of the Board; and 
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official gazette, establish a 
quasi-judicial body to be known as the Airfare Regulatory Board (hereinafter referred to as 
the Board) to exercise the powers conferred on and to perform the functions assigned to it 
under this Act. 


(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, 
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by 
the said name, sue or be sued. 


(3) The head office of the Board shall be at New Delhi and the Board may establish 
such offices at other places in the country as it deems necessary for carrying functions 
under this Act. 


(4) The Board shall consist of,— 
(a) a Chairperson; 
(b) two Members, 


to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst person of ability and 
integrity and having extensive experience and adequate professional knowledge in the 
domain of civil aviation, consumer affairs, law, economics and public policy in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Chairperson and members of the Board shall hold office for such period, not 
exceeding four years as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf. 


(6) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers and staff 
including experts to the Board as may be required for its efficient functioning. 


(7) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service 
of the Chairperson, member, officers, staffand experts of the Board shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


(S) The Board shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 
4. The Board shall,— 


(7) function as an apex quasi-judicial authority for regulating and monitoring 
the tariff of all airlines operating in the country; 


(7) design a regulatory environment for commercial airlines keeping into account 
the economic viability of airline operations, cost of operations, reasonable profits, 
rate and value of the services, cost of fuel and changes in existing tax structure; 


(iii) determine an upper limit of the airfare that can be collected from a passenger 
in each class and route; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 77 


(iv) monitor the tariff of airlines on a regular basis and issue directions and take 
disciplinary actions against any airline, if the Board is satisfied that the specific airline 
has charged excessive or predatory tariff; 


(०) call for such information and records which are necessary for determining 
the upper limit or maximum airfare to be collected from passengers in each route and 
class; 


(vi) hold due consultations with all the relevant stakeholders while determining 
the air tariff and any other matter as may be referred to it; 


(vii) call upon the representative of any airline to furnish in writing any such 
information and explanation related to its functions and operations; 


(viii) direct any of its officers and staff to inspect the website, books of account 
and relevant document of the airline; and 


(ix) advise the appropriate Government in any other matter as may be referred 
to it, from time to time. 


5. The Board shall, while investigating any matter referred to it in section 4, have all 
the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and, in particular in respect of the following matters, 
namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of 
India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discover and production of any document; 

(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 

(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; 
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witness and documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 


6. The appropriate Government shall consult the Board on all policies related to the 
monitoring and regulation of airfare in the country. 


7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by law 
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Board for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. 


8. (/) The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, as 
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a true and full accounts of its activities undertaken 
under section 4 during the previous financial year and submit a copy thereof to the Central 
Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid, as soon as may 
be after receipt of the report under sub-section (), before each House of Parliament along 
with a memorandum explaining the reasons for not accepting any of the recommendations 
made thereto. 


(3) Where the report or any of its part is related to any of the issues connected with 
a State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of that State, 
who shall in turn, along with an explanatory memorandum concerned with the action taken 
or proposed to be taken on the recommendations related to the State, if any, and reasons for 
not accepting any of the recommendations, cause to be laid such report before each House 
of the State legislature. 


Board to have 
powers of 
Civil Court. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to consult the 
Board. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Annual 
Report. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to make 
rules. 


78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


9. (J) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary for removal of 
difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


0. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. 


Il. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 79 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The exorbitant increase in airfare has been recognized as a serious issue ever since 
the airline sector has been de-regulated. With the repeal of Air Corporations Act in March, 
994, airlines are free to fix reasonable tariffs under the provisions of sub-rule (/) of Rule 35 
of Aircraft Rules, !937. Therefore, there is no regulating and monitoring mechanism to 
rationalize the airfare without affecting the passengers. In some sectors, the Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation has created ‘Tariff Monitoring Unit’. But these units only ensure 
that the fares charged by the airlines are within the prescribed tariffs of the airlines displayed 
on their websites. As a result, the airlines often charge excessive rates particularly during 
festival or holiday seasons. 


The airfare is dynamic in nature and follows the principle of demand and supply. 
Besides, the airline companies are always influenced by shareholder interests and revenue 
management rather than passenger concern and affordability. All these issues seriously 
affect the passengers. The expatriates who work in the Gulf region are often the victims of 
this unscrupulous airfare charges as they are forced to pay three to four times of the regular 
fare during vacations reasons. 


Realizing the gravity of the situation, the Parliamentary Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture have also expressed their concern on the self-regulating mechanism of 
the current airline monitoring regime which is inadequate to address the financial burden of 
the passengers on the one hand and the predatory tariff structure of the airline companies 
on the other. The Committee also suggested the establishment of a quasi-judicial entity to 
regulate and monitor the air tariff in an ethical and equitable manner. Since there is no such 
monitoring agency to regulate the airfare in the current context of liberalized economy, there 
is an urgent need to set up an apex authority with all the relevant powers and functions to 
regulate the airfare dynamics and fix an upper limit to the maximum tariff. The establishment 
of the Airfare Regulatory Board would be the right direction in this regard. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SHAFI PARAMBIL 
July 2, 2024. 


80 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Airfare Regulatory Board. It 
also provides for the appointment of a Chairperson, members, officers, staff and experts to 
the Board. Clause 7 provides for the Central Government to provide funds to the Board for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that about rupees one hundred crore 
will be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause | of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to the matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is, of a normal character. 


42 of 2005. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 8l 


Bill No. 53 of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act, 2005. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


.(/) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee (Amendment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 


2.In the long title of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words “one hundred days”, 
the words “one hundred and fifty days” shall be substituted; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of Long Title. 


82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Amendment 3. In section 3 of the principal Act,— 


of section 3. . . ” 
(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “one hundred days”, the words “one 


hundred and fifty days” shall be substituted; and 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted namely,— 


“(2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme 
shall be entitled to receive wages at the rate of rupees four hundred for each 
day of work or at such wage rate of each day of work, as may be determined, 
whichever is higher.”. 


Amendment 4.In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words “one hundred 
of section 4... days” the words “one hundred and fifty days” shall be substituted. 


Amendment 5.In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/) for the words “sixty rupees per 
of section 6... day”, the words “four hundred rupees per day” shall be substituted. 


Amendment 6.In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “one hundred 
of section 7. days”, wherever they occur, the words “one hundred and fifty days” shall be substituted. 


Amendment 7. In section 25 of the principal Act, for the words “one thousand rupees”, the words 
of section 25. “twenty thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 


Amendment 8.In Schedule I of the principal Act, in para 3, in sub-para (a) for the words “one 
of Schedule I. hundred days”, the word “one hundred and fifty days” shall be substituted. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 83 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee (MGNREGA) Act, 2005 
is perhaps the most significant social policy initiative in India since independence. The 
main objective of the Act is to provide enhancement of livelihood security of the households 
in rural areas by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment to 
every household in unskilled manual work. Ever since its inception, the rural employment 
guarantee program has provided lifeline to the poor households in the rural areas, especially 
during the periods of rural distress. 


While the country is witnessing an alarming rate of unemployment with limited job 
opportunities in manufacturing sector, there is a high demand for the jobs under the 
MGNREGA Scheme. But the existing provisions of the Act are unable to address the growing 
aspirations of the rural poor. For example, the average wage rate for unskilled manual 
workers under the program has been growing at a sluggish pace since 208-l9. The average 
wage rate was Rs. 207 in 20I8- 9, growing to Rs. 259 in 2023-24. The slight increase in wage 
rate is insufficient to meet the increase in cost of basic goods, which have risen due to spike 
in inflation in the last few years. 


The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj in 
202-22 critically noted that the fluctuations and huge disparity in wage rates among the 
States are unjustified. Hence, there is a need to rise the lower limit of the wage rate under the 
scheme in such a way that it can guarantee a decent income which can manage the chronic 
of price rice. While considering the existing wage rate of different States, it is understood 
that a minimum wage of rupees four hundred would be a balanced amount to be fixed for a 
day’s work. Besides, the last few years have witnessed significant increase in demand for 
job across the country. Therefore, there is a need to guarantee at least one hundred and fifty 
days of employment instead of one hundred days. 


Considering the changing dynamics of the unemployment situation, rural distress 
and chronic inflation in the country, it is envisaged that increasing the days of guaranteed 
employment to one hundred and fifty days and fixing the minimum wage rate at rupees four 
hundred would transform the lives of the rural poor substantially. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SHAFI PARAMBIL 
July 2,2024. 


84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provide for increasing the days of guaranteed employment under 
the Act from existing one hundred days to one hundred and fifty days. Clause 3 provides 
for fixing the minimum wages to at least rupees four hundred per day. Clause 4 provides for 
the State Government to increase the number of days of guaranteed employment in a 
financial year to every household in the rural areas under the Scheme from existing one 
hundred days to one hundred and fifty days. Clause 6 provides for the specifying the 
minimum wage rate from existing sixty rupees per day to four hundred rupees per day. 
Clause 7 provides for the State Government to pay unemployment allowance to a household 
from existing one hundred days to one hundred and fifty days. Clause 8 provides for 
increasing the days of guaranteed employment under the Act from existing one hundred 
days to one hundred and fifty days. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about 
rupees fifty crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 85 


Bill No. 42 of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Advocates Act, /964. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 
. (/) This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 2024. Short title and 
दे गा commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions 
of this Act. 
25 of 96]. 2. In section 2 of the Advocates Act, 96], (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) Definition. 


in sub-section (/):— 
() for clause (a) the following clauses, shall be substituted, namely: — 


“(a) “advocate” means an advocate entered in any roll under the 
provisions of this Act and includes an advocate carrying on practice in law with 
a law firm, by whatever name called, and a foreign lawyer registered under any 
law in a country outside India and recognised by the Bar Council of India in 
such manner as may be prescribed;”; 


(aa) “Advocates Social Security Fund” means the fund maintained by 
the Central Government under section 44B to be specifically used for the 
purposes mentioned under section 44A;”; 


Insertion of 
new sections 


44A and 44B. 


Welfare 
Scheme for 
lawyers. 


Constitution 
of the 
Advocates 
Social 
Security Fund. 


86 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(ii) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


(ia) “practicing advocate” means an advocate with twelve or more 
recorded hearings and name in five or more vakalatnamas in a year;”; 


(iii) after clause (n), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(na) “Vakalatnama” means a written document submitted before a court 
by an advocate declaring that his client has authorised him to represent him in 
a legal proceeding; 


(nb) “young practicing advocate” means an advocate under the age of 
thirty years who is practicing for a period of less than three years from the date 
of registration.”. 


3. After section 44 of the principle Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“CHAPTER VA 
SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS 


44A. (/) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Bar Council of India, 
formulate and notify, from time to time, suitable welfare schemes for practicing lawyers on 
matters relating to— 


(a) life and disability cover; 

(b) health and maternity benefits; 

(c) stipend for young practicing lawyers; 

(d) group health insurance cover; 

(e) compensation in case of death; and 

(f) any other benefits as may be determined by the Central Government. 


(2) The State Government may, in consultation with the State Bar Council formulate 
and notify, from time to time, suitable welfare schemes for practicing advocates, including 
schemes relating to— 


(a) housing; and 
(b) capacity building of practicing lawyers. 


44B. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette constitute 
a fund to be called the “Advocates’ Social Security Fund” which shall be managed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Bar Council of India in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) There shall be credited to the fund, a compulsory contribution called the social 
security contribution one per cent of the net income after tax or such higher percentage as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government, from time to time from practicing advocates 
having income after tax exceeding rupees one crore. 


(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund— 


(a) any voluntary donation or contribution made to the Fund by the Bar Council 
of India, any State Bar Association, any State Advocates’ Association or other 
association or institution, or any advocate or other person; and 


(b) any grants which may be made by the Central Government or a State 
Government to the Fund. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 87 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Preamble of the Constitution of India speaks of a solemn resolution to secure to 
all of its citizens, amongst other things, justice. Of the entire apparatus put in place to 
ensure timely delivery of justice, the most crucial component is the human resource element— 
the advocate. Even after 75 years after the country’s freedom there is no social security 
scheme for advocates.The importance of the role of advocates is unquestionable and their 
role in shaping our society, already acknowledged. Therefore, the well-being of lawyers and 
a plan for their social security is a matter of grave concern and one that demands the closest 
attention of the Government, Bar Councils, the Bar and the legal fraternity at large. 


The primary aim of the Advocates Act, 96], is to constitute a single class of legal 
practitioners, ‘Advocates’ as well as to introduce the powers of the Bar Council of India and 
the State Bar Council. According to this Act, only Advocates, who are enrolled in the Bar 
Council, have the power to practice the law in the court. With the enactment of the Advocates 
Welfare Fund Act, 200/, some steps were sought to be taken in this direction. Ineffective 
implementation of its provisions, however, has rendered it almost defunct. 


This seeks to amend the Advocates Act, |96] with a view to constitute Advocates’ 
Social Security Welfare Fund and the rules for the disbursement funds to be made by the 
Central or the State Government to create a financial security net for the advocates who 
have retired from practicing because of their age or illness and to the young lawyers who 
have just started out in the profession for their sustenance. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE 
July 2,2024. 


88 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Advocates’ Social Security Fund 
to be managed by the Central Government. It also provides for the Central Government to 
provide grants for the fund. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. However, at this stage it is not possible to calculate the exact amount which 
is likely to be incurred towards recurring and non-recurring expenditure for the purpose. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 89 


Bill No. 32 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for measures to ensure welfare and holistic development of orphans and 
for matters connected therewith. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Orphan Child (Welfare and Development) Act, 2024. Short title and 


हि हि हि commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:— Definitions. 


(a) “Appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in other cases, the Central Government; 


Central 
Government 
to conduct 
survey of 
orphan 
children. 


Orphans 
Welfare 
Scheme. 


90 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(b) “foster care home” means foster care home established under section 6; 


(c) “orphan child” means any child below eighteen years of age, who has lost 
both of his biological parents and registered in Central Registry of orphans established 
under section 3; 


(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(e) “Registry” means the Central Registry of Orphans established under section 3 
of this Act; 


(f) “Scheme” means the Orphans Welfare Scheme formulated under section 4; 
and 


(g) “social security” means provision of food, shelter, education, healthcare, 
job reservation quota, establishment of recreation centers and such other amenities 
necessary for the welfare of orphan child. 


3. () The Central Government shall, in consultation with State Governments, conduct 
and publish the survey of orphan children after every ten years along with census in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The survey conducted under sub-section (/) shall include— 
(a) socio-economic status of orphan children; 
(b) data on the cause and effect of becoming orphans; 
(c) Demographic profile of orphan children; 


(d) performance appraisal of existing orphan children welfare schemes and 
programmes; and 


(e) the number of special needs children who are orphans. 


(3) The Central Government shall establish, maintain and operate a Registry to be 
known as the Central Registry for Orphans, for implementation of Orphans Welfare Scheme 
formulated under section 4. 


(4) The Registry shall contain such details of every orphan child as may be prescribed. 


4. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, formulate 
a scheme to be known as “Orphans Welfare Scheme” to provide social security to all 
orphan children and to ensure healthy upbringing and also ensure protection from exploitation 
and ill treatment so as to ensure peaceful life thereon. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall provide every orphan child under the 
Scheme— 


(7) a Bank account and deposit every month in that account an amount as may 
be prescribed and the total sum accrued shall be handed over to the child on attaining 
eighteen years of age; 


(ii) Free education; 

(iii) Free medical and healthcare facilities; 
(iv) Free food, lodging and clothing; 

(v) Free travel by road, railways or by air; 
(vi) Free sports facilities; and 


(vil) Free legal assistance. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9] 


5. (/) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Orphan Children Welfare 
Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act with an initial corpus of rupees two 
thousand crores, to be provided by the Central Government, after due appropriation 
made. by Parliament by law in this behalf. 


(2) The Fund shall also include, 


(a) contributions made by the Central Government and State Governments in 
such ratio, as may be prescribed; 


(b) money received by way of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise 
from individuals, body corporate, domestic and foreign financial institutions. 


(3) The Fund shall be utilised for rehabilitation and welfare of orphan children in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


6. (/) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of foster care homes 
as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The foster care homes established under sub-section (l) shall provide free of 
cost boarding and lodging and such other facilities to the orphan children as may be 
prescribed. 


7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force. 


8. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule. 


Constitution 
of an Orphan 
Children 
Welfare Fund. 


Establishment 
of foster care 
homes. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 


Power to make 
rules. 


92 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Usually, when we talk of an orphan, we mean a child who has been either abandoned 
deliberately by their parents or a child who has lost his/her parents in an accident or mishap. 
As per the United Nations Conventions on Rights of the Child (UNCRC), a child is anyone 
who is below the age of I8 years or unless under the law applicable to the child, the majority 
is attained earlier. Every child has the right to family care. This provision is found in the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child, 989, the UN Guidelines for Alternative Care 2009, 
the Indian Constitution and the jurisprudence of the Indian Supreme Court on child rights. 


India is home to approximately 29.6 million orphan children, which amounts to nearly 
four percent of the youth population. This alarming figure underscores the urgent need for 
comprehensive and effective legislation to safeguard the rights and welfare of these 
vulnerable children. 


The Bill seeks to provide social security and welfare measures to orphan children and 
to address the needs of special needs children who are orphans, who are among the most 
vulnerable sections of our society. Moreover, the existing provisions do not adequately 
address the issue of overcrowding in orphan care homes or orphanages. Overcrowding can 
lead to inadequate care and attention for each child, compromising their development and 
well-being. The proposed amendments also include the establishment of a Central Registry 
of all orphan children by the Central Government to streamline the adoption process and 
ensure transparency. This will help in the efficient tracking and placement of orphan children 
in suitable homes. 


In India, there is no separate legislation dealing with Orphans. Orphans and vulnerable 
groups are included under the Juvenile Justice Act. According to the concept of Parens 
Patriae, the State is your parent if you have none. This statement is truer for no other 
category of citizens but orphans. Therefore, the bill has been brought exclusively for the 
Orphans to ensure that they are provided with their fundamental right to life, as guaranteed 
under our Constitution. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE 
July 3,2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 93 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for survey of orphan children. Clause 4 of the Bill 
provides for social security to orphan child, monthly bank savings for child welfare in 
future, free education, food, clothing and lodging, medical and other healthcare facilities, 
free travel and free legal assistance may be provided to orphan child. Clause 5 provides for 
constitution of an Orphan Children Welfare Fund. Clause 6 provides for establishment of 
foster care homes to provide free food, lodging and other requisite amenities to orphans. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two thousand crore would be involved as recurring 
expenditure per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


94 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, therefore, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 95 


Bill No. 37 of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
Act, 2009. 


Be it 
follows:— 


I.(/) 


enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 


This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 


(Amendment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Offici 


al Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 2 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, 


(hereinafter 


referred to as the principal Act),— 
(a) for sub-section (ee), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(ee) child with disability” includes,— 


(A) a child, being a ‘person with disability’ as defined in clause (s) of 
section 2 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 20l6; and 


(3) a child, being a ‘person with benchmark disability’ as defined in clause 
(r) of section 2 of the Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 206; 


(C) a child, being a ‘person with disability having high support needs’ as 
defined in clause (7) of section 2 of the Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 
206; and 


(D) a child with ‘multiple disabilities’ as defined in para 5 of the Schedule 
to the Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 206; and 


(b) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ga) “inclusive education” means inclusive education as defined in 
clause (m) of section 2 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 206 (49 of 
206);”. 


3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words “neighbourhood 
school”, the words “neighbourhood school providing inclusive education” shall be 


substituted. 


4.In section 8 of the principal Act in clause (5), for the words “neighbourhood schoo!”’, 
the words “neighbourhood school providing inclusive education” shall be substituted. 


5. In section |! of the principal Act, for the word “may”, the word “shall” shall be 


substituted. 


6. In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (c), the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ca) needs of children with disabilities; and 


(cb) universal design for learning;”. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Amendment 
of section 3. 


Amendment 


of section 8. 


Amendment 
of section |]. 


Amendment 
of section 29. 


96 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Education is a fundamental right of every child, which is essential for their growth 
and development. The importance of education cannot be overstated, as it enables children 
to acquire knowledge, skills, and values that are necessary for their personal and social 
development. The right to education for children is enshrined in various international and 
national laws, including the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) 
and the Indian Constitution. Article 26 of the UNCRC recognizes the right of every child to 
an education, which should be directed to the development of the child’s personality, 
talents, and mental and physical abilities to their fullest potential. The Indian Constitution 
also recognizes the right to education as a fundamental right under article 2lA, which was 
inserted by the 86th Amendment Act in 2002. This amendment made free and compulsory 
education a fundamental right for children between the ages of 6 and |4 years. 


It has been more than a decade since the Right to Free and Compulsory Education 
Act, 2009 (RTE Act) was enacted to enforce the fundamental right to education for children 
between six and fourteen years of age. Since then, India’s disability rights framework has 
also evolved to enforce obligations under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities. With the passage of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Act, 20l6 (RPWD Act), inclusive education got statutory backing in India. 


However, even as legal standards that guarantee the right to education for children 
with disabilities have evolved in India, several inconsistencies exist. As a result of the 
inconsistencies, there’s a lack of clarity in what ‘inclusion’ means in terms of quality education 
for children with disabilities, leading to challenges in on-ground implementation of the 
laws. 


The Bill seeks to focus on inclusive education by amending the definition of children 
with disability who have been identified as specially abled or divyangjan by the 
Honorable Prime Minister and we need to reform laws concerning education to provide 
them accessibility and a feasible environment which will take care of their special needs. We 
also need to focus on pre school education and the Bill also makes pre school education 
mandatory and the onus for the same is on the government. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE 
July 3,2024. 


24 of 989. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 97 


Bill No. 3l of 2024 
A Bill further to amend the Railways Act, 989. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. After section 24 of the Railways Act, 989, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"24A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 22, 23 and 24 of the Act, the 
Central Government may, by notification, sanction the running or extension or diversion of 
super fast trains via Thawe junction in the State of Bihar by approving the proposal received 
from the Railway Division of the North-Eastern Region and extension of train no. 224] / 
2242 (Arunachal Express) via route Siwan-Thawe- Kaptanganj-Gorakhpur.". 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new section 
240. 

Special 
Provisions of 
railway at 
Thawe 
junction in 
the State of 
Bihar. 


96 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The section of Varanasi division of North-Eastern Railway which comprises Thawe- 
Gopalganj junction is facing number of challenges and disadvantage due to non-availability 
of superfast trains for various metropolitan cities of the country. To overcome such difficulties 
and to make railway connectivity from this neglected section by providing the train facilities 
would certainly provide ample revenue to railways. 


At Thawe junction in the Thawe-Gopalganj section, there is one of the most important 
and reverable religious peeth. Seeing the rush of pilgrims during normal days and huge rush 
during auspicious days, and considering the fact that this area is the native to lakhs of 
migrant labours who are working in different parts of country, especially, NCR and the 
States of Haryana, Punjab, J&K, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, 
Kerala, West-Bengal, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh etc., the train facilities to this junction is 
must. Apart from the above, people of this area depends on bigger cities of country for any 
specialized medical facilities and education too. This section/area does not have any direct 
train for Delhi or any other metropolitan cities. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Railways Act, 989 with a view to implement 
the proposal of North-Eastern Railway once received for approval without any further 
delay to augment the train services to cater the need of the neglected Thawe Junction 
which is a long awaited demand of lakhs of people of the various districts of the State of 
Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. 


Hence this Bill. 


New Delhi; ALOK KUMAR SUMAN 
July 3, 2024. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 24A seeks to provide diversion or extension 
of the superfast trains via Thawe junction by giving the approval of the proposal received 
from the railway division of the North-Eastern Region. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual 
recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred and fifty crore from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 99 


Bill No. 47 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for the constitution of a National Flood and Drought Control Board to 
control flood and drought and for matters connected therewith and incidental 
thereto. 


Wuereas entry 56 of List I-Union list of the Seventh Schedule to the constitution 
provides for regulation and development of Inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent 
to which such regulation and development under the control of the union is declared by 
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest; 


AND WHEREAS a lot of havoc is caused by floods and drought every year in almost all 
parts of the country; 


AND WHEREAS it is expedient in the public interest to take effective measures to control 
flood and drought. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Flood and Drought Control Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


00 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "Board" means the National Flood and Drought Control Board constituted 
under section 3; and 


(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


Constitution 3.(/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
of the constitute a Board to be known as the National Flood and Drought Control Board to 


National perform functions assigned to it under this Act. 
Flood and 


Drought (2) The headquarter of the Board shall be at New Delhi and regional office at Gopalganj 
Control in the State of Bihar. 


Board. 
(3) The Board shall consist of,— 
(a) a Chairperson; and 


(b) a member representing each of the State Government and Union territory, to 
be appointed, from amongst persons of eminence having special knowledge and 
experience in the field of flood and drought control, by the Central Government. 


(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Central Government shall make available such officers and staff to the Board 
as it may require for its efficient functioning. 


Functions of 4. The Board shall,— 
the Board. 
(a) identify areas which are prone to floods and droughts; 


(b) suggest measures for flood and drought control; 


(c) make a time bound plan for inter-linking of rivers which are prone to floods 
with the ones which are not so; 


(d) suggest measures for the development of land in areas which are prone to 
floods and drought; 


(e) install flood forecasting system in areas which are prone to floods; 


(f) suggest steps that shall be taken to evacuate the inhabitants from flood 
affected areas to safer places; 


(g) suggest measures to the State Governments for rehabilitation of inhabitants 
of flood and drought affected areas; and 


(A) suggest measures to the State Governments for rain water harvesting and 
construction of dams. 


Expenditure 5. The expenditure incurred on implementation of flood and drought control 
incurred on measures as suggested by the Board shall be borne by the Central Governments and the 


implementation State Governments in such ratio, as may be prescribed. 
of the Act to 


be borne by 
the Central 


and State 

Governments. 

Recommendations 6. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to implement the recommendations 
of the Board —_ of the Board: 

to be 

implemented Provided that where it is felt that any recommendation cannot be implemented due to 


by the Central any reason, the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, inform the 
Government. Board accordingly. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 0l 


7. () The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, as 
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a true and full accounts of its activities during 
the previous financial year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid, as soon as may 
be after receipt of the report under sub-section (/), before each House of Parliament. 


8. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both House agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
tule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Annual 
Report. 


Power to make 
rules. 


02 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

India is the land of many great rivers. Disaster such as floods occur in almost all river 
basins of the country. The water resources of the country are not being fully utilized. Every 
year there are floods in some parts of the country which cause immense loss of life and 
property. It has been observed that at the same time, there is flood in one part of the country 
and the other part is affected by drought. The national resources are damaged by floods 
and drought. The problem, therefore, needs to be addressed urgently to mitigate the affects 
of floods and droughts. 


Therefore, it is expedient in public interest to evolve an integrated and scientific 
approach to deal with the problem of frequent occurrence of floods and drought and to 
draw out a national plan fixing priorities for implementation of strategies in the future. 


The Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of a National Flood Control Board to 
suggest measures to prevent flood and deal with the problem of drought in the country. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; ALOK KUMAR SUMAN 
July 3,2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 03 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Flood and Drought Control 
Board. Clause 4 provides inter alia for a time bound action plan for inter-linking of rivers and 
installing of flood forecasting system. Clause 5 provides that the expenditure incurred on 
implementation of the provisions of this Act shall be borne by the Central Government and 
State Governments. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees 
one hundred crore per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
incurred. 


04 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the 
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 05 


Bill No. 36 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for special economic assistance to the State of Bihar for the purpose of 
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Backward Sections of people and for the development, exploitation and 
proper utilization of its resources. 

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 

follows:— 

. (4) This Act may be called the Special Economic Assistance to the State of Bihar Short title 

Act, 2024. and 

commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Special 
Economic 
assistance to 
the State of 
Bihar 


Act not in 
derogation of 
other laws. 


06 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India, 
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special economic assistance 
to the State of Bihar to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken 
by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of promoting the 
welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Sections of 
people or for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources in the 
State. 


3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 07 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The State of Bihar is socially and economically backward. The low pace of development 


in the State has resulted in the impoverishment of the State and its people. The development 
of Bihar is the need not only of that State but of the entire country as a whole. 


The development of the State can be ensured only with the active involvement of the 
Central Government. For this, it is necessary that the Central Government provides special 
economic assistance to the State for its all round development including the welfare of 
weaker sections and for the development and exploitation of its vast resources. Such a step 
would go a long way in building our nation more and more strong. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; ALOK KUMAR SUMAN 
July 3, 2024. 


08 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, 
as special economic assistance to the State of Bihar to meet the costs of such schemes of 
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of 
India. 


The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Bihar. As the sums of 
moneys which will be given to the State of Bihar as special financial assistance by 
appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to be 
implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are identified, 
it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved 
out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 09 


Bill No. 46 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for a framework to enable the country to achieve its goal of eliminating 
single use plastic by the year 2025 and for matters connected therewith or incidental 


thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Single-use Plastic (Regulation) Act, 2024. Short title, 
extent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commencement. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Gazette, appoint. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "higher education institution" includes institutions imparting education on 
completion of senior secondary level; 


(c) "plastic" means material which contains as an essential ingredient a high 
polymer such as polyethylene terephthalate, high density polyethylene, Vinyl, low 
density polyethylene, polypropylene, polystryrene resins or multimaterials like 
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene, polyephylene oxide, polycarbonate or polybutylene 
terephthalate; 


(d) "plastic packaging" means all products which are— 


(i) used for the containment, protection handling, delivery and 
presentation of goods; and 


(ii) partly or wholly composed of plastic; 
e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
i ibed" ibed by rul de under this A 


(f) "recycle"means the reprocessing in a production process of the waste 
materials of a plastic product for the original purpose or for other purposes; 


(g) "reuse" means any operation by which a plastic product, which has been 
conceived and designed to accomplish within its life cycle a minimum number of trips 
or rotations, is refilled or used for the same purpose for which it was conceived; and 


(A) "single-use plastic" means any disposable plastic item which is designed to 
be used only once before it is thrown out or recycled and includes plastic forks and 
knives, plastic shopping bags, plastic coffee cup, lids, plastic water bottles, styroforam, 
plastic take out containers and plastic straws. 


Plastic target 3. The Central Government shall, within six months from the commencement of this 
setting. Act,— 
(a) prescribe a target of complete elimination of plastic waste by the year 2050 


in accordance with international obligations, if any, agreed to by India; 


(b) specify the year 2025 target year to implement a complete ban on single-use 
plastic and the proportion of reduction of single-use plastic during each year following 
the date of fixing of target year 2025; and 


(c) formulate and implement a National Plastic Control Strategy for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. 


Promote 4. The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures to promote sustainable 
sustainable alternatives to single-use plastic including,— 

alternatives 

to plastic. (a) research by higher education institutions and others into sustainable 


alternatives to plastic packaging; and 


(b) the use of sustainable alternatives to plastic packaging. 


Phasing out of 5. The appropriate Government shall take measures to ensure— 
existent e taties the : मै 
plastic. (a) elimination of the production and use of plastics; 


(b) increase in recycling, reuse and other forms of waste recovery in relation to 
plastics; and 


(c) removing plastics already in the environment for the purpose of recycling, 
reusing or applying another form of waste recovery to the plastics. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ll] 


6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no 
person shall, after the target year 2025, use, stock, distribute, manufacture, sell or trade in 
any single-use plastic item. 


7. Whoever violates the provision of this Act shall be punished with a fine which 
shall not be less than rupees one lakh but which may extend upto five lakhs. 


8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


9. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Ban on single 
use plastic 
items. 


Penalty. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
requisite 
funds. 

Power to make 
rules. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

India generates close to 26000 tonnes of plastic a day. A little over 0000 tonnes of 
plastic waste remains uncollected and these uncollected waste eventually ends of in the 
natural environment in our seas and oceans piling up on our lands. By 2050 the amount of 
plastic in seas and oceans across the world will weigh more than all the marginal creatures. 
At less than |] kg India's per capital plastic consumption is nearly a tenth of the United 
States, at |09 kg. Nearly one sixth of the plastic waste is generated by 60 cities andhalf of 
this comes from Delhi, Mumbai, Bangaluru, Chennai and Kolkata. The National Green Tribunal 
has also rapped 25 cities in U.P. for not following its order on submitting a plan on how they 
would comply with the plastic waste management. 


Plastic is highly non-biodegradable causing permanent damage to the environment 
by disrupting ecosystems. Single-use plastic can block waterways and exacerbate natural 
disasters. By clogging sewers and providing breeding grounds for mosquitoes and pests, 
plastic bags can increase the transmission of vector borne diseases like Malaria. Troubles 
with single use plastic came to the fore during floods in various parts of the country on the 
source of pollution as addition to landfills is adversely impacting the already frail ecological 
balance. Heaps of plastic wastes were washed ashore highlighting the lack of awareness 
and infrastructure to effectively deal with the product. 


Efforts to ban single-use plastic and promote sustainable alternatives to it can help in 
mitigating the ill-effects on human life and environment. India's commitment towards 
sustainable development can only be realized through concerted efforts to reduce pollution 
caused by plastic. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY 
July 3,2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for research by higher education institutions and other 
into sustainable alternatives to plastic packaging. Clause 5 provides that the appropriate 
Government shall take measures to recycling, reuse and other forms of waste recovery in 
relation to plastic. Clause 8 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide 
requisite funds for carrying out the purpose of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will 
involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India and at this stage it is not possible 
to estimate that figures. No non-recurring expenditure is like to be involved. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only the delegation of 
legislature power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


Bill No. 29 of 2024 


A Bill to provide for the protection and rehabilitation of victims of floods which may be 
caused due to heavy rains, cloudbursts, cyclones, breached bunds of dams, reservoirs 
and other reasons by making various provisions through a statutory board at 
national level which may also suggest measures to be taken by the Central 
and the State Governments to control floods and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Victims of Floods caused due to Heavy Rains, Short title, 
Cyclones and Other Reasons (Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2024. extent and 


commencement. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect. 


Definitions. 


Establishment 
of Board. 


Functions of 
the Board. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(6) "Board" means the National Board for Rehabilitation and Welfare of Flood 
Victims established under section 3; and 


(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. (/) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within a period of sixty 
days from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish for the purposes of this Act a Board to be known as the National Board for 
Rehabilitation and Welfare of Flood Victims for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 


(2) The Board shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of properties, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


(3) The headquarters of the Board shall be at Deogarh in the State of Jharkhand and 
its regional offices shall be located in the capital of each State and Union territory. 


(4) The Board shall consist of:— 


(7) a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson and six other members to be appointed 
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(ii) not more than one representative from the each State and Union territory to 
be nominated by the respective State Government and Union territory Administration. 


(5) The Central Government shall provide to the Board such number of officers and 
staff as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board. 


(6) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service 
of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other members, officers and staff of the Board 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(7) The Board shall comply with such directions as may, from time to time, be given to 
it by the Central Government. 


(8) The Board shall meet at such place and observe such rules of procedure in regard 
to the transaction of business at its meetings in the manner as may be prescribed. 


4. (/) The Board shall discharge such functions as may be necessary for the protection 
and rehabilitation of victims of floods caused by heavy rains, cloudbursts, cyclones, 
breached bunds of dam, reservoirs. 


(2) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (/), 
the Board may also provide for:-— 


(a) making a detailed study and analysis of floods caused in the past in the 
different regions and areas of the country and identify areas in every State and Union 
territory which are prone to floods; 


(b) making provision for accelerated water drainage system in the residential 
areas prone to floods in particular which are near the rivers or the sea, as the case may 
be; 

(c) suggesting policy with regard to construction of houses and commercial 
establishments near the rivers and beaches; 


(d) making provision for providing permanent shelters capable of withstanding 
the severity and intensity of flood waters to the inhabitants of identified floodprone 
areas; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(e) steps to be taken for plantation of trees and shurbs as afforestation measure 
in and around floodprone areas and in particular near the rivers and hilly areas where 
landslides are caused by floods or heavy rain to mitigate the gravity of floods and 
cloudbursts; 


(f) installing flood forecasting systems to alert the persons of floodprone areas; 


(g) making provision of food, drinking water and other necessities in flood- 
affected areas during floods in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(A) making provision for boats and other rescue materials for the rescue of 
persons in flooded areas; 


(7) making recommendations to the Central Government for minimizing the loss 
of lives and properties in flood affected and flood prone areas; 


(0) keeping perpetual surveillance, carrying out inspections and monitoring 
rescue operations during the floods; 


5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the recommendations 
of the Board. 


6. Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, 
the Central Government shall pay compensation of,— 


(7) rupees ten lakh to the nearest kin of a person who has lost his life in flood; 
(ii) rupee five lakh in case of a serious injury to a person affected by flood; 


7. (/) The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time, as may be prescribed, its 
annual report, giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous financial 
year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 


8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf provide to the Board requisite funds every year for the effective implementation 
of this Act. 


9. This Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time 
being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act. 


0. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
tule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to implement 
recommendations 
of the Board. 


Compensation 
in case of 
death or 
serious injury 
during flood. 


Annual Report. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
requisite 
funds. 


Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 


Power to make 
rules. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

In several parts of our vast nation floods are a regular phenomenon caused by mother 
nature fury every year. Even this year floods have wreaked havoc in various States such as 
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Assam and Odisha. It has not spared even desert States such 
as Gujarat and Rajasthan. Bihar, Assam and eastern Uttar Pradesh which face the fury of 
floods every year caused by rivers emanating from Nepal and China. Apart from the fury of 
mother nature humans too have contributed immensely in the matter. Polluted environment, 
unplanned and uncontrolled development in the cities particularly those which are near the 
rivers and sea, ruthless destruction of jungles, rampant use of plastic, toxic gases, chemicals, 
etc. lead to disruption in the weather cycle in the country frequently culminating in the fury 
of floods. The floods devastate quite a large number of villages, cities and damage properties, 
crops, roads and kill human being and livestock. The agricultural land also undergoes 
severe soil erosion. Due to these floods country suffers huge losses in terms of human 
lives, livestock, properties, crops, etc. thereby increasing the financial burden of the 
Governments of the day. At the same time persons become homeless and get displaced and 
face innumerable problems including safety of their lives. 


Though the Central Government and State Governments and their agencies do their 
level best to provide relief to the victims of floods and their kins by making temporary 
arrangements of shelter, food etc. for them, it is felt that there still is need to have a permanent 
statutory body to suggest measures to control floods. As such a National Board needs to 
be established to exclusively deal with natural calamity of floods in the country. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY 
July 3,2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Board for Rehabilitation 
and Welfare of Flood Victims. Clause 8 seeks to provide requisite funds by the Central 
Government for effective implementation of the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, 
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is 
not possible to quantify the amount but it is estimated that an amount of one thousand 
crore rupees may involve as recurring expenditure per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of five hundred crore rupees may also involve 
for creating assets. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |0 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is therefore of a normal character. 


5 of 2007. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2] 


Bill No. 49 of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) 
Act, 2006. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in 
Admission) Amendment Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 2 of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) 
Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),— 


(7) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ca) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in other cases, the Central Government." 


(ii) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ea) "government school" means any recognised school managed 
by the appropriate Government, imparting elementary or higher secondary 
education or both and includes— 


(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate 
Government or a local authority; 


(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of 
its expenses from the appropriate Government or the local authority; and 


(iii) corporation schools, municipal schools, tribal welfare schools, 
forest department schools and other schools managed by the Government 
departments." 


3. In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(iv) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty, ten 
per cent. seats shall be reserved horizontally for the students of government schools 
in so far as by doing so the total reservation does not exceed fifty per cent in any 
case: 


Provided that where reservation exceeds fifty per cent by the reservation of ten 
per cent. seats for students of government schools, reservation of seats shall be 
provided up to the maximum extent possible without breaching the ceiling of total 
reservation of fifty per cent." 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
Section 2. 


Amendment of 
Section 3. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


India is the world's largest populated country and hosts pluralism in culture, religion, 
ethnicity, language and multilayered caste system which often imposes challenges on the 
Indian Government to structure and manage a harmonious society. The challenges include 
creating equal employment opportunities, providing and allocating equal distribution of 
resources and funds of the government and making education available to all citizens of 
India without discrimination on the grounds of their religion, caste, race, sex, socio-economic 
background etc. In order to overcome such challenges, the government uses reservation as 
a tool for the smooth administration of the country. 


The term reservation can be described as 'certain policy measures or the techniques 
adopted by the Indian governance in order to empower, promote and uplift those social 
segments or members of community which have remained backward, or discriminated, or 
historically oppressed, by reserving their access to seats or quota for admission into 
educational institutes, in governmental jobs and legislatures. 


Students from government schools and those studying in private schools hail from 
different socio-economic backgrounds. Considering these disparities, it would be unfair to 
weigh them on an equal footing. Students from government schools must get access to 
quality education and a chance to fulfil their dreams. Those who are brilliant must not be 
stopped because of social or economic boundaries. Professional courses are the stepping 
stone towards a bright future of young talents in the country. Providing reservation to 
students from government schools in Central Educational Institutions would be a step in 
the right direction considering the principles of equality under article l4 and non- 
discrimination under article l5 as enshrined under the Constitution of India. If implemented 
across the country, this reservation policy may also help in increasing the enrolments in 
government schools. 


Affirmative action by the Government is the need of the hour to place students from 
all walks of life at an equal footing to secure their future and thereby ensure that students 
from weaker socio-economic backgrounds do not suffer in the long run. Suitable amendment 
is, therefore, required in the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) 
Act, 2006. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY 
July 3,2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


Bill No. 4 of 2024 


A Bill to promote rational thought, critical thinking and evidence-based decision-making 
in society with a view to create an environment that fosters the cultivation 
of reason and intellectual discourse. 


WuerEAS, rational thought and critical thinking are essential for informed decision- 
making, fostering innovation and creating a society based on reason and evidence; 


AnD WuerEAS, a Culture that values rational discourse contributes to the well-being 
of individuals, communities and the nation as a whole; 


Now, THEREFORE, it is expedient to enact legislation to promote and uphold the principles 
of rational thought, 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


.(/) This Act may be called The Promotion of Rational Thought Act, 2024. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "Appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government 
of that State and in other cases, the Central Government; 


(6) "Board" means the Board for the Promotion of Rational Thought and Critical 
Thinking constituted under section 6; 


(c) "critical thinking" means the intellectually disciplined process of actively 
and skillfully conceptualizing, applying, analyzing and /or evaluating information to 
make a reasoned decision about any concept; 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to promote 
rational 
thought and 
critical 
thinking in 
educational 
institutions 
and 
workplaces. 


Formulation 
of policy for 
integration of 
critical 
thinking, 
logic and 
scientific 
reasoning in 
education. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds to 
institutions for 
research on 
cognitive 
science, logical 
reasoning and 
educational 
methodologies. 


Constitution 
of Board for 
the promotion 
of rational 
thought and 
critical 
thinking. 


Functions of 


the Board. 


Annual report. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(e) "rational thought" means the thought based on reason and logic to consider 
and analyze any information with a view to arrive at systematic conclusion. 


3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it 
shall be duty of the appropriate Government to— 


(i) promote rational thought and critical thinking in educational institutions, 
workplaces and public discourse; 


(ii) encourage evidence-based decision-making in their policies, public 
programmes and social initiatives; and 


(ii) foster a culture that values intellectual discourse, respectful debate and 
open- mindedness, 


in such manner as may be prescribed. 


4. The appropriate Government shall, for the purposes of promotion of rational thought 
and critical thinking by notification in the Official Gazette, formulate a policy provided 
that,— 


(i) every educational institution may incorporate curricula and teaching 
methodologies that emphasize critical thinking, logic and scientific reasoning; and 


(ii) teacher training programmes shall include component for fostering 
rational thought among students; 


(iii) public awareness campaigns to promote the importance of rational thought, 
critical thinking, and evidence-based decision-making may be initiated in such manner 
as may be prescribed; and 


(iv) the media organizations be encouraged to contribute in awareness 
campaigns initiated under clause (iii) by providing requisite platforms for rational 
discourse and fact-based reporting. 

5. The Central Government shall provide requisite funds to institutions who are 


engaged in research on cognitive science, logical reasoning and educational methodologies 
that enhance rational thought and critical thinking. 


6. () The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
a Board to be known as the Board for the Promotion of Rational Thought and Critical 
Thinking for implementing the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of 
the Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 


7. The Board shall— 
(J) monitor the proper implementation of the provisions of this Act; and 


(2) evaluate the impact of rational thought and critical thinking in the society, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
8. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year, as may 


be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year, and submit the report to the Central Government. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


9. Any person or institution found violating the provisions of this Act shall be liable 
for penalties as prescribed by regulations. 


0. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 


l. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act. 


2. (/) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
tules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature. 


Penalties. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 


Power to make 
rules. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Rational thought and critical thinking are the bedrock of a progressive and informed 


society. In recognizing the fundamental importance of fostering intellectual curiosity, logical 
reasoning, and evidence-based decision-making, the proposed Bill seeks to:— 


(a) emphasize the integration of curricula and teaching methodologies in educational 
institutions that focus on nurturing critical thinking skills, logical reasoning, and scientific 
inquiry; 

(0) foster an environment that encourages questioning and analysis aimed to empower 
individuals with the tools necessary for sound decision-making; 


(c) promote the use of empirical evidence and rational analysis in government policies, 
public programmes, and societal initiatives, evidence-based decision-making to ensure that 
decisions are grounded in facts rather than unsupported opinions; 


(d) cultivate a culture that values intellectual discourse, respectful debate, and open- 
mindedness by encouraging individuals to engage in constructive conversations based on 
reason and evidence and seeks to build a society that celebrates diverse perspectives while 
upholding the principles of rational thought; 


(e) recognize the influential role of media in shaping public opinion, by encouraging 
media organizations to contribute to the promotion of rational thought; 


(f) provide platforms for well-informed discussions and fact-based reporting is essential 
in countering misinformation and promoting public understanding; 


(g) advance our understanding of cognitive processes and effective educational 
methodologies, allocate resources to support research in areas such as cognitive science 
and logical reasoning as a commitment to research is essential for continually refining 
educational practices that enhance rational thought; 


(A) establish a monitoring and evaluation mechanism to assess the impact of its 
provisions on society; and 


(7) submission of reports to the Parliament to provide insights into the progress made 
and areas requiring further attention, ensuring the continuous improvement of initiatives 
promoting rational thought. 


Inconclusion, the proposal "Promotion of Rational Thought Bill" is a forward-looking 
legislative initiative aimed at fortifying the intellectual foundations of our society. By 
prioritizing critical thinking, evidence-based decision-making, and a culture of reasoned 
discourse, the Act envisions a society better equipped to navigate the complexities of the 
modern world. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; BENNY BEHANAN 
July 3,2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides that Central Government to provide requisite resources 
for research on cognitive science, logical reasoning and educational methodologies. Clause 
6 provides for constitution of Board for the promotion of rational thought and critical 
thinking. Clause 0 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for 
implementing the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two hundred and 
fifty crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |2 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only the delegation 
of legislative power is of normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


Bill No. 50 of 2024 


A Bill to recognize and address the needs of individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorders, 
to promote early detection, intervention, and treatment, and to ensure the provision 
of appropriate support and services. 


Wuereas Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are a range of neuro-developmental 
conditions characterized by challenges in social interaction, communication, and repetitive 
behaviours; 


Anp WuereAS Recognizing and addressing ASD early is crucial for the overall well- 
being and development of affected individuals; 


Now, THEREFORE it is expedient to enact legislation for the recognition and treatment 
of Autism Spectrum Disorders. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


.(/) This Act may be called the Autism Spectrum Disorders (Recognition and 
Treatment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of 
that State and in other cases, the Central Government; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Duties of 
appropriate 
Government. 


Research and 
Data 
Collection. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 
Overriding 
effect of the 
Act. 


Power to make 
tules. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(b) "Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD)" mean range of neuro-developmental 
disorders characterized by persistent deficits in social communication and interaction, 
and restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities; and 


(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
3. The appropriate Government shall,— 


(a) organize awareness programs to educate the public, healthcare professionals, 
and educators about the early signs of Autism Spectrum Disorder; 


(b) take measures to ensure the availability of appropriate medical, educational, 
and therapeutic interventions for individuals with ASD; and 


(c) conduct specialized training programs for healthcare professionals, 
teachers, and caregivers to enhance the quality of support and services provided for 
ASD. 


4. (/) The appropriate Government shall facilitate and support research on ASD to 
enhance understanding and improve interventions. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall maintain a national database of the 
individuals identified having ASD. 


5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


6. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid the 
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the 
time being in force. 


7. (४) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rule 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
tule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) represent a significant public health concern 
affecting individuals across the globe, transcending geographical, cultural, and 
socioeconomic boundaries. ASD is characterized by a range of neuro-developmental 
conditions that impact an individual's ability to engage in social interaction, communication, 
and may involve repetitive behaviors. Recognizing the unique challenges faced by 
individuals with ASD and the necessity for early intervention and support, the proposed 
"Autism Spectrum Disorders (Recognition and Treatment) Act" aims to address the following 
issue: 


The Bill seeks to establish a framework for the early recognition of Autism Spectrum 
Disorders. This includes the development and implementation of awareness programs to 
educate healthcare professionals, educators, and the general public about the early signs 
of ASD. Timely identification is crucial for initiating interventions that enhance the 
developmental outcomes for individuals with ASD. 


The legislation aims to ensure that individuals diagnosed with Autism Spectrum 
Disorders have access to a comprehensive range of medical, educational, and therapeutic 
interventions. This involves the promotion of specialized training programs for healthcare 
professionals, teachers, and caregivers to enhance their capacity to provide tailored support 
services. 


Recognizing the importance of ongoing research to deepen our understanding of 
ASD, the Act encourages and supports research initiatives focused on the various aspects 
of Autism Spectrum Disorders. Additionally, the establishment of a national database is 
proposed to systematically collect and analyze data on the prevalence and characteristics 
of ASD, providing a foundation for evidence-based policymaking. 


The Bill proposes a legal framework to enforce compliance with its provisions. Penalties 
are prescribed for individuals or institutions found in violation of the Act, thus ensuring 
accountability and adherence to the established norms. 


The proposed legislation takes into account international best practices in the 
recognition and treatment of Autism Spectrum Disorders. By aligning with global standards, 
the Act aims to contribute to the creation of a supportive and inclusive environment for 
individuals with ASD. 


In conclusion, the Bill is a significant step towards creating an inclusive society that 
recognizes and supports the unique needs of individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorders. 
By fostering early intervention, access to appropriate services, and promoting research, the 
Act aims to improve the quality of life for individuals with ASD and their families. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; BENNY BEHANAN 
July 3,2024. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for conducting awareness programes to educate the 
public, healthcare professional and educators about the early science of ASD. Clause 4 
provides for research and maintenance of database on Autism Spectrum Disorder. Clause 5 
provides for the Central Government to give adequate funds to the States. The Bill, therefore, 
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated 
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred and fifty crore would be involved 
from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. As the rules and regulations will relate to matters of detail only, 
the delegation of legislative power, is therefore, of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-0054. 


MGIPMRND—94GI—6-08-2024. 


