रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल. (एन) 04/0007/2003—05 REGD. NO. D. L. (N) 04/0007/2003—05 


Fa =: राजपनत्र 


Che Gazette of India 


OY. SH. -F. Wel. -AT.-3092023-248630 
CG-DL-W-3092023-248630 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


साप्ताहिक 
WEEKLY 


q 34] नई दिल्‍ली, अगस्त 20---अगस्त 26, 2023, शनिवार/श्रावण 29--भाद्र 4, 945 
No. 34] NEW DELHI, AUGUST 20—AUGUST 26, 2023, SATURDAY/SHRAVANA 29—BHADRA 4, 945 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह पृथक संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके 
Separate Paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation 


भाग II— avs ३---उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 


भारत सरकार के मंत्रालयों (TAT मंत्रालय को छोड़कर) द्वारा जारी किए गए सांविधिक आदेश और अधिसूचनाएं 
Statutory Orders and Notifications Issued by the Ministries of the Government of India 
(Other than the Ministry of Defence) 


वित्त मंत्रालय 
(वित्तीय सेवाएं विभाग) 
नई दिल्‍ली, 47 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. 349.—ccdta arava बैंक अधिनियम, 987 (7987 का 53) की धारा (6) की उप-धारा (॥) के 
खंड (च) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, केन्द्रीय सरकार, एतट्टारा, डॉ. जे रविशंकर, सचिव, आवासन विभाग, 
कर्नाटक सरकार के स्थान पर श्रीमती सारिका प्रधान, सचिव, सिक्किम आवास एवं विकास बोर्ड को अधिसूचना की तारीख 
से तीन वर्ष की अवधि के लिए या अगले आदेशों तक, जो भी पहले हो, राष्ट्रीय आवास बैंक के निदेशक मंडल में निदेशक के 
पद पर नियुक्त करती है। 


[फा. सं. 24/47/2040-आईएफ.]] 
शिवानी गोयल, सहायक निदेशक 


5228 GI/2023 (2793) 


2794 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Department of Financial Services) 
New Delhi, the !7th August, 2023 


S. 0. 39.—In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (f) of sub-section (.) of section 6 of the National 
Housing Bank Act, 987 (53 of 987), the Central Government hereby appoints Smt. Sarika Pradhan, Secretary, 
Sikkim Housing & Development Board as Director on the Board of Directors of National Housing Bank, vice Dr. J 
Ravishankar, Secretary, Housing Department, Government of Karnataka, for a period of 3 years from the date of 
notification or until further orders, whichever is earlier. 


[F. No. 24/7/200-IF.I]] 
SHIVANI GOEL, Assistant Director 


उपभोक्ता मामले, खाद्य और सार्वजनिक वितरण मंत्रालय 
(खाद्य और सार्वजनिक वितरण विभाग) 
नई दिल्‍ली, 28 जुलाई, 2023 


का.आ. 320.--केन्द्रीय सरकार राजभाषा (संघ के शासकीय प्रयोजनों के लिए प्रयोग) नियम, 7976 के नियम 
40 के उप नियम (4) के अनुसरण में उपभोक्ता मामले, खाद्य और सार्वजनिक वितरण मंत्रालय (खाद्य और सार्वजनिक 
वितरण विभाग) के प्रशासनिक नियंत्रणाधीन निम्नलिखित कार्यालयों, जिनके 80 प्रतिशत या उससे अधिक कर्मचारीवृन्द ने 
हिन्दी का प्रवीणता/कार्यसाधक ज्ञान प्राप्त कर लिया है, को राजपत्र में अधिसूचित करती है:- 


धिसूचित किए जाने वाले केन्द्रीय भंडारण निगम के कार्यालयों का नाम 


फाजिल्का 


नाभा बेस डिपो 


चनालो 


भटठिंडा 


पठानकोट बेस डिपो 


सरहिंद 


मानसा 


मोगा-2 


ayaa. 


अबोहर 


मोहाली 


मोगा-॥ 


गढ़शंकर 


मुक्तसर 


मंडी गोबिन्दगढ़ 


नाभा (सामान्य) 


गुरदासपुर 


3 जले जे हे के उे ये 8ठै [०|०ह-7|०|०ण|+|५०|॥०|-+ : 


चंडीगढ़ 


[फा. सं. €-407/4/2008-fe-at(32924)] 
राजेन्द्र कुमार, संयुक्त सचिव 


[भाग II-—ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2795 


MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
New Delhi, the 28th July, 2023 


S. O. 320.—In pursuance of sub-rule (4) of Rule 0 of the Official Language (use for official purpose of the 
Union) Rules, 976, the Central Government hereby notifies the following offices under the administrative control of 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution), whereof 
80% or more staff have acquired the working knowledge of Hindi: 


SI. No. Offices of Central Warehousing Corporation to be notified 
|| Fazilka 
2 Nabha BD 
3 Chanalo 
4 Bathinda 
3 Pathankot B.D. 
| 6 _| Sirhind 
7 Mansa 
| 8 _ _| Moga-2 
| 9 ~~ Amritsar-I 
0 Abohar 
l] Mohali 
2 (028- | 
3 Garhshankar 
4 Muktsar 
5 Mandi Gobindgarh 
6 Nabha (General) 
7 Gurdaspur 
8 Chandigarh 


[F. No. E-0/I/2008-Hindi(32924)] 
RAJENDER KUMAR, Jt. Secy. 


श्रम और रोजगार मंत्रालय 
नई दिल्‍ली, 22 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. (324.—seata सरकार, कर्मचारी राज्य बीमा अधिनियम,4948 (948 का 34) की धारा 94क के 
साथ पठित धारा 88 द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, बीएसईएस यमुना पावर लिमिटेड के कारखानों और 
स्थापनाओं के नियमित कर्मचारियों को उक्त अधिनियम के प्रवर्तन से छूट प्रदान करती है। यह छूट राजपत्र में इस 
अधिसूचना के प्रकाशित होने की तारीख से एक वर्ष की अवधि के लिए प्रभावी रहेगी। 


2. उक्त छूट निम्नलिखित शर्तों के अधीन है; अर्थात्‌:- 


(4) 0 कारखाना और स्थापना छूट प्राप्त कर्मचारियों के नाम और पदनाम विनिर्दिष्ट करते हुए, कर्मचारियों का एक 
रजिस्टर रखेगी; 


(2) कर्मचारी उक्त अधिनियम के अधीन ऐसी प्रसुविधाएं प्राप्त करते रहेंगे जिनको पाने के लिए वे इस अधिसूचना 
द्वारा दी गई छूट के प्रवृत्त होने की तारीख से पूर्व संदत्त AMSA के आधार पर हकदार हो जाते हैं; 


(3) छूट प्राप्त अवधि के लिए, यदि कोई अभिदाय पहले ही किए जा चुके हों, तो वे वापस नहीं किए जाएंगे; 


(4) उक्त कारखाने और स्थापना का नियोजक उस अवधि की बाबत जिसके दौरान उस कारखाने पर उक्त 
अधिनियम (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अवधि कहा गया है) प्रवर्तन के अध्यधीन था ऐसी विवरणियां, ऐसे 
प्रारूप में और ऐसी विशिष्टियों से युक्त होगी जो कर्मचारी राज्य बीमा (साधारण) विनियम, 7950 के अधीन 
उसे उक्त अवधि की बाबत देनी अपेक्षित होती थीं; 


(5) निमम द्वारा उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 45 की उपधारा (4) के अधीन नियुक्त किया गया कोई सामाजिक 
सुरक्षा अधिकारी या निगम का इस प्रयोजन के लिए इस निमित्त प्राधिकृत कोई अन्य पदधारी-- 


2796 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(i) उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 44 की उपधारा () के अधीन, उक्त अवधि के लिए प्रस्तुत किसी विवरणी में 
अंतर्विष्ट विशिष्टयों को सत्यापित करने; या 
Gi) यह अभिनिश्चयन के लिए कि कर्मचारी राज्य बीमा (साधारण) विनियम, 7950 are यथाअपेक्षित 
रजिस्टर और अभिलेख उक्त अवधि के लिए रखे गये थे या नहीं; या 
Gii) यह अभिनिश्चयन के लिए कि कर्मचारी, नियोजक द्वारा दिये गए उन प्रसुविधाओं को, जिसके 
फलस्वरूप इस अधिसूचना के अधीन छूट दी जा रही है, नकद में और वस्तु रूप में पाने का हकदार है 
या नहीं; या 
(iv) यह अभिनिश्चयन के लिए कि उस अवधि के दौरान, जब उक्त कारखाने और स्थापन के संबंध में 
अधिनियम के उपबंध प्रवृत्त थे, ऐसे किन्हीं उपबंधों का अनुपालन किया गया था या नहीं, निम्नलिखित 
कार्य करने के लिए सशक्त होगा-- 
(क) प्रधान या आसन्न नियोजक से अपेक्षा करना कि वह उसे ऐसी जानकारी दे जिसे इस अधिनियम 
के प्रयोजन के लिए आवश्यक समझता है ; या 
(ख) ऐसे प्रधान या आसन्न नियोजक के अधिभोगाधीन, किसी कारखाने, स्थापना, कार्यालय या अन्य 
परिसर में किसी भी उचित समय पर प्रवेश करना और उसके प्रभारी से यह अपेक्षा करना कि वह 
कार्मिक के नियोजन और मजदूरी के संदाय से संबंधित ऐसे लेखा, बहियां और अन्य दस्तावेज, 
ऐसे निरीक्षक या अन्य पदधारी के समक्ष प्रस्तुत करें और उनकी परीक्षा करने दें या ऐसी 
जानकारी दें जिसे वे आवश्यक समझते हैं; या 
(ग) प्रधान या आसन्न नियोजक की, उसके अभिकर्ता या सेवक की, या ऐसे किसी व्यक्ति को, जो ऐसे 
कारखाने, स्थापना, कार्यालय या अन्य परिसर में पाया जाए, यह विश्वास करने का युक्तियुक्त 
कारण है कि वह कर्मचारी है, परीक्षा करना; या 
(घ) ऐसे कारखाने, स्थापना, कार्यालय या अन्य परिसर में रखे गए किसी रजिस्टर, लेखा, बही या 
अन्य दस्तावेज की नकल तैयार करना या उद्धरण लेना; या 
(=) यथास्थिति अन्य शक्तियों का प्रयोग करना जो विनिर्दिष्ट किए जाएँ | 
6. विनिवेश या निगमीकरण के मामले में, प्रदत्त छूट स्वतः रद्द हो जाएगी और तब नए प्रतिष्ठान को छूट के लिए 
समुचित सरकार को आवेदन करना होगा | 
[4. TA-3806/48/20 8-U4.04-]] 


धीरेन्द्र मोहन खरे, अवर सचिव 


MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
New Delhi, the 22nd August, 2023 


S.O. 32.—In exercise of the powers conferred by section 88 read with section 9] A of the Employees’ 
State Insurance Act, 948 (34 of 948), the Central Government hereby exempts the regular employees of factories 
and establishments of M/s BSES Yamuna Power Limited from the operation of the said Act. The exemption shall be 
effective for a period of one year from the date of publication of this notification in the Official Gazette. 


2, The exemption is subject to the following conditions namely:- 


(I) the factories and establishments shall maintain a register of the employees specifying the names and 
designations of the exempted employees’; 


(2) the employees shall continue to receive such benefits under the said Act to which they would have 
been entitled to on the basis of the contribution paid prior to the date from which exemption granted 
by this notification operates; 


(3) the contribution for the exempted period, if already paid, shall not be refundable; 


(4) the employer of the said factory and establishment shall submit in respect of the period during which 
that factory was subject to the operation of the said Act (hereinafter referred as the said period), such 
returns in such forms and containing such particulars as were due from it in respect of the said period 
under the Employees’ State Insurance (General) Regulations, 950; 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2797 


(5) a Social Security Officer appointed by the Corporation under sub-section () of section 45 of the said 
Act or other official of the Corporation authorised in this behalf by it, shall, for the purpose of — 


(i) verifying the particulars contained in any return submitted under sub-section () of section 
44 of the said Act for the said period; or 


(ii) ascertaining whether registers and records were maintained as required by the Employees’ 
State Insurance (General) Regulations, !950 for the said period; or 


(iii) ascertaining whether the employees continue to be entitled to benefits provided by the 
employer in cash and kind being benefits in consideration of which exemption is being 
granted under this notification; or 


(iv) ascertaining whether any of the provisions of the Act had been complied with during the 
period when such provisions were in force in relation to the said factory and establishment to 
be empowered to — 


(a) require the principal or immediate employer to furnish to him such information as he 
may consider necessary for the purpose of this Act; or 


(b) at any reasonable time enter any factory, establishment, office or other premises 
occupied by such principal or immediate employer at any reasonable time and require 
any person found in charge thereof to produce to such Social Security Officer or 
other official and allow him to examine the accounts, books and other documents 
relating to the employment of persons and payment of wages or to furnish to him 
such information as he may consider necessary; or 


(c) examine, with respect to any matter relevant to the purposes aforesaid the principal or 
immediate employer, his agent or servant, or any person found in such factory, 
establishment, office or other premises or any person whom the said Social Security 
Officer or other official has reasonable cause to believe to be or to have been an 
employee ; or 

(d) make copies of or take extracts from, any register, account book or other document 
maintained in such factory, establishment, office or other premises; or 

(e) exercise such other powers as may be specified. 


(6) In case of disinvestment or corporatisation, the exemption granted shall stand cancelled and the new 
entity may apply to the appropriate Government for exemption. 


[No. S-3806/48/208-SS-T] 
DHEERENDRA MOHAN KHARE, Under Secy. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. 4322.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 74) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 

भारत पेट्रोलियम कॉर्पोरेशन लिमिटेड, कोलकाता के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध में 

निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता, Tare (रिफरेन्स .-03/208) को जैसा कि 

अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 76.08.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ 
था। 

[सं. Tet-300//49/207-asare(TH)] 

डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the !6th August, 2023 


9.0. 322.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 03/208) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to Bharat 
Petroleum Corporation Limited, Kolkata and Their Workmen which was received along with soft copy of the award 
by the Central Government on 6.08.2023. 

[No. L-300/49/207-IR(M)] 


D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


2798 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present: Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
REF. NO. 03 OF 208 


Parties: Employers in relation to the management of 


M/s BPCL, Kolkata 
AND 
Their Workmen/ Union 

Appearance: 

On behalf of Management: M/s BPCL, Kolkata : Present 
On behalf of the Workmen/ Union : Present 

Dated 2377 February, 2023 
AWARD 


Both sides are present through their respective Ld. Counsels. 


Today has been fixed for adducing evidence by the Union, but union has come with a verified application 
stating the concerned two dismissed workmen are not interested to pursue with the present reference case. Therefore, 
it has prayed for passing necessary order or an appropriate award. Let the petition be taken on record. 


The present reference case has seen referred by the Ministry of Labour vide Order No. L- 300] [/49/20]7- 
IR(M) dated 03.0.20l7 for determination “Whether the action of the Management is justified in denying the Post- 
Retirement Medical Benefit to two dismissed employees (workmen) viz. Sri Tapas Bhattacharyya and Sri Ram 
Chandra Bishoyi? If not, to what relief the concerned workmen are entitled to?” 


Since the union which has espoused the cases of the above two workmen is not interested to proceed further 
with the hearing of the reference and as such, no dispute award is hereby passed. 


Accordingly, Reference No. 03 of 208 is disposed of without cost. 
Send copy of this order/ no dispute award to the Ministry for doing needful. 
Supply copy to the parties as per rule. 
Justice K.D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. 4323.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम ((947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
इंडियन ऑयल कॉर्पोरेशन लिमिटेड, हल्दिआ रिफाइनरी के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स नं.-25/2007) को 
जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 76.08.2023 को 
प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. Tet-300//49/2007-atsarz(TH)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the !6th August, 2023 


S. 0. 323.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 25/2007) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to Indian 
Oil Corporation Limited, Haldia Refinery and Their Workmen which was received along with soft copy of the award 
by the Central Government on 6.08.2023. 


[No. L-300] /49/2007-IR(M)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2799 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present: Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
REF. NO. 25 OF 2007 
Parties: Employers in relation to the management of 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., Haldia Refinery 
AND 
Their Workmen/ Union 
Appearance: 
On behalf of Management: Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., 
Haldia Refinery _ : Present 
On behalf of the Workmen : None 
Dated 3 March, 2023 
AWARD 
The Management is present through its Ld. Counsel. 


Summon/ notice of appearance issued to the Union in the address given in the Order of reference has returned 
undelivered with postal endorsement insufficient address as per track report. 


The Record reveals, the union has been conducting the case and lastly the case was fixed for further cross- 
examination of Union’s witness Ashok Kumar Maity since 08.2.20ll. The evidence from the side of Union has been 
closed vide Order Dated 04.04.209, when union has failed to produce the W.W No. | Ashok Kumar Maity for his 
cross-examination and has stopped appearing. Thus, case was fixed for evidence from the side of Management since 
2.06.209. 


Unfortunately, till date the Management too has failed to adduce evidence. 


Therefore, this Tribunal decides to dispose of the present Reference Case No. 25/07 on the basis of materials 
available on record. 


The Govt. of India, Ministry of Labour vide its Order No. L-300!/49/2007 IR(M) dated 25.09.07 has 
referred the following issue for adjudication:- 


“Whether the action of the management of the Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., Haldia Refinery in closing down 
and shifting the LPG Bottling plant resulting in consequential changes of service condition of the concerned workmen 
is justified? If not, what relief the concerned workmen are entitled to?” 


The union in its claim application has alleged that Management unilaterally decided to shift LPG Bottling 
Plant from Haldia Refinery which has been running for more than thirty years and in its place decided to establish B.G 
gantry for Naphtha unloading thereby affecting the service conditions of those workmen working for bottling plant. 
Contractor’s workmen too were withdrawn after the plant was closed on & from |“ March, 2007. That due to 
redeployment of the workmen of LPG Bottling Plant to different departments of Haldia Refineries it grossly changed 
in their service conditions, they have been posted in those departments where risk of life is high. That they have lost 
their seniority. Thus, it has prayed for restoration of operation of L.P.G Bottling Plant and not to discriminate the 
workmen of bottling plant at the time of promotion and not to change their service conditions. 


On the other hand, the management has contended in its w/s the union in question has no locus standi to 
challenge the decision of the Management as it is not a recognized union. The recognized union which represent the 
majority of the workmen of Haldia Bottling Plant has not raised any dispute as it has accepted the redeployment of the 
workmen of Bottling Plant to different departments of Haldia Refineries as they have been suitably redeployed in 
other section/ departments. At the Haldia Refinery itself with similar benefits and conditions of service as per rules. 


The shifting of plant is purely a managerial decision and which was necessitated for Corporation’s 
commercial exigencies and when this is redeployment of the workmen of the plant in different section and 
departments at the Haldia Refinery itself with similar benefits and service conditions cannot be termed as change of 
conditions of service. 


That out of 49 contractor’s workmen, 3l have been deployed at Hydro Crocker Project under different 
contractors and |8 have been paid one time lump-sum compensation on terms of settlement dated 3.04.2007. 


2800 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Bottling Plant had to be dismantled to install Hydro Crocker Unit at Haldia, in order to meet the future fuel 
specification of petrol and diesel as per auto fuel quality norms of the Govt. of India and to improve Refinery 
profitability. Relocation of bottling plant is not the close of the plant. Thus, it has prayed for dismissal of the 
Reference Case. 


Gone through the exhibited documents and from where it appears the LPG Bottling Plant at Haldia Refinery 
has already been relocated elsewhere i.e. outside Haldia and at its site new Hydro Crocker Plant has been established. 


From Ext. W-6 it appears that there was 39 permanent workmen working at Bottling Plant. On the shifting of 
the plant outside Haldia, they have been redeployed within Haldia Refinery, but in different sections and departments 
under the same management, without affecting their seniority in the same pay scale and all prerequisite facilities to 
which they were entitled as employee of bottling plant. 


Therefore, this tribunal does not find any change in the service condition of those permanent employee of 
LPG Bottling Plant on their redeployment in different sections and departments of the same management. 


The documents filed by the Management shows that out of 49 contractor’s employee, it has deployed 3] of 
them to different sections under different contractors and service provider M/s S.B Engineering had retrenched 8 
workmen, but after providing them retrenchment compensation as admissible under I.D. Act, [947 including ex-gratia 
payment. 


Therefore, I do not find any merit in the dispute raised by the Union. 
Consequently, the Reference stands dismissed. 
Accordingly, dismissal award is hereby passed. 
Reference Case No. 25/07 is dismissed without cost. 
Send copy of this Award to the Ministry for doing needful. 
Supply copy to the parties as per rule. 
Justice K.D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. 4324.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (7947 का 44) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार भारत 
पेट्रोलियम कॉर्पोरेशन लिमिटेड, एलपीजी प्लांट कोलकाता के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध 
में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स नं.-24/2020) को जैसा कि 
अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 76.08.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ AT | 


[सं., Tet-300//23/2020-aTsare(TH)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the l6th August, 2023 


9७.0. 324.—In pursuance of Section 47 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 24/2020) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to Bharat 
Petroleum Corporation Limited, LPG Plant, Kolkata and Their Workmen which was received along with soft copy 
of the award by the Central Government on 6.08.2023. 


[No. L-300 /23/2020-IR(M)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present: Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
REF. NO.24 OF 2020 
Parties: Employers in relation to the management of 
M/s Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, LPG Plant 
AND 
Their Workmen 
Appearance: 
On behalf of Management: M/s Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Ltd., LPG Plant : Present 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 280 


On behalf of the Workmen : None. 


Dated 25" January, 2023 
AWARD 
The Management represented by its lawyer. 


Today too the Union has failed to appear like on the previous date inspite of having knowledge about the 
pendency of present reference case, referred by the Govt. of India, Ministry of Labour at its initiative or having 
espoused the dispute against the Management before different Govt. Authorities. 


Be that as it may, the Govt. of India, Ministry of Labour vide its office Order No. L-300/23/2020 (IR-M) 
dated 4.2.2020 has referred the following issue for adjudication:- 


“Whether the action of the management of BPCL, Raigunj Territory (LPG) in introducing the new machine without 
issuing notice under Section 9A of the ID Act is justified? If not, what relief the workmen are entitled to?” 


Since the union after raising the dispute has decided not to pursue the case before the Tribunal for 
adjudication by keeping itself absent or not putting appearance, it can be said that union is no more interested to 
proceed further with the issue under reference. 


Therefore, no dispute award is passed and Reference Case No. 24 of 2020 is disposed of. 
Send copy to the Ministry 
Supply copy to the parties. 


Justice K.D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. 4325.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (7947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
स्वाति एयरपोर्ट सपोर्ट सर्विसेज प्राइवेट लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स F.-64/204) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में 
दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 6.08.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[a. Weat-072/2/2074-arsare(T4)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the ]6th August, 2023 


9.0. 325.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 ((4 of l947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 6/204) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to 
Swati Airport Support Services Pvt. Ltd. and Their Workmen which was received along with soft copy of the 
award by the Central Government on 6.08.2023. 

[No. L-02/2/204-IR(M)] 


D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present: Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
RtEF. NO. 6 OF 204 
Parties: Employers in relation to the management of 
Swati Airport Support Services Pvt. Ltd. 
AND 
Their Workmen/Union 


Appearance : 


2802 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


On behalf of Management: Swati Airport Support 
Services Pvt. Ltd. : Present 
Contractor Employer : Absent 
On behalf of the Workmen/Union _ : Absent 
Dated 24" March, 2023 
AWARD 


The Management of Airport Authority of India is present. None appears from the side of the Contractor 
Employer and Union inspite of due service of notice upon Union as per tack report. 


Record shows that since !.02.20!6 the union which has espoused the present dispute and has filed claim 
statement has not been taking any step or perusing with the the hearing of the case. 


So, it can be assumed the union is no more interested with the dispute or issue “Whether the action of the 
Management of Swati Airport Support Services Pvt. Ltd. is justified in terminating the service of Sri Sankar Gupta 
w.e.f. [6.07.203 is legal and /or justified? If not, what relief the workmen are entitled to?” 


The union in its claim statement has alleged Mr. Shankar Kumar Gupta was engaged as Aero Bridge 
Operator on 5.02.203 and prior to that, he was engage in different capacities since 2004 within the ambit of 
Principal Employer under different contractors. 


That for no reason his service was terminated on 6.07.203 without following the statutory obligation. Thus, 
union has prayed for his reinstatement with back wages. 


The Airport Authority of India in its written statement has alleged since there exist no relationship of 
employer and employee between it and the concerned workmen, the present reference case is not maintainable against 
it and prayed for dismissal. 


In the record I do not find such materials to prove the claim made by the union that concerned workman was 
working under different contractors engaged by A.A.I since 2004 or that he was retrenched from the service without 
following and complying the procedure under provision laid down in I.D. Act. 


Therefore, No Dispute Award is passed and Reference Case No. 6! of 204 is disposed of. 
Send copy to the Ministry for doing needful. 
Justice K.D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. 4326.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (7947 का 44) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार भारत 
पेट्रोलियम कॉर्पोरेशन लिमिटेड, कोलकाता के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स F.-07/209) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में 


दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 6.08.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 
[सं. एल-30044/54/2048-आईआर/(एम)] 


डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the l6th August, 2023 


S.O. 326.—in pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 0/20I9) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Kolkata and Their Workmen which was received along with soft copy of 
the award by the Central Government on 6.08.2023. 


[No. L-300/5/208-IR(M)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2803 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present: Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
REF. NO. 0 OF 209 
Parties: Employers in relation to the management of 
M/s BPCL & Others 
AND 


Their Workmen/ Union 


Appearance : 
On behalf of Management 
On behalf of the Workmen : Ld. Adv. Mr. M.S. Dutta 
Dated 4 March, 2023 
AWARD 


Both the workmen Md. Shakil and Sri Sankalpo Baran Hari are found present in the Tribunal along with their 
Ld. Counsel M.S. Dutta. 


Sri Dipak Kr. Bhattacharya, the General Secretary, B.P.C.L Employee Union who has espoused this present 
dispute files a verified petition stating both the workmen are not interested to proceed with the present case. 
Therefore, he has prayed for passing necessary order. 


The workman Sri Sankalpo Baran Hari files Xerox copy of his Aadhaar Card to prove his identity and duly 
signed by him and his lawyer on record. Let it be taken on record while Md. Sakil submits that he has not brought any 
of his identity issued by the Govt. to prove his identity, but Ld. Lawyer on record identifies himself. 


The Govt. of India, through Labour Ministry and vide Order No. L-300/5/208-IR (M) dated 07.0!.209 
has referred the following dispute to this tribunal for adjudication: - 


“Whether redressal accorded by the Executive Director Aviation, BPCL, Kolkata in the appeal made by the workmen 
viz., Sri Md. Shakil and Sri Sankalpa Baran Hari is justified? If not, to what relief the concerned workmen are entitled 
to?” 


Since the Union and workmen are not interested to proceed with the dispute and who have prayed for 
disposal of the case for non-presence and as such their prayer is allowed. 


Accordingly, no dispute award is passed and Reference Case No. | of 209 is disposed of. 
All pending applications are disposed of. 
Send copy to the Ministry for dong needful. 
Justice K. D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. 4327.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
लाइफ इन्सुरेंस कॉर्पोरेशन ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय 
सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता, Tate (रिफरेन्स नं.-08/2003) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में 


दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 6.08.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 
[सं. Weat-470/25/2002-aTeare(t-ID] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


2804 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the l6th August, 2023 


9.0. 327—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 08/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to Life 
Insurance Corporation of India and Their Workmen which was received along with soft copy of the award by the 
Central Government on 6.08.2023. 


[No. L-70/25/2002-IR(B-II)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present: Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
REF. NO. 08 OF 2003 
Parties: Employers in relation to the management of 
LIC of India 
AND 
Their Workmen/Union 
Appearance: 
On behalf of Management: Mr. Avishek Guha, Ld. Advocate. 
On behalf of the Union/Workman: Absent 
Dated: 8th June, 2023 
AWARD 


By order No. L-!70/25/2002/IR(B-I) dated 3-0-2003, the Government of India, Ministry of Labour, has 
referred the following issue for adjudication by this Tribunal :- 


“Whether the action of the management of LIC of India in increasing the working hours on Saturday to eight 
hours to the Watchman, Liftman and Driver etc. w.e.f. I5-03-2002 without following the procedure under 
section 9A of the Industrial Dispute Act is justified or not? If not, what relief the concerned workmen are 
entitled to ?” 


The Union which has espoused the above dispute in its claim statement has alleged that it is one of 
Registered Trade Union and recognised by the management of LIC of India. The management of Eastern Zonal Office 
by issuing letter dated 29-02-2002 informed the 43 workmen names mentioned in the claim statement and working in 
the capacity of Liftman, Watchman and Driver about change in their duty hours on Saturday from four hours to eight 
hours would be of eight hours and such change would take place from 5-03-2002. 


It is the contention of the Union that appointment letters of those workmen specifically provide that working 
hours on Saturday would be four hours. Hat letters dated 29-02-2002 and 07-03-2002 were totally silent about 
payment of extra remuneration for working additional extra four hours on Saturday. The Union raised objection 
against such sudden change in the duty hours before the management but the management did not pay any heed to 
their representation for which they had to raise an industrial dispute before the authority concerned, but reconciliation 
failed. Hence this reference. 


The management in its written statement has alleged that duty hours of driver, watchman and liftman was 
fixed as per establishment manual. The different division had fixed different duty hours in the appointment letters of 
watchman, liftman and drivers contrary to the codified hours of duty in the establishment manual. The service 
condition of the staff of LIC is not governed by the provision of West Bengal Shop and Establishment Act. The 
overtime is allowed only for those work which is necessary to dispose of the urgent matter of non-routine nature. The 
duty hours of those staff belonging to the category of Liftman, Watchman and driver have been changed from 
four/four and half hours to eight hours as per establishment manual. 


That as per clause 55 of LIC (Staff Regulation) !960 Corporation may sanction overtime payment to its 
employees belonging to the class II and class IV who are required to work on Saturday or holidays or to put in extra 
hours on week days in connection with corporation work subject to the provision of local enactment. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2805 


Therefore, it has prayed for dismissal of the reference. 


The Union in order to prove its case has examined Sri Shyamal Kumar Chakraborty, Watchman, as WW-|, 
Sri Swapan Kumar Bedajna, a member of the Union and High grade Assistant of Insurance Company as WW-2, Sri 
Haradhan Majumder, Watchman as WW-3 and Sri Khokon Singh, Driver as WW-4. 


From the side of the said Union [4 documents have been produced and which have marked as Exhibit-W- | 
to W-4. 


From the side of the management Smt. Ranjita Swain, Administrative Officer was examined as M.W.], Sri 
Dipak Kumar Ghosh, Secretary, Office Service Department of Eastern Zonal Office as MW-2, Sri Anup Kumar 
Ghosh, Assistant Secretary, Office Service Department of Eastern Zonal Office as MW-3, but management has failed 
to produce Sri Subrata Bose whose evidence-in-chief on affidavit was filed. Thus incomplete evidence of Sri Subrata 
Bose is hereby declared expunged. From the side of the management five documents have been produced and which 
have been marked as Exhbiit-M-! to M-3/2. 


It is undisputed fact, earlier the office of LIC used to have full five working days from Monday to Friday and 
half working day on Saturday. Therefore, appointment letters of those 43 workmen in the category of Liftman, 
Watchman and Driver, show that their daily working hours was eight hours and four hours on Saturday. Further, their 
appointment letters contain a clause apart from the limit prescribed their actual working hours will be subject to 
change from time to time as per the requirement of the office. If more than one shift is worked, the workman is liable 
to transfer to one shift to another. Some of the appointment letters contain the following condition :- 


“Subject to the provision of the local Shop and Establishment Act daily working hours will be eight hours 
excluding lunch interval on full working days and four/four and half hours on half day. Subject to this limit, the actual 
working hours will be prescribed by the office from to time.” 


The impugned letter dated 27-02-2002 issued by the Regional Manager of Eastern Region, LIC of India, the 
root cause of the present dispute shows the Management had informed the concerned workmen about change in the 
working hours on Saturday and the reason for the change. It was written in the dispute letter dated 27-02-2002, that 
assuming Shop and Establishment Act of West Bengal was applicable to the Building Maintenance Staff of the LIC of 
Indi, at Zonal Office, Kolkata, the working hours was fixed less than eight hours on working Saturday. Since the State 
Act is not applicable to LIC and as such the duty hours of Building Maintenance Staff on working Saturday was 
increased from four and half hours to eight hours w.e.f. !5-03-2002. 


Perused those exhibited appointment letters produced from the side of the Union. Indeed, those appointment 
letters contains a clause with regard to the working hours and which shows that working hours for those Building 
Maintenance Staff i.e. Liftman, Watchman and also that of Driver, their working hours has been prescribed 
as follows :- 


“8 hours during week days from Monday to Friday and four or four and half hours on Saturday and such 
working hours is subject to local Shop and Establishment Act. That their working hours limit is also subject to change 
as and when prescribed by the office from time to time.” 


By issuing letter dated 27-02-2002 the management as disclosed to those liftman, watchman and Driver, that 
Shop and Establishment Act, West Bengal is not applicable to LIC of India. 


It is a matter of common knowledge that LIC is a Govt. of India Undertaking and is governed by the LIC 
Act, 956 and which is a Central Govt. undertaking and the State Govt. has no control over the affairs of LIC and its 
employees. Therefore, this Tribunal is of view mentioned of application of Shop and Establishment Act of West 
Bengal in the appointment letters of those 43 workmen is unwarranted. Therefore, the union cannot take advantage of 
such unwarranted, improper clause contained in the appointment letters of those employees. 


That apart, it is a matter of common knowledge in the earlier days LIC used to function six days a week like 
nationalised banking institution i.e. from Monday to Friday as full day and Saturday half day. Subsequently, there was 
a change in the working days in LIC like nationalised banking sector whereby Second and fourth Saturday of every 
month was declared holidays/ non-operational days while first, third and fifth Saturdays were made working 
days/operational days. At present the working days of LIC is five days a week. 


A question may arises under such changed circumstances with regard to working days. Whether the LIC can 
reduce the salary of the liftmen, watchmen and driver merely the working days from six days a week has been brought 
down in five days a week? The answer is “NO” as it will create a chaos in the establishment of LIC. 


Further, a question may arises when LIC started functioning on first, third and fifty Saturday as full working 
days by declaring second and fourth Saturday as holidays, then staff who falls under the category of Bing 
Maintenance and Drivers can deny working on working Saturday a full working day, merely their appointment letters 
contain four hour working hours on Saturday. The answer is simply no as they being regular staff of LIC, their nature 
of job demands it is their bounden duty to keep the lift operation, office premises is opened before the start of working 


2806 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


hours and to close after the office hours during full working days including Saturday, which was made full working 
days from half day after declaring 20 and 4" Saturday of a month holidays. Equally drivers need to attend their duty 
on working days and remain during working hours and they cannot say since their appointment letters provides four 
hour duty on full working Saturday by putting the admiration in lurch. 


That apart, the management by issuing notice those 43 workmen individually on 27-02-2002 and 07-03-2002 
have informed them in advance about the change in working hours and date from when it would effective i.e. 5-03- 
2002. 


As per section 9A of the Industrial Dispute Act, the management need to give prior notice of changes it 
intend to bring on working days and working hours to the concerned workmen going to be effected by changes and 
can give effect to changes within 2] days of giving of notice. In the present case there appears due compliance of 
provision of Section 9A of the I.D. Act, 947 by the management. 


Further, this tribunal is of view, the proposal of changes effected by management to be sound, legal and valid 
as one cannot expect liftmen shutting lifts after 2 p.m., watchman closing the office before the working hours or 
Driver leaving the office during office hour on full working Saturday, when other regular office staff and managerial 
staff would be discharging their duty for eight hours and when the office is fully functioning merely their appointment 
letters speak of four hours duty on Saturday. There cannot be two types of working hours on full working day on 
Saturday in the same office and when the works of liftmen, watchmen and drivers have direct link with duty hours of 
office staff, managerial staff and business hours of Insurance Office. More so, the management has specially 
mentioned in their appointment letters its right to bring changes in the limit of their working hours from time to time. 
Therefore, the management of LIC was justified in bringing changes in the working hours of its staff who falls in the 
category of the liftmen, watchmen and Drivers. 


Further, with the several changes that have been effected during long pendency of this case for last two 
decades, with regard to working days and working hours in LIC office i.e. from Six Days a week i.e. full five working 
days from Monday to Friday and Saturday as half day to I*, 37 and 5“ Saturday of a month as full working days and 
204 and 47 Saturdays of a month as holidays and now Five days a week as working days and weekend i.e. Saturday 
and Sunday as Holidays, the dispute raised by union at this stage has become redundant and infructuous and this 
Tribunal does not find any merit in the dispute. Accordingly, the Reference case no.08 of 2003 is dismissed and 
Award of dismissal is passed. 


Justice K.D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. 4328.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 74) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 

लाइफ इन्सुरेंस कॉर्पोरेशन ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 

केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता, Tare (रिफरेन्स F.-78/204) को जैसा कि 

अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 76.08.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ 
था। 

[सं. एल-47044/6/2043-आईआर(एम)] 

डी.के.हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the !6th August, 2023 


9.0. 328.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 8/204) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to Life 
Insurance Corporation of India and Their Workmen which was received along with soft copy of the award by the 
Central Government on 6.08.2023. 


[No. L-I70/6/203-IR(M)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2807 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present: Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
REF. NO. 8 OF 204 
Parties: Employers in relation to the management of 
Life Insurance Corporation Ltd. 
AND 
Their Workmen/Union 
Appearance: 
On behalf of the Management: Authorised Representative 
On behalf of the Workmen/Union : Authorised Representative. 
Dated: 24th July, 2023 
AWARD 


By Order No. L*-70/6/203 (IR-M) dated 9-02-204, Central Govt., Ministry of Labour in exercise of 
power conferred by section 0() (d) and (2A) of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 has referred the following dispute 
to this Tribunal for adjudication:- 


“Whether the action of the management of Life Insurance Corporation of India, Eastern Zonal Office, 
Hindustan Building, 4, (२, Avenue, Kolkata -700 072 for not granting recess hours to the Cashier from 3- 
5 hrs. To 4-00 hrs., as granted to all categories of the workmen, as demanded by the Union is legal and/or 
justified? If not, what relief the workmen concerned are entitled to?” 


That the facts giving rise to this dispute in brief are that those staff who discharge the duty of Cashier in Life 
Insurance Corporation of India office, are deprived of lunch break or recess hours, which is otherwise extended to all 
the employees of Life Insurance Corporation of India and who are entitled to take lunch break and recess hours in 
between 3-I5 hrs. to !4-00 hrs. Such discriminatory attitude of the management is inhuman labour practice, 
insatiable or exploitation and has caused gross injustice to the Cashiers. The management has adopted a step brotherly 
treatment towards the Cashiers without being supported by any circular. 


The other financial institutions like Bank, Post Office etc. follow uniform recess hours for their entire staff 
including their Cashiers after three hours of duty. That forcing the Cashier of LIC of Eastern Zone to work at a stretch 
from 0 hrs. to 5 hrs., continuously without any lunch break, just to maintain continuity of work in the cash counter 
in the interest of customers is inhuman and which may have adverse effect on their health also. Thus by espousing the 
present dispute the union has demanded that there should be uniform lunch break or recess hours to the Cashier also 
like it is enjoyed by the other member staff of the Life Insurance Corporation of India. They have demanded that 
Cashier may be allowed a lunch break or recess hours in between 3-5 hrs. to 4-00 hrs. That the management may 
be directed to adequately compensate the Cashiers for denying them lunch break in between 3-5 hrs. to 4-00 hrs. 
from the date the present dispute has been raised. 


On the other hand the management in its written statement has alleged that Cashiers are allowed lunch break 
or recess after cash hours i.e. after 3 p.m. The recess hours is allowed for 45 minutes subject to adjustment basis on 
actual office hours. Cashiers are selected for particular branch/branches on being fully aware of the nature of job and 
for which special allowance is paid. The Cash Counter of Life Insurance Corporation of India is kept open during 
regular normal lunch hours to cater those customers who come to the Insurance Office to pay premiums during normal 
lunch break. Therefore, the management has prayed for dismissal of the claim of the Union. 


The Union in order to prove its case has examined Sri Biplab Talukdar, a Cashier of Life Insurance 
Corporation of India as W.W. No.! and Sri Biswanath Tripathi, another Cashier as W.W. No.2. However, no 
document whatsoever has been produced from the side of the Union. 


On the other hand, the Management has examined Sri Nirmal Alexander Karkata as M.W. No.| and Sri 
Pratik Chatterjee as M.W. No. 2. From the side of the management following documents have been produced and 
exhibited:- 


l. Circular dated 29-09-20 — Exhibit-A. 
2. Letter dated 05-04-203 — Exhibit-B. 
3. Application of Cashier Sri Biplab Talukdar (W.W. No.|) dated 9-2-994 — Exhibit-C. 


2808 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


4. Letter of conversion from the Assistant to Cashier of Sri Biswanath Tripathi, (W.W.No.2) dated 0- 
08-200- Exhibit-D. 


Gone through the written argument submitted by the Ld. Counsel for both sides, both oral and 
documentary evidence which have come on record. 


It is undisputed fact that the lunch break or recess hours of the Cashiers of Life Insurance Corporation of 
India was not same like that of the other member staff of the Life Insurance Corporation of India. The other member 
staff of the Life Insurance Corporation of India at the relevant time used to enjoy lunch break/recess in between 3-5 
hrs. to 4-00 hrs., but Cashiers were not allowed to enjoy the said recess hours. Cashiers were entitled to recess only 
after the cash hour was over. The working hours of the cashiers at the cash counters was from !0-00 a.m. to 
03-00 p.m. 


From Exhibit-A, it appears that Chief of Finance and Accounts Department, Central Office, Mumbai by 
issuing a circular dated 29-09-20, had directed all the offices of LIC to see that in case customers are found standing 
in queue at the hour of closing of the cash counter gate at 3-00 p.m. the office cannot return those customers who are 
standing in queue, the cashier is bound to accept the deposit for which they may have to work for extra-time. 


Further, Ext.M-B a letter dated 05-04-20l3 addressed to ALC (central), Kolkata by Executive Director 
(Personal), Central Office, Mumbai, shows the Labour Commissioner was informed that cash hours in LICI during 
weekdays to be for 5 hours a day and on Saturday it is 3 hours, but subject to local conditions and convenience of 
policy holders and further it has to be decided by Zonal Manager. Further, it has been stated that allowing lunch break 
between cash hours to cashiers like other employees of LIC is not found advisable as it makes inconvenient for the 
office going public who wish to deposit/remit the premium during their lunch break. Therefore, cashiers of LIC can 
enjoy lunch break immediate after cash hour is over and within normal working hours. 


However, M.W. No.! in his evidence has stated since !5-05-202 uniform recess hours is adopted in all the 
offices of Life Insurance Corporation of India, for all the employees including Cashiers. Now, the recess hours is from 
0-30 p.m. to 02-00 p.m. i.e. for half an hour and consequently the working hours of cash counter has been extended 
from 0-00 a.m. to 04-5 p.m. in place of earlier cash counter hours from 0-00 a.m. to 03-00 p.m. 


It is also seen from the evidence of both the management witnesses, the cashier are selected amongst the 
eligible employees on their willingness applications and also based on certain other factors and for which they 
were/are paid special allowance. 


Both the witnesses of the union who are two Cashiers of Life Insurance Corporation of India, too in their 
evidences stated that lunch break hours was fixed in Life Insurance Corporation of India for 45 minutes i.e. from 
0l-I5 p.m. to 02-00 p.m. uniformly for all classes of the employees right from Sweeper to Chairman, but for Cashiers 
they can take break only after cash hours i.e. after 3 p.m. 


So, it appears the management has admitted that no regular lunch break which is otherwise enjoyed by the 
other staff of Life Insurance Corporation of India was extended to the Cashiers, in the interest of those office going 
customers who could come to the branch to deposit/remit their premiums and for other related transactions only 
during their normal lunch break time and to prevent harassment to the customers. Therefore, the cashiers go for lunch 
on staggered basis. 


Therefore, the only question that requires determination in the present reference is whether the Cashiers 
were discriminated for not extending recess hours during 3-5 hrs. to l4-00 hrs as enjoyed by their colleagues or 
superior officers and subordinate staff working in the same establishment? 


There are other institutions like LIC, such as Bank, Post Office etc. There are several Revenue generating 
departments in Government offices where cash transactions from public are dealt with. In those departments uniform 
recess hours or lunch break is maintained as a general rule and no two different recess hours being maintained within 
the same establishment especially in respect of employees working in the cash counters. In some of those institutions/ 
establishment, it is seen transaction in one or two of the cash counters being closed keeping the other cash counters 
open to cater the customers coming to those institutions/establishment during recess hours and some of those financial 
institutions suspending the work in cash counters completely during recess hours. So, to this tribunal it appears to 
direct a cashier of LIC to work uninterruptedly without any break and continuously at a stretch for five hours just for 
the sake of some office going customers to be inhuman and unjust. Such rigorous duty hours may tell upon their both 
mental and physical health. 


It is true the lunch break may vary from place to place or to establishment to establishment but all the 
employees working in those establishments are entitled to lunch break at least working for 03-00 to-03-30 hours in the 
first half of the day, but in the present case it is seen the Cashiers of Life Insurance Corpn. Ltd. were made to work 
continuously for five hours without any break from l0 a.m. to 03-00 p.m. whereas their other colleagues, senior 
officers and staff subordinate to them enjoyed uniform lunch break after working for three and half hours at the 
relevant period to be unjust and discriminatory. The union is justified in raising the present dispute. 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2809 


However, it has been admitted by both sides that during the pendency of the present reference all the 
employees of LICI irrespective of their post and designation have been enjoying uniform lunch break or recess hours 
and the dispute raised by the union regarding disparity in recess hours for cashiers and rest of the employees of LICI 
under Eastern Zone has been settled by the Management by issuing revised working hours for the employees of LICI 
under Eastern Zone on 4th May 202] and copy of which has been filed by the Management of LICI along with its 
written notes of argument. 


Therefore, in view of the letter no. EZO/P&R/202-22/Working Hours dated May 4 202], the present 
reference is disposed of. Accordingly, Reference No.|8 of 204 is disposed of and Award is passed. 


Justice K. D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. 4329.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 74) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 

इंडियन ऑयल कॉर्पोरेशन लिमिटेड, कोलकाता के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध में 

निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता, Tare (रिफरेन्स नं.-30/2022) को जैसा कि 

अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 76.08.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ 
था। 

[सं. जेड -6025/04/2023-arsare(wa)-5] 

डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the !6th August, 2023 


9.0. 329.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 30/2022) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to Indian 
Oil Corporation Limited, Kolkata and Their Workmen which was received along with soft copy of the award by the 
Central Government on 6.08.2023. 


[No. Z-!6025/04/2023-IR(M)-5 | 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present : Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
REF. NO. 30 OF 2022 
Parties : Employers in relation to the management of 


Indian Oil Corporation 


AND 
Their Workman 
Appearance : 
On behalf of Management : Mr. Sushil Karmakar, Advocate 
On behalf of the Workman : 


Dated: 2" June, 2023 
AWARD 


By Order No ID/Misc./8/(8)/2022-E.I/B.II dated 20-06-2022, the Deputy Chief Commissioner (central), 
Kolkata has referred the following dispute for adjudication by this Tribunal: — 


280 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


“Whether the termination/disengagement of the service of Sh. Babulal Halder, Ex-Senior Operator (F) 
w.e.f.l2-09-2008 by the management of M/s. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., Marketing Division, Eastern Region, 
Kolkata is legal, just and proper? If not, to what relief the concerned workman Sh. Babulal Halder is entitled to?” 


Indian Oil Corpn. is represented by its Ld. Counsel Mr. Sushil Karmakar. 


The workman Sri Babulal Halder is present through his Lawyer, but I do not find power in favour of the 
ld.Lawyer in the record. The claim statement contained Vokalatnama which bears the signature of Sri Babulal Halder 
but it does not bear any signature or name of the Lawyer who is conducting the case on his behalf. 


One Mr. S. Mukherjee, Advocate has fled written objection against the petition of the management dated 06- 
03-2023, but I do not find any power being executed by the workman in his favour. 


Be that as it may, today has been fixed for hearing the application dated 06-03-2023 filed by the management 
challenging the maintainability of the present reference case. It has been alleged in the said petition that the workman 
Sri Babulal Halder was terminated from the service on [2-09-2008 on the finding of the Enquiry Officer in the 
domestic enquiry held against him on the charge of furnishing false school certificate at the time of his 
employment/recruitment. 


Said Babulal Halder challenging such order of dismissal or termination of his service dated 2-09-2008, had 
filed a case under section 2A of the Industrial Dispute Act, before this Tribunal in the year 20l8 and which was 
registered as CGIT-9/208. That when he found that his case was barred by limitation in view of the provisions of 
section 2A(3) of the I.D. Act, he had filed an application for withdrawal of the case and which was duly allowed by 
the predecessor of this Tribunal on 2-07-209. Then he filed WPA-7524 of 2022 before the Hon’ble High Court and 
which too he had withdrawn with a view to approach the appropriate forum for redressal of his grievances. 
Accordingly, said writ petition was dismissed for non- prosecution and liberty was given to the writ petitioner to 
approach the appropriate forum for redressal of his grievances and such order was passed on 20-06-2022. 


That Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner, Kolkata referred the dispute on 20.06.22 to this Tribunal the time 
barred dispute for adjudication. Therefore, ld. counsel for the Management has prayed for dismissal of the reference. 
He in support of his contention has referred to Haryana State Cooperative Land Development Bank —vs- Neelaam, 
2005 II CLR 45 and Smt. Swapna Adhikari (Smt) —vs- State of West Bengal & Ors., 204 II CLR-352. 


On the other hand it has been contended that order of withdrawal of previously filed case u/s 2A of the 
I.D.Act and writ petition will not operate as resjudicata as the dispute was not disposed of on merit. Since the Govt. 
has referred the dispute u/s!0 () (d) and 2A of the I.D.Act, the same is not subjected to law of limitation. 


On perusal of record, it appears that Sri Babulal Halder was terminated from the service on securing job in I. 
B.P. which was later merged with Indian Oil Corporation on the basis of the forged educational certificate and on the 
basis of the report of domestic enquiry held against him on and from 2-09-2008. 


Challenging such termination order dated 2.09.2008, he has filed a case u/s 2A of the I.D.Act, being CGIT 
No.9 of 208. In view of provision of sections 2A(2) and 2A(3) of the I.D.Act, a workman who has been discharged, 
dismissed, retrenched or otherwise terminated from service can file an application directly to the labour court or 
tribunal challenging the order of dismissal, discharge, retrenchment and termination before expiry of three years from 
the date of passing of order of dismissal, discharge, retrenchment or termination. So, it appears he filed the application 
u/s2A of the Act, almost ten years of his termination. Realising that his cause is barred by limitation, he withdrew the 
case on 2.07.20l9. Then, he moved the High Court of Calcutta and filed WPA-7524 of 2022 and that too he 
withdrew on 20-06-2022 and the same was dismissed for non-prosecution. However, he managed to obtain an order to 
approach the appropriate forum for remedy. Thus, it appears the workman has misused the process of the Court and 
the Tribunal. 


It further appears, DLC, Kolkata referred the dispute in question for determination by this Tribunal, the day 
the writ petition was withdrawn by the workman on 20-06-2022. It shows that workman had already raised an 
industrial dispute before the Labour Commissioner for reconciliation and such matter was pending before the Labour 
Commissioner when he filed the writ petition and he appears to have suppressed such fact before the Hon’ble Writ 
Court as Writ Court while dismissing the writ for non-prosecution has given him liberty to move appropriate forum 
for remedy. 


Further, it is very interesting to note DLC, Kolkata, has failed to annex delegation of power u/s 39 of the Act, 
in its favour to refer the dispute directly to this Tribunal i.e. almost |4 years after his termination. 


Prima facie it appears the dispute raised by the workman is barred by limitation in view of section 2A (3) of 
the I.D. Act. 


That apart Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Haryana State Cooperative Land Development Bank —vs- 
Neelaam, 2005 II CLR 45, has been pleased to hold “the aim and object of the industrial dispute may be to impart 
social justice to the workman but the same by itself would not mean that irrespective of his conduct a workman would 


[भाग I—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 28i] 


automatically be entitled to relief. The procedural laws like estoppel, waiver and acquiescence are equally applicable 
to the industrial proceedings. A person in certain situation may even be held to be bound by the doctrine of acceptance 
sub silentio.” 


The Hon’ble High Court, Calcutta in Smt. Swapna Adhikari —vs- State of West Bengal & Ors., 204 III 
CLR-352 has been pleased to hold that “the legislature, however, has introduced sub-section (3) so that the case 
falling under section 2A, the employee approached within a stipulated time. The said sub-section (3) prescribed the 
time within which an application for adjudication of disputes is required to be filed before the Tribunal/Labour Court. 
This is the second application contemplated under the amended section. The first application is to be made before the 
conciliation officer. The workman is first required to approach the conciliation officer. This also appears to be the 
procedure under Rule 2A of the West Bengal Industrial Dispute Rules, 958 vide Notification No.l806-ir Dated 
November |2 ,993. However, the tribunal under no circumstances can accept and decide any such application under 
section 2A(2) after the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise 
termination of service as specified in sub-section (l). The amendments to section 2A enabling industrial workman to 
seek adjudication of his dispute has been introduced only on 5" September, 20!0 by when the three-year period 
under sub-section (3) of section 2A had already expired. In terms of section 0 sub-section (B) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, !947 as amended by the West Bengal Act, 33 of 989 w.e.f. 870 December, 989, it was open to an 
individual workman to apply to the Conciliation Officer for a certificate during the pendency of the conciliation 
proceedings, in the event no settlement has arrived at within a period of 60 days from the date of raising of the 
dispute. The Conciliation Officer thereafter on receipt of such application shall issue a certificate within 7 days from 
the date of receipt in such a manner as may be prescribed. The party may within a period of 60 days from the receipt 
of such certificate or when such certificate has not been issued within 7 days as aforesaid within a period of 60 days 
commencing from the date immediately after the expiry of 7 days as aforesaid, file an application in the prescribed 
form to the Labour Court or Tribunal as may be specified by the appropriate Government.” 


Further it has been held “Time stipulated for invocation of the forum of the Labour Court under sub-section 
(3) of Section 2A is “before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise 
termination of such service specified in sub-section ()” thereof. Time limit for making an application to the Labour 
Court stipulated in sub section (3) of section 2A does not appear to have a bearing to the provisions of sub-section (2) 
of Section 2A. In any case right conferred under section 2A lapse immediately preceding the date of expiry of three 
years of the dater of dismissal etc. This sub section (3) of Section 2A operates independently, continuation of the 
conciliations notwithstanding.” 


Therefore, in view of above discussions and decisions of the Hon’ble Courts, this Tribunal is of view the 
present reference is barred by limitation and not maintainable. Accordingly, the Reference Case No. 30 of 2022 is 
dismissed being not maintainable and barred by limitation. Award of dismissal is hereby passed. 


Justice K. D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 46 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. 4330.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 74) की धारा 77 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 

लाइफ इन्सुरेंस कॉर्पोरेशन ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 

केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स नं.-07/2040) को जैसा कि 

अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 76.08.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ 
था। 

[सं. WaA-70 4//2009-aTe aT (TA)] 

डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the l6th August, 2023 


9७.0. 330.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (l4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 07/200) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to Life 
Insurance Corporation of India and Their Workmen which was received along with soft copy of the award by the 
Central Government on 6.08.2023. 


[F. No. L-I70/I/2009-IR(M)] 
D.K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 


282 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present : Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
REF. NO. 7 OF 200 
Parties : Employers in relation to the management of 
Life Corporation of India Ltd. 
AND 
It’s Workman 
Appearance : 
On behalf of the Management: Mr. DilipKumar Kundu 
On behalf of the Workman : Mr. Saibal Mukherjee 
Dated: 8th day of July, 2023 
AWARD 


By order No. L-70/!/2009-IR(M) dated 09-06-2009, the Central Govt., Ministry of Labour in exercise of 
power conferred under section !0(/) (d) and (2A) of the Industrial Dispute Act referred the following issue to this 
Tribunal for adjudication :- 


“Whether the action of the management of Life Insurance Corporation of India, in relating to its Eastern 
Zonal Office, Kolkata in imposing punishment of removal from Service w.e.f. 9-09-2005 on Sri Pallab 
Lodha, Ex-Sub-Staff, working in Zonal Office, Kolkata is legal and justified? To what relief he is entitled?” 


The facts giving rise to such dispute in brief are that Sri Pallab Lodha was appointed as a Peon on 
6-03-993 and later his service was confirmed and made him permanent staff of LIC w.e.f. l6-03-994. That 
Sri Pallab Lodha was a habitual absentee and used to remain on unauthorised leave, without prior sanction of leave or 
without any intimation to his immediate controlling officer. 


That employees of Life Insurance Corporation. Ltd. of India, are governed by LIC of India (Staff) 
Regulations, 960. Regulation 30 of LIC of India (Staff) Regulations ,l960 provides that no employee shall absent 
himself from his duty without having obtained the permission of the competent authority, nor shall he absent himself 
in case of sickness without submitting the medical certificate satisfactory to the competent authority. Regulation 2 of 
the said Staff Regulation provides that every employee of the Corporation shall at all times maintain absolute integrity 
and devotion to duty, shall confirm to and abide by the said regulations. 


That during the period from 04-03-!999 to 8-0i-2000 said Sri Pallab Lodha remained on unauthorised leave 
or absent for 454 days, without prior sanctioned and without informing the office. Consequently, he was charge 
sheeted for such unauthorised absence for 54 days on 08-02-2000. Against such charge domestic enquiry was 
initiated against him and he was found guilty of the charge. The Disciplinary Authority imposed penalty for such 
proved charge by withholding one increment for one year in terms of regulation 39 () (b) of the Regulations, [960 on 
28--2000. 


Sri Lodha did not rectify himself and continued with his habit of absenteeism and again during the period 
from 08-08-2000 to 29-] -2000 he absented himself from duty for 8 days and that too without any prior sanction or 
without prior intimation to the authority concerned. Once again he was charge sheeted for remaining on such 
unauthorised leave for 8l days on l6-!2-2000. Departmental enquiry was initiated against him on such charge. He 
was found guilty by the Enquiry Officer. The Disciplinary Authority concurred with the findings of the Enquiry 
Officer and imposed penalty by reducing basic pay of the by two stages, in view of provision of Regulation 39() (d) 
of Regulations !960 on 03-09-200]. 


Inspite of such second punishment Sri Lodha did not rectify himself and he stuck to his habit of absenteeism 
and remain absent for 25 days during the period from 4-05-200] to 07-06-200I and for 5 days during the period from 
4-06-200I to I8-06-200l and remained in continued absence from 28-06-200] till 4-09-200. Accordingly, fresh 
charge was framed against him for remaining on such unauthorised absence on !4-09-200l. Once again departmental 
enquiry was started and in such enquiry he was found guilty and this time the disciplinary authority withheld three 
increments permanently in terms of regulation 39() (d) and 39() (b) of the Regulations, 960. 


Further, he remained absent for 207 days during the period from |l-0-2004 to 9-0-2004. That he having 
failed to maintain absolute integrity and devotion to duty and failed to serve the Corporation honestly and faithfully 
and acted in a manner prejudicial to good conduct and detrimental to the interest of the Corporation. He was once 
again charge sheeted for violating the provisions of regulation 2] and 30(l) of the LIC (Staff) Regulations, !960 and 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 283 


charge sheet was issued on 07-2-2004. He was served with the provisional list of documents and provisional list of 
witness along with the charge sheet. 


The concerned workman submitted his reply to the said charge on 247 December, 2004/8" January, 2005 and 
where he has admitted the charges. Therefore, management decided to initiate a departmental enquiry against him. 
The Enquiry Officer in its report dated !™ April, 2005 found the concerned workman guilty of the charge. Copy of 
the enquiry report was sent to the concerned workman for his comments on findings of the Enquiry Officer, but he did 
not bother to submit his reply. Then, the Disciplinary Authority issued a show cause notice proposing the penalty of 
his removal from his service on 29-06-2005. 


The concerned workman submitted reply to the show cause notice on 2i-06-2005. The disciplinary authority 
in exercise of the power conferred on him under regulation 39 (l) (f) read with Schedule-l of the LIC (Staff) 
Regulations, !960 imposed the penalty of removal of service w.e.f. !9-09-2005. 


The concerned workman receiving the order of punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority preferred 
an appeal before the Appellate Authority. Appellant Authority dismissed the appeal and upheld the punishment vide 
order dated 29-2-2005. 


Then, the concerned workman preferred a memorial as provided in Regulation 49 of Regulations, 960 
before the Chairman. The Chairman too rejected his memorial vide order dated 8" September, 2009. 


Against the order of removal from service w.e.f. 9-09-2005 the concerned workman raised the present 
industrial dispute where he has alleged that he is a psychiatric and depression patient and because of his such illness 
he was unable to attend his duty regularly. However, he has alleged that the domestic enquiry which was initiated 
against him was in utter violation of the principle of natural justice where he was prevented from adducing evidence in 
his defence. He was not allowed to cross examine the witness produced from the side of the management. The 
management by adopting unfair labour practice has victimised him and illegally terminated his service. Therefore, he 
has prayed for setting aside the punishment of removal from service and prayed for his reinstatement with full back 
wages. 


The workman has examined himself as W.W. No.|. From his side 25 documents have been produced and 
marked as Exhibit- ४७/॥ to W/25 on admission by the management as reflected from order dated 4--209. It also 
appears from the said order that the other four documents namely workman’s letter dated 04-03-2000, medical 
certificate dated 30-07-2002, medical prescription dated 24-02-2005 and his another letter dated 20-2-2007 were not 
exhibited or admitted by the management, but the record shows the workman has failed to prove those four documents 
by examining the Doctor who issued those medical certificate and prescription and his own letters. 


On the other hand the Management has examined Smt. Tuhina Bose, Assistant Secretary (P&IR) as M.W. 
No.|. The entire record of the departmental proceeding has been produced and which have been marked as Exhibit- 
M/A series i.e. M/A to M/A30. 


Having heard the Ld. Counsels for the parties it appears that by raising present industrial dispute, the 
workman has challenged his order of termination and also the domestic enquiry. 


It is an admitted fact, the concerned workman was a permanent employee of Life Insurance Corporation of 
India in the category of Peon or Group-D. That from Exhibit-A series it is seen that the concerned workman was not 
charge sheeted for the first time for remaining unauthorised absence for 207 days in the year |l-0i-2004 to 9-0- 
2004 on 07-2-2004 but he was charge sheeted earlier on three different occasions for remaining on unauthorised 
absence for 54 days in the year 999 on 08-02-2000, for 8 days in the year 2000 on 6-!2-2000, for 48 days during 
the year 200! on I4-09-200I. 


That he was found guilty in all those three previous departmental enquiries for remaining on unauthorised 
leave without sanctioned of leave and without prior intimation. It also seen that in those earlier departmental enquiries, 
a lenient view was taken by the management of Life Insurance Corp. of India, first by withholding one increment for 
one year, in second time by reducing basic pay by two stages in time scale, thirdly permanently withholding three 
increments. So, It appears that in spite of having suffered such punishment, the workman did not bother to rectify 
himself and he remained absence for 207 days in the year 2004. 


That remaining absent for 207 days in a year the management has charge sheeted him on 7" December, 2004 
and the management not being satisfied with his reply to charge sheet decided to hold an enquiry on the charge. 
Exhibit-M-A/27 prove that one Sri Swapan Kumar Chakraborty was appointed as an Enquiry Officer and 
Sri A. Ghosh as 8 Presenting Officer. That as per the submission made by the workman he was permitted to take 
assistance of his co-employees Sri Chanchal Bhattacharya as his defence representative in such enquiry. 


Exhibit-M-A/27 bears the signature of the concerned workman. It further shows that he admitted the charge 
framed against him. The Enquiry Officer to render just and fair enquiry decided to continue with the enquiry 
proceeding. 


284 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Exhibit- M-A/28, M-A/30 prove the concerned workman fully participated in the departmental enquiry. He 
was allowed to examine the documents relied by the management and he also permitted to produce documents. The 
departmental witness Sri N.C. Das, Administrative Officer, Marketing Department was cross examined by the defence 
representative of the workman. During such cross examination he had stated that that the workman used to remain 
absent continuously for number of days and that too without prior permission and in many occasion he was late in 
submitting his leave application along with medical papers. 


Sri N.C. Das during his cross examination further stated that whenever the workman used to come to the 
office he used to behave properly as a normal person and used to discharge his duty normally. Such statement 
suggests the workman was normal and not a psychiatric patient as alleged by himself. 


The concerned workman during the departmental enquiry and to the question put by the Presenting Officer 
why he was unable to produce the prescription of Dr,. J.K. Bhattacharya and produced cash memos of medicines. On 
such question he has stated that he lost the prescription of the Doctor and that he used to buy medicines on his own 
without any prescription and he never collected any cash memo and vouchers. Further he was put a question that the 
department could not locate Dr. Suraj Rawat whose prescription he had submitted and to such question he has stated 
that Dr. Suraj Rawat is a Nepali Doctor, but he could not give further details of the said Dr. Rawat. It is worth to 
mention here that among Nepali community title Rawat is not known. Such statement of the concerned workman 
makes his case of being a psychiatric patient and cause of his absenteeism doubtful. 


The workman has filed a prescription and certificate issued by Dr. Soumitra Chatterjee, B.Sc, DHMS, FWT 
&PET dated 2005 and which have been marked as Ext.-W-2 and W-/3 i.e for the period after the charge sheet dated 
07-2-2004. He has failed to examine such homeopathic doctor to prove the contents of those two exhibits. The 
qualification of the above named Dr. as reflected from the prescription itself prove that he is not a psychiatrist. 


That apart, prima facie from Exhibit- M-A series this Tribunal does not find any violation of principle of 
natural justice during domestic enquiry. Rather it appears the management held the entire enquiry in the presence of 
the workman and his representative and after serving the copy of documents on which it had relied and giving 
opportunity to the representative of the workman to cross examined the management witness. Nothing has come on 
record to show that unfair labour practice being adopted by the management of Life Insurance Corp. of India against 
the workman or the workman to be a victim of unfair labour practice. This tribunal finds just and proper domestic 
enquiry being held against the concerned workman. 


In fact Exhibit-M-A. Series discussed above prove that the workman was guilty of chronic absenteeism. He 
was not bothered about the fact that due to his excessive absenteeism, the management may had to face administrative 
problem for not being able to utilised his service for the purpose of which he was recruited. It seems the workman had 
taken the management or Authority for granted for its lenient attitude towards him as he knew that management at the 
most would withheld his increment or reduce his pay scale as it was done in three previous occasions, but he would be 
enjoying full pay packet without doing any work or without attending office. Such conduct on the part of the workman 
proves that he had no regards to the service rules and regulations and also about the punishment for violation of 
service rules and regulations. It appears the he has crossed the limit of patience and tolerance of the management by 
remaining absent for 207 days in a period of 365 days. Out of remaining I58 days also it includes holidays e.g. 
Saturday, Sunday, Festival holidays and National Holidays. Further, nothing is there to prove substantial cause 
behind such excessive absenteeism. The plea of depression taken by him is not substantiated by cogent and reliable 
medical evidence. 


Therefore, considering such conduct of the workman, this Tribunal holds the disciplinary authority has 
rightly removed him from the service. 


That apart Exhibit-MA series shows that the disciplinary authority had taken the decision to remove him 
from the service after considering his past conduct also. Similarly, the Appellant Authority as well as the Chairman 
have rejected his appeal and memorial considering his past conduct and his no care attitude. Therefore, this Tribunal 
does not find any need to hear the workman on punishment as this Tribunal upheld the decision taken by the 
disciplinary authority in removing the working from the service of Peon from Life Insurance Corp. of India to be legal 
and proper. If this workman inspite of holding guilty for excessive absenteeism in four different domestic enquiry is 
allowed to continue in service, it would set a bad precedent in the establishment and other co-workers may be 
encouraged in violating the service rules and regulations. The engagement of such type of an employee would be a 
loss to the establishment. 


Therefore, this Tribunal holds the management of Life Insurance Corporation of India is justified in 
removing Sri Pallab Lodha from the service of Peon w.e.f. !9-09-2005. And do not find an need to linger the 
proceeding further, for hearing on the point of quantum of punishment as imposed b the Disciplinary Authority. The 
discussion made above prima facie prove the non-reformist attitude of the concerned workman and as such the 
punishment of his removal from service do not appear to be disproportionate to the degree of guilt of the concerned 
workman. 


Accordingly, Reference Case No. 07 of 200 is disposed of. 
Justice K. D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 285 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. 334.—siterthter विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 44) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
भारत पेट्रोलियम कॉर्पोरेशन लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय 
सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता, Tare (रिफरेन्स F.-6/200) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में 
दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 6.08.2023 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल-30044/82/2000-आईआर(एम)] 
डी. के. हिमांशु, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the |6th August, 2023 


9७.0. 33l.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. l6/200l) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to Bharat 
Petroleum Corporation Limited and Their Workmen which was received along with soft copy of the award by the 
Central Government on 6.08.2023. 


[No. L-300/82/2000-IR(M)] 
D. K. HIMANSHU, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present : Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
REF. NO. 6 OF 200 
Parties : Employers in relation to the management of 
Bharat Petroleum Corpn. Limited. 
AND 
Their Workmen 
Appearance : 
On behalf of the Management of B.P.C.Ltd : Advocate Janardan Mondal 
On behalf of M/s Security & Vigilance Agency: Absent 
On behalf of the Workman : Absent 
Dated: 7th June, 2023 
AWARD 


By Order No L-300] /82/2000 /IR(M) dated 30-04-200I, the Central Government, Ministry of Labour has 
referred the following issue to this Tribunal for adjudication. 


“Whether the action of the management of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd., Kolkata in paying 65% of the 
daily rate of wages instead of 00% for the period from 8-05-996 to 3l-03-998 in terms of DGR instruction to the 
contractor i.e. Security & Vigilance Agency who is responsible for paying the same wages to security personnel is 
legal and justified? If not, what relief the workmen are entitled? “ 


The facts leading to this reference in gist are that Bharat Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. for safety and security of its 
establishment at Haldia, had engaged [7 ex-servicemen as Security Guards and 2 ex-servicemen as Supervisors 
through Directorate General Resettlement (DGR) sponsored agency M/s. Security & Vigilance Agency on terms and 
condition as set by DGR guideline/formula. 


Those workmen were engaged earlier by another DGR sponsored agency named M/s. Purbanchal Ex- 
Servicemen Welfare Association. On termination of its contract on |8-05-996 M/s, Security & Vigilance Agency 
was engaged and they continued to work under newly engaged service provider. 


It is the contention of the Union that in view of DGR guidelines of 993 they were paid l00% wages but 
after the engagement of the M/s. Security & Vigilance Agency their wages have been reduced to 65%. They were not 


286 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


entitled to draw Minimum Wages Act applicable in West Bengal as they being ex-servicemen governed by DGR 
guidelines and in view of Govt. Of West Bengal notification dated 04-04-2000. 


They have also alleged that they were not paid House Rent Allowance at the rate of 5% of the wages to 
which they are otherwise entitled to. Therefore, the Union has prayed that both the principle employer and the 
contractor employer to be directed to pay their arrear wages at [00% in view of DGR guidelines of 993 for the period 
from 8-05-996 to 3-03-]998. 


The Principle Employer in its written statement has contended the security personnel engaged by it were/are 
sponsored by DGR. In view of circular issued by Commoder, Director (Employment) dated 0-02-996, in order to 
bring parity in wages payable to DGR sponsored ex-servicemen throughout India, their wages were/are paid as per 
formula promulgated by DGR on Minimum Wages Act, which is revised periodically. In States, where wages have 
not been revised for last !2 months, the minimum wages (Basict VDA) to be paid are not to be less than 65% of Delhi 
wages.The BPCL strictly followed such guidelines. 


The security personnel engaged by it through M/s. Security & Vigilance Agency were entitled to draw wages 
@ 65% of prevalent Delhi wages w.e.f. 0l-02-996 and not 00% wages during the period from 8-05-996 to 3l-03- 
998. 


The tripartite settlement dated 27-06-996 was executed amongst the Union, Contractor Employer and 
Assistant Labour Commissioner. BPCL was not the party to such settlement and as such BPCL is not bound by any 
terms and conditions of tripartite settlement. Therefore, it has prayed for dismissal of the reference being not 
maintainable. 


M/s,. Security & Vigilance Agency, in its written statement stated that it had submitted its quotation before 
BPCL and as per para 4 of the quotation it had quoted wages @ Rs.2,!7l/- per month per security guard and 
Rs.2,836/- per month per security superior and in addition 25% of the total wages as service charges of the agency. As 
per DGR’s letter No. 2!2/SA/DGR/RW/ EMP/92 dated 30-03-l992, the DGR sponsored guards were entitled to 
00% wages of 993 and subject to upward revision. 


On acceptance of its tender/quotation, an agreement was executed for a period from 0-06-996 to 3-05- 
998 for BPCL staff quarter and from 8-05-996 to 7-05-998 for BPCL project site. That both the contracts which 
it had with BPCL expired on 30-06-998 after an extension. 


It has also alleged that there was tripartite agreement on 23-07-996 and it was agreed whenever the DGR 
revises the wages of security personnel the same will be implemented after acceptance and payment by BPCL, the 
Principal Employer. Arrear, if any, will be paid only on receipt from BPCL. 


It has also alleged that rate of wages for security staff was revised by DGR w.e.f. February [996 and fixed at 
Rs.3,288/- per month per security guard and २६.4,३7 |/- per month per security Supervisor. 


Similarly, there was revision of wages by DGR w.e.f. February [997, and the wage of security guard was 
fixed at Rs.3,498 per month per and 7२६.4,6] [/- per month per security Supervisor. 


During 998 the wage was fixed at Rs.3,826/- per month per security guard and Rs.5,070/- per security 
Supervisor. But at the same time admitted the rate quoted by it in the agreement was not as prescribed or formulated 
by by DGR. Workmen refused to accept 65% DGR rate and demanded !00% DGR revised ate. 

The Union to prove its case and claim has examined workmen Ashish Kumar and Sri Kalyan Das as WW-0L 
and W.W.-02. 


From the side of the Union seven documents namely:- 
(.) Memorandum of Agreement executed between BPCL and M/s. Security & Vigilance Agency dated 26-07-996, 


(2) Memorandum of Settlement under section 2(3) of the Industrial Dispute Act between Security & Vigilance 
Agency and their workmen before A.L.C.(Central) dated 23.07.996, 


(3) Xerox copy of Govt. Of West Bengal, Labour Department notification dated 04-04-2000, 
(4) Revision of wages issued by Govt. Of India, Ministry of Defence dated November 993, 

(5) DGR instructions with regard to wage structure of security personnel as on 0l-02-!997 

(6) DGR instructions with regard to wages structure of security personnel as on 0[-02-9986 and 


(7) Guidelines for sponsoring and operating of security agency and related activities issued by Directorate of 
Employment, Directorate General Resettlement and which have been marked as Exhibit-W-| to W-7. 


On the other hand the Management of BPCL has examined in part one Sri S. Balakrishnan as M.W.no.|. 
Therefore, his part evidence is not considered and treated as expunged. However, management produced one Sri 
Avijit Chanda as M.W. 2. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 287 


The management of BPCL has produced Xerox copy of Exhibit-W-! and copy of extract of DGR guideline 
concerning security agency from 0l-03-!996 and which have been marked as Exhibit-M- to M-2. 


The contractor employer has failed to pursue with the case and adduce evidence in support of the case by it in 
its written statement. It has been proceeded exparte. 


From the pleadings of the parties, oral evidence of witnesses and from documentary evidence, it is appears 
the BPCL indeed all along used to engage ex-servicemen as security guards at its establishment and that too though 
DGR sponsored agency. With the change in agency on expiry of contract period security guards already working for it 
were/are absorbed by its newly engaged agency sponsored by Directorate General Resettlement, Ministry of Defence. 


Ext-W-I/Ext-M-! prove M/s. Security & Vigilance Agency was one of the sponsored agencies of Directorate 
General Resettlement. From the evidence of witnesses and from exhibited documents, further it is seen n expiry of 
contract it had with M/S Purbanchal Ex-Servicemen Welfare Association, it had engaged Security & Vigilance 
Agency as service provider for security guards for a period from |8-05-996 till 7-05-998. It has absorbed those 9 
security personnel who were already working in the establishment of BPCL under another contractor. 


It is the contention of the Union, those workmen in view of DGR guideline of !993 used to draw l00% of 
wages. The Union exhibited order of revision of wages issued by the Govt. of India, Ministry of Defence in the month 
of November, 993 as Exhibit-W-4. Exhibit-W-4 is not legible, but somehow it is seen that the minimum rate of 
wages applicable in National Capital Territory of Delhi for semi-skilled workmen which was ६।, | 76/- was revised 
to Rs.,27/- and one who used to get wages at the rate of Rs.,328/- was raised to Rs. ,369/-w.e.f. 0-09-983. 


M-? is the extract of the DGR guidelines of the concerning security agency effective from 0l-03-!996 which 
shows that wage structure as payable in Delhi for security guard was fixed at Rs.3,880/-, to Gunman at Rs.4,80/-, 
Supervisor at ६.5,।58/- and Assistant Security Supervisor at Rs.6,324/- and such wage structure was given effect 
from February, 996. It further provides due to large variation in minimum wages in different states and unions and 
non-revision by the States and Unions, security personnel engaged outside NCT of Delhi should not be paid not less 
than 65% of Minimum Wages. 


Exhibit-W-l and Exhibit-M-l shows that M/s. Security and Vigilance Agency was engaged as a service 
provider by BPCL for the period from 8-05-l996 to 7-05-!998 on the basis of agreement executed in between 
BPCL and the service provider on 26-06-996. Therefore, the workmen engaged by M/s. Security and Vigilance 
Agency being governed by DGR guidelines, they are entitled not less than 65% of Minimum Wages fixed for NCT 
Delhi. 


As per Exhibit-M-2 it is admitted fact that service provider had engaged 7 security guards and 2 Supervisors 
for the establishment of BPCL and both the employers agreed to pay wages to them as per DGR Guidelines. 
Therefore, as per Ext M-2 the 7 security guards and 2 security supervisors were entitled to get not less than 65% of 
Minimum wages fixed for NCT Delhi i.e.65% of Rs.3880 for Security Guards 65% of Rs.558 and which comes to 
Rs.2522/- and Rs.3353/-respectively from the month of February 996. 


As per Exhibit W-5 the wages of those two category of workmen were revised w.e.f. February 997 to Rs. 
428/- and to Rs. 5476/-respectively. In that case their wages ought to had been Rs.2,683/- per month and Rs.3,559/- 
respectively. 


Similarly, exhibit w-6 shows, there was further revision in the wage structure of those security guards w.e.f. 
0-02-998. The wage of security guards was raised to Rs.4,55/- and that of Security Supervisor to Rs.5,983/-. 
Therefore, they were entitled to get not less than Rs.2,935/-per month and Rs. 3,889/-per month respectively w.e.f. 0l- 
02-998. 


Ext W-I, the agreement of contract executed between two employers on 26.07!996 and for a period from 
8.05.996 to 7.05.998 show wages of security guard was fixed at Rs. 27lp.m. and Rs. 2836 p.m. for Security 
Supervisor. 

Prima-facie it appears the contractor employer had quoted wages less than 65% of Minimum Wages Rate 
fixed by DGR for NCT Delhi w.e.f. February 4996. As per DGR Formula and Guidelines the wages of security 
guards and security supervisors should not had been less than Rs.2522/- and Rs.3353/-respectively. 


Further, Ext.W-| prove that it was agreed between the employers the workmen will be paid wages at revised 
rate as and when any upward revision was made by DGR and arrear too would be paid by the Principal Employer. 


But Ext.W-2 prove there was no due compliance of the DGR Formula or guidelines in fixation of wage rate 
and as such there was a dispute between the contractor employer and its employee. 


Nothing has come on record what steps were taken by the contractor employer with the Principal Employer 
for revision of wages as per DGR guidelines and formula or how much it paid to the workmen from February 997 
and February 998 till its contract period was expired. Therefore, it can be assumed that those 9 workmen were never 
paid the wages as per DGR guidelines. 


288 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


Similarly, nothing has come from the side of the Principal Employer to show indeed it paid wages to the 
contractor employees as DGR guidelines through its contractor. Therefore, it can be safely held that both the 
employers were engaged in unfair labour practice by paying them less than 65% of Minimum wages fixed for NCT 
Delhi. Since those security guards were engaged through a service provider to work in the establishment of BPCL. As 
per terms and conditions stipulated in the contract, it appears BPCL was ultimately liable to pay the legal wages to 
which those security guards were entitled as per DGR guidelines. But it stands prove that Principal Employer and its 
service provider had failed to adhere the DGR guidelines and thereby deprived the ex-servicemen of the wages to 
which they were legally entitled. 


Therefore this Tribunal holds that 7 security guards and 2 Security Supervisors were entitled to wages per 
month in the following rates for the period from 8.05.996 to 7.05.998 :- 


Period Security Guards Security Supervisor 
From8-05-996 to 3-0-997 Rs.2,522/- p.m. Rs.3353/- p.m. 
From 0i-02-997 to 3-0i-998 Rs.2,683/- p.m. Rs. 3,559/- p.,. 
From 0i-02-998 to 7-05-998 Rs.2,935/- p.m,. Rs.3,889/- p.m. 


BPCL is bound to pay the wages in the above rate to those !7 security Guards and 2 Security Supervisors 
during the period it has engaged M/s. Security and Vigilance Agency as its service provider and who had absorbed 
those security guards already working for it but under its previous service provider. 


Union has been able to prove that BPCL had failed to pay the wages to 9 Security personnel it had engaged 
through contractor at the rate which was formulated by DGR during the period from |8-05-996 to 7-05-998 and 
they are entitled to get the arrear from BPCL 


BPCL is hereby directed to pay the arrears of wages to those !9 workmen to which they were entitled within 
three months from the date hereof along with interest 8]2% per annum from the date of due till payment. 


It is very pertinent to note that the union/workmen have stopped taking any step when the matter was ripened 
to the stage of argument and saw no further progress and development in the dispute espoused by then even after 
waiting for more than two decades. Since they have been successful in the battle fought by them for more than two 
decades but which they have abandoned before the declaration of the result, then a duty is cast upon this Tribunal to 
inform them result. 


Therefore, office is directed to notify following persons about the award:- 


(l) W.W.Nol Sri Asish Kumar Dolui, S/o. Sri/Late Banamali Dolui, Vill. Bangapara, P.O. Deulpota, Dist. East 
Midnapore 


(2) W.W.No.2 Sri Kalkyan Das, S/o Late/Sri Laxmikanta Das, resident of CPT Contractors Colony, P.O. & 
P.S. Durgachak, Dist. East Midnapore and 


(3) The General Secretary, Haldia Security Agency Staff Association, Shramik Bhaban, Chiranjibpur, Debhog, 
Haldia, Midnapore, West Bengal, by Speed Post by sending a copy of this award so that they can claim their 
legitimate due from the management of BPCL. 


Accordingly, reference case no.6 of 200] is allowed and award to that effect is passed. 


Justice K. D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2023 
का.आ. 332.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम i947 (947 का १4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (0I/2003) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[a. एल L-2025/0I/2023-37g आर (बी-)-74] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the [70 August, 2023 


S.O. 332.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. l0l/2003) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 289 


Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of State Bank of India and 
their workman. 


[No. L-2025/0/2023-IR(B-I)-74] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
In The Central Government Industrial Tribunal Cum Labour Court At Hyderabad 
Present: Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 3" day of July, 2023 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. 04/2003 

Between: 
Sri Ch. Paradesi, 
S/o Ch. Israil, 
Kankaraguta Post 
Guntur Mandal 
Guntur District. ... Petitioner 
And 
| The Chief Manager, 

Personnel Section, 

State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, Labbipet, 

Vijayawada. 
2. The General Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Personnel Department, 


Local Head Office, Bank Street, 


Hyderabad. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner: Sri Suman, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjith Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Ch. Paradesi who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this petition 
under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger/Sweeper duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of 
service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2: Earlier this industrial dispute was answered by this Tribunal by a common award dated 7.5.2005, along with 
other batch cases, and the claim of the workman was dismissed. Workman challenged said award before the Hon’ble 
High Court vide WP No. 6470/2006 & batch wherein Hon’ble High Court of A.P., vide decision dated 23.6.204 set 
aside the common award dated [7.5.2005 passed by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, 
Hyderabad and directed the Respondent bank to reengage the workmen in the positions which they had been 
occupying prior to termination. Being aggrieved by the said order in WP No. 6470/2006 & batch, Respondent bank 
preferred appeal WA Nos. 268/204 and batch cases wherein Division Bench of Hon’ble High Court held:- 


“(L) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the “extent it sets aside the common 
award dated /7.35.20035 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) The further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated; 


2820 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer 
limit of five(5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


3 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in WA ४०.268/204 and other batch, held that, “ Hearing the learned 
senior counsel for the SBI and the Learned Senior Counsel for the contesting unofficial respondents, we see that while 
the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award of the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than 
one. Firstly, in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims 
as to the length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the 
post for each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each 
case ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and the most 
important aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a 
relief that could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not 
have been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating 
body, which has to do_ that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would 
sustain the order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the 
further findings and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases HCJ&ARR,J 
WA No. 7266 of 2074 & Batch 6 have to be sent back for consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before 
the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the materials already on record and also by affording an 
opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the management to place their rival contentions and further 
material before the Tribunal//The learned counsel appearing for the workmen are justified in pointing out that 
enormous delay has already happened and further action by the Tribunal in this line may be expedited.” 


Therefore, in compliance with order dated 20.3.20l9 of Hon’ble High Court of A.P., Hyderabad passed in WA 
No.268/204, this Industrial Tribunal conducted hearing proceedings in this reference on an individual basis and 
both parties have been provided ample hearing opportunity during the proceeding. 


The factual matrix of the present industrial dispute is as follows: 
3. The workman filed his claim statement with the averments in brief as follows: 


The petitioner, Sri Ch. Paradesi, was working as a Messenger in the State Bank of India since 986. He worked until 
March, 4997 when he was stopped from working based on the orders of the respondent panels. The petitioner was 
called for an interview in |989 and included in the panel in 99!. During the period from July, 99] to March, 997, 
he worked for a total number of !060 days. Contempt petition was filed regarding the employment of temporary and 
casual workers as the petitioner was not considered for regular employment while his juniors were. In June, 999, a 
stay order was obtained, preventing recruitment from taking place. As a result, the petitioner has crossed the age limit 
for recruitment and cannot seek alternate employment. The petitioner had previously worked from 975 to 99] but 
was denied employment by a blank order from the Regional Manager, Tirupati. A settlement in [987 allowed those 
who had completed a minimum number of working days to be called for interviews. The petitioner was asked to work 
temporarily during this time. Multiple settlements were made without considering the petitioner's name for absorption 
into permanent employment. Panels were prepared concurrently, and the Branch Manager was directed not to engage 
temporary employees from July, !997. Writ petitions were filed, and the Single Judge directed the State Bank of 
India to absorb the petitioner within six months. However, the respondent appealed to the Division Bench, which set 
aside the single judge's order and directed the petitioner to exhaust remedies under the Industrial Disputes Act. The 
petitioner claims that he is more senior compared to many of the people selected later who are still working. Despite 
the existence of branch vacancies, the petitioner was not considered for employment. The petitioner's services were 
abruptly stopped without any reason or following the procedure under the Industrial Disputes Act. It is submitted that 
the respondents have not exhausted the necessary procedures before retrenching the petitioner. The abrupt termination 
is seen as an unfair labour practice. The petitioner's name was included in a panel valid until December 99], which 
was prepared after March 3l, [997., The petitioner claims a reasonable expectation of continuation in service. The 
petitioner submits that the respondent's actions constitute discrimination among equally qualified candidates, contrary 
to guidelines established by the Supreme Court. The petitioner believes that only empanelled candidates, including 
himself, should be appointed to temporary or permanent vacancies until they are absorbed. Previous settlements 
were not implemented as intended, and subsequent agreements were made without following the intention to give 
chances to empanelled candidates. The petitioner disputes the respondent's claim that the panel of temporary 
employees and casual labour expired on March 3], [997, arguing that there is no specified authority to decide the 
validity or termination of the panel. The petitioner claims that since the illegal termination, alternative employment 
has not been secured by him despite best efforts. The petitioner requests the court to declare the respondent's 
termination of service as illegal, arbitrary, and unjust. He seek reinstatement with continuity of service, back wages, 
and other associated benefits deemed fit by the court. 


4. The Respondents filed counter refuting the averments made by the Petitioner _in the claim petition, and the 
contention of the Respondent in brief runs as follows: 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 282] 


The respondent submits that the claim petition is not valid and goes against the Industrial Disputes Act, !947. They 
deny the allegations made in the claim statement and demand proof of those allegations. The respondent bank used to 
hire temporary subordinate staff to cope with staff shortages and government-imposed restrictions. The All India State 
Bank of India Staff Federation advocated for temporary employees with less than 240 days of service to be considered 
for permanent appointments. Discussions were held between the federation and the bank, leading to a settlement that 
aimed to provide fair treatment to temporary employees. The settlement includes various factors, some of which are 
relevant to the current application. 


५ On 47..967, an agreement was signed between the Federation and the management Bank under Section 
2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the ID Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 967. 


As per settlement the temporary employees were categorized into three categories, detailed as under: 

i) Category 'A': 

Those, who have completed 240 days of temporary service in 2 calendar months or less after 97.97./9/5. 
ii) Category 'B': 


Those, who have completed 270 days aggregate temporary service in any continuous block of 36 calendar months 


after 07. 97/.4975. 
iii) Category 'c': 


Those, who have completed a minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after 94.97. /975 
or minimum of 70 days aggregate temporary service in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after 07. 9/.4/97/5. 


In the initial settlkement, it was agreed that temporary employees would be given an opportunity for permanent 
appointments in the bank for vacancies expected to arise from 987 to !99l. However, on July 6, 988, a subsequent 
agreement was reached between the Federation and the bank, extending the consideration period for vacancies from 
987 to 992. This agreement was signed under relevant sections of the Industrial Disputes Act and its associated 
rules, and it will be referred to as the second settlement. 


6. Later, on October 27, 988, another agreement, referred to as the third settlement, was reached between the 
Federation and the bank. It introduced a new clause, |-A, after clause | in the initial settlement. This clause stated that 
individuals engaged on a casual basis to fill in for leave or casual vacancies in positions like messengers, farrashes, 
cash coolies, water boys, sweepers, etc., would also be considered for permanent appointments in the bank for 
vacancies expected to arise from 988 to 992. Therefore, not only temporary employees receiving scale wages but 
also casual or daily wagers would be eligible for permanent absorption into the bank. 


7. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.990 issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to the absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement 
along the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 
240 days of temporary service in !2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25F of the 
Industrial Disputes Act might be decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. With respect to 
temporary employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement 
could be avoided, however, if the Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the 
representative union. In para 6(h) it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary 
service of 90 days or more days after |..82 would be eligible for consideration under the scheme. Although the 
Government guidelines envisaged a settlement in respect of temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 
90 days or more days, the Bank by way of further concession entered into settlements even in respect of those who 
had put in less than 90 days. 


8. According to the settlement dated November [7, !987, temporary employees who had worked with the bank 
from July 4, 975, to December 3!, 987, were given an opportunity to be considered for permanent appointment 
against future vacancies. The eligible candidates were categorized into three groups based on their completed days of 
service: Category A (240 days), Category B (270 days), and Category C (70 days). The waitlisted candidates’ panel 
would remain valid until December 3!, 99], Through a modification in the second settlement on July l6, 988, the 
qualifying service date was extended to July 3l, !988, instead of December 3, [987., An advertisement was issued 
on August |, 988, calling for applications from temporary employees who received scale wages, region-wise, to fill 
the vacancies in different regions. 


9. The third settlement on October 27, 988, was a result of the union's advocacy for casual or daily wage 
workers. It was decided to consider all candidates for vacancies likely to arise between 988 and 992. While the 
number of vacancies in some regions exceeded the waitlisted temporary employees, the Chennai circle was an 
exception as there were more waitlisted temporary candidates than available vacancies. 


2822 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


0. On January 9, 99], the fourth settlement was reached, extending the validity of the panel from 99] to 
994. After December 3l, 994, the remaining candidates on the panel would have no claim. Following the third 
settlement, the bank issued an advertisement on May |, 99, inviting applications from casual/daily wage workers 
for consideration for permanent appointment. This created concerns among temporary employees who felt threatened 
if a common list was created. However, if the casual daily wagers were placed at the end of the list, there would have 
been no cause for concern. 


Il. In response, the SBI Employees Union filed a writ petition (Writ Petition No.7872 of 99) seeking relief to 
operate the waitlist based on the August |, 988, advertisement and not to operate any list based on the May |, 99], 
advertisement. An interim stay was granted regarding the latter aspect, which lasted for more than eight years until 
July 23, [999., Consequently, no list of casual posts/daily wage workers could have been drawn up during this period, 
and the list of temporary employees should have been in operation. The writ petition was finally disposed of on July 
23, 999, by which time the relief sought in the petition would have been implemented. 


2. The 57 settlement was arrived at on 30" July 996 requiring the panel to be kept alive up to 3% March, 997 
and this was in respect of the vacancies which became available up to 3l‘' December 994. 


3. The respondent submits that the petitioner has not worked for more days than those who have been absorbed 
into the vacancies as agreed upon. They deny the petitioner's claim of continuous years of work and state that the 
petitioner, who has worked for less than 240 days in a |2-month period from 975 to 988, has no right to seek 
absorption in the bank except under the settlements. The case of the petitioner has already been considered under 
several settlements, and therefore, all the provisions and terms of those settlements are binding on them. The 
respondent submits that the applicant and other ex-temporary employees do not have an independent right, and their 
claims are based solely on the settlements. The preparation and maintenance of panels are in compliance with the 
agreed terms of the settlements. The panels, including the applicant, have ceased to exist after the designated period, 
and the remaining candidates have no right or claim against the bank. The settlements explicitly stated that the panels 
would not be kept alive until all candidates were absorbed. The applicant is barred from questioning the validity of the 
settlements after accepting the benefits and empanelment. According to the settlement dated January 9, 99], 
vacancies until December 994 were to be filled based on seniority from the 989 panel. After that, the panel lapsed, 
and the remaining candidates have no claim for permanent absorption. The same applies to the 992 panel. The 
respondent submits that only the temporary service rendered from January |, !975, to July 3, 988, is considered for 
permanent absorption, and days worked after that period are not counted since the panels had already lapsed. The 
bank never promised to absorb all candidates in the panel, as the advertisement clearly stated that candidates would be 
considered for absorption in vacancies until [992., According to the respondent, the vacancies were identified and the 
ex-temporary employees in the panels were absorbed based on seniority, as per the settlements between the Federation 
and the management Bank. The respondent submits that mere empanelment does not guarantee absorption for the 
petitioners, and keeping the panels alive after March 3l, [997, goes against the settlements. The respondent submits 
that the settlements between the State Bank of India and the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation have the 
force of law and are binding on the parties. The petitioners themselves have acted upon the settlements by being on 
the panel, and therefore, they are bound by the terms of the settlements. The maintenance of panels is in line with the 
agreed terms of the settlements, and the Bank has strictly adhered to these terms. The present application is based 
solely on the settlements and not on any independent right or provision of the Industrial Disputes Act. The panels 
under the settlements had a specific time limit, and this term cannot be modified in any legal proceedings. Therefore, 
those temporary employees who could not be accommodated due to lack of vacancies have no further rights for 
regularization under the settlements or otherwise. The bank has fully complied with the settlements, and the 
mentioned circulars and letters were merely directives to discontinue the practice of engaging temporary employees, 
which was also a term of the settlements. It is submitted that some writs were filed by certain temporary employees 
who were also called for interview and empanelled. In writ petition No.!2964/94, the Hon’ble High Court went into 
similar contentions in detail and the Learned Judge also referred to the settlements and subsequently held that the 
Petitioners therein were not entitled to any relief and the only relief they can claim is enforcement of settlements, if 
there is any right flowing from it or it has been violated. The relevant operative portion of the said judgement is as 
follows: 


"Tt is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which 
is the majority union and the bank management is binding on the petitioners also. It is not, at all the case of the 
petitioner that any of the terms of the settlement has been violated by the bank’s management. If the Petitioner had 
worked in the bank on part-time basis before 37.3. 94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services 
should be regularized on permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Petitioner in the 
present petition is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Petitioner to claim any right 
which flows from the settlement between the union and the bank management. As already pointed out that it is not 
the grievance of the Petitioner that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Petitioner has 
been denied by the bank management. Therefore, I domestic enquiry not find any ground, let alone substantial 
ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Petitioner. Writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No 
costs.” 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2823 


The respondent submits that the settlements clearly state that the panels would cease to exist at the end of the 
designated period, and there would be no further temporary or casual recruitment. The relief sought by the applicant, 
if granted, would essentially make temporary employment permanent through a backdoor entry, which goes against 
the settlements, as well as Articles l4 and 6 of the Constitution. It would also deprive rightful claimants of their 
chances through proper recruitment procedures. The settlements were intended as a one-time measure to end the 
practice of temporary engagement, and the rights of the applicant were determined by these settlements. Therefore, 
there is no legitimate expectation or estoppel, as contractual rights arising from an industrial settlement take 
precedence. The bank did not make any statement or representation guaranteeing permanent appointment, as clearly 
stated in the advertisement issued pursuant to the first settlement, which outlined the process of being considered for 
permanent appointment and being wait-listed based on suitability and subject to vacancies, with the waitlist valid until 
99]. 


4. The ex-temporary employees in the panels filed a writ petition before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, 
which was initially allowed by the Single Judge. However, the bank appealed this decision, and the Division Bench of 
the High Court set aside the Single Judge's order. The ex-temporary employees then filed a Special Leave Petition 
before the Supreme Court, which was also dismissed. Therefore, the reference to the Single Judge's judgment in the 
writ petition is irrelevant, as it has been overturned. The petitioner has not worked for the required 240 days in any 
preceding 2-month period, so the reference to Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act is not relevant. The 
petitioners’ claim regarding their service and educational qualifications require strict proof. The allegation of 
termination is incorrect, as the vacancies were filled based on seniority, and the non-engagement of the petitioner does 
not constitute termination. Temporary employees are subject to the availability of work, and there is no obligation to 
continue their employment when there is no work. The bank has not engaged in unfair labour practices, and the 
settlements are binding on the petitioner, having been fully implemented without violating any provisions of the 
Industrial Disputes Act. The issue has been addressed in various judgments of the Supreme Court and High Courts, 
and the petitioner's industrial dispute lacks merit and should be dismissed. 


5. The Petitioner in support of his claim examined himself as WWI and also filed photocopies of 5 
documents which were marked as Ex.W] to WI5. Ex.WI is the news paper advertisement, Ex.W2 is |“ panel list, 
Ex.W3 to W9 are service certificates, Ex.Wl0 is circular regarding lapse of panel, Ex.Wll is news paper 
advertisement, Ex.W2 is 274 panel list, Ex.W3 is Transfer certificate of School, Ex.W4 is caste certificate of ४/७। 
and ए5.9४४5 is employment registration certificate. On the other hand, Respondent filed photocopies of !2 documents 
which were marked as ४5.0७] to Mi2. Ex.MI to M4 are settlements between Respondent and All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation. Ex.MS is conciliation proceedings. Ex.M6 is another settlement. Ex.M7 is Memorandum of 
understanding. Ex.M8 is statement giving the particulars of 989 messenger panel. Ex.M9 is statement of 989 non- 
messenger panel. Ex.M0 is statement of 992 panel. Ex.MI] is order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 and 
Ex.M2 is order in SLP No.886-888. 


6. On the basis of the pleadings and the submissions made by the parties, following points emerge for 
determination:- 


I. Whether the action of the Respondent Management in terminating the services of the workman, w.e.f, 
3.03.997 is legal and justified? 


II. Whether the workman in terms of settlements arrived at between the Respondent Bank Management and the 
Federation of Employees is entitled for regularization absorption in the service of Bank? 


II. To what relief, the workman is entitled for? 

Findings: 

7. Points No. I & I:- The workman claims that he had been working with the Respondent Bank since 986 on 
temporary basis. In the year 988, Respondent No. 2 issued advertisement for calling applications from the then 
temporary subordinate employees for the post of messenger. The workman moved application and he received 
interview call letter dated 2.07.989 from bank to attend the interview on 25.07.l989 workman attended interview 
and Respondent Bank prepared an panel List of all the successful candidates in the year [99] and the Petitioner’s 
name appeared also in the panel list. The Respondent Bank utilized the services of the empanelled employees and 
workman on temporary basis till March 4997 and some of the empanelled employees were given permanent 
appointment basing on the number of days of service put up by them. Thereafter, the Respondent No.2 issued a Letter 
dated 25.03.997 directing all Branch Managers not to utilize the services of the empanelled Messenger and to declare 
that the panel list of 99! will lapse by 3!.03.!997. Therefore, all the remaining empanelled employees as per the 
panel list of !999, were denied employment after 3].03.[997. It is further submitted by the workman that Respondent 
No. 2 issued another advertisement in the year 99] calling application for interview from the then temporary working 
messengers and selected some of the candidates among the applicants and prepared another panel list of 80 
employees. The said panels lapsed in March 997. However, surprisingly all the temporary employees as per 
Second panel List of !993 were given permanent appointment and that order was issued just |5 days before the 
lapse of the panel List. It is further submitted that the empanelled employees of Second panel List of 993 were 


2824 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


juniors to the temporary employees’ of first panel list of !99| in terms of number of days of service put up by them. 
Therefore, the act of Respondent Bank appointing the junior employees of second panel list ignoring the senior 
employees of the first panel list of !99] is discriminatory, arbitrary and illegal which goes to indicated that the 
Respondent Bank chose to favour the employees of second panel List of 993 for the reason best known to the 
Respondent Bank. 


8. On the other hand, the Respondent countered the allegations made by the workman and submitted that the 
persons who do not have the requisite number of days of service as per the settlement, could not be considered for 
permanent absorption. It is contended that the bank had never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be 
absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that the candidate will be considered for the absorption in the 
vacancies that may arise up to 992. Since the panel list had already lapsed on 3].03.[997, and the vacancies were 
already filled up by absorbing the temporary attendants and daily wagers/casual employees respectively in order of 
their seniority in the empanelment, therefore, the consideration of engaging their services including workman could 
not have arise. Therefore, panel list of daily wagers prepared in the year [992 was used for filling vacancies which 
arose up to end of 994 and the said panel list automatically lapsed after the filling of the aforesaid vacancies. 


9. In support of his claim, the workman has examined himself as WW] and in chief examination, he reiterated 
his claim as made in his petition. Further he stated that Ex. W2 is the document referred List of empanelment Ex. 
W3-W9 are service certificates according to which the workman has worked for total number of 060 days. In cross 
examination, WWI states that he was not given any posting order at the time of joining the service nor at any other 
time. On the oral instruction of Branch Manager, he worked in the Branch. Further, he admits that in the panel list 
released by the management on 8.02.993, his name was not a part of the list and that he did not work continuously 
for 240 days in any year of service. He further states that he is not aware of any settlements between the Management 
and the Union. On the other hand, the Respondent has examined ५७४] and in his chief examination the witness had 
stated that the petitioner was included in the panel list 989 however, as the existing vacancies at that time were 
exhausted, his turn didn’t come, and he could not be given permanent employment in the bank. All the appointments 
were made strictly in accordance with the settlement between the SBI management and the SBI Staff Federation. 
The witness has also stated that as per the seniority was determined on the basis of number of days as temporary 
service put in by the employee in the given period and all the appointments were made as per seniority. Witness 
states that the petitioner had not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The 
petitioner and other temporary employees were not terminated from service by the Bank. The vacancies were filled up 
on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panel list and which were expired in terms of settlement on 
3.03.997 and there were no vacancies to absorb rest of the empanelled employees. 


20. In view of the above statement of witness, it manifests that, the workman did not work for 240 days 
continuously in any year in the service. Therefore, the protection of the provisions under Section 25 (f) of Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 against the retrenchment is not available to the workman. The initial burden of proof was on the 
workman to show that he had completed 240 days of continuous service in the employment of bank from the date just 
preceding date of termination, but he failed to discharge his burden of proof. 


In the case of Mohan Lal v. Management BEL 98 SCC 225, the Hon’ble Apex Court have held that: 


"Before a workman can claim retrenchment, not being in consonance of Section 25 of the ID act. he has to show that 
he has been in continuous service of not less than I year with the employer who had retrenched him from service.” 


"Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction to treat a workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact 
that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during 
the period of /2 calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date 
of retrenchment. In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first 
the relevant date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is 
ascertained, move backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain 
whether within the period of /2 months, the workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three 
facts are affirmatively answered in favor of the workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it 
will have to be assumed that the workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the 
eligibility qualification enacted in Section 25-F" 


Therefore, in view of the above law, the claim of the workman that Respondent has not exhausted procedure before 
his retrenchment from service is not tenable. 


2i. Further, the workman claimed that his name was included in the empanelment of 99] for regularization on 
temporary posts, but he was not regularized in the service and the temporary employees junior to him in service were 
appointed on permanent posts from the empanelment of 993. However, WWI in cross-examinations has admitted 
that he was not sponsored by the Employment Exchange. He could not indicate any instance of regularizing the 
temporary employee from the panel list of l99l, junior to him. Since, as per settlements arrived at between the 
Federation of Bank Employees and Respondent Bank Management, the vacancies for the empanelled employees of 
99] were available which would arise upto December, 994 and those vacancies were absorbed from the panel list 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2825 


99] in order of seniority. Therefore, due to non-availability of the vacancies, and the workman not having the 
requisite number of days in service, and also workman being junior to other workmen in the panel, could not be 
granted regularization/absorption as a permanent employee in the Bank. It is admitted by the workman that the panel 
list was prepared in terms of settlement arrived at between the State Bank Management and Federation of State Bank 
Management Employees Association and the same is binding on both parties under Section 8 (/) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act. Therefore, in view of the above, settlements and awards are binding on the parties to the agreement. 


In the case of National Engineers Industries v. St. of Rajasthan Civil Appeal No. 6832/996 dated 0.2.999, 
three judges bench of Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“In Ram Pukar Singh and Ors. Vs. Heavy Engineering Corporation and Ors. (/994/7 6 SCC 745 this Court said that 
a settlement arrived at between the management and the sole recognised union of workmen under section 72(3) read 
with section 76 of the Act would be binding on all the workmen whether members of the union or not.” 


Therefore, mere empanelment of the named workman, in the list for regularization, does not entitled him for 
absorption in the Bank’s service as a permanent employee. As per the settlement, the panel lists expired on 
3.03.997, and thereafter, the life of the panel list could not be extended. In the Writ Petition No. 2964/994, the 
Hon’ble High Court observed:- 


"Tt is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which 
is the majority union and the bank management is binding on the petitioners also. It is not at all the case of the 
petitioner that any of the terms of the settlement has been violated by the Bank's Management. If the petitioner had 
worked in the Bank on Part-time basis before 37.35. 94, that itself would not vest in his a right to claim that his services 
should be regularised on permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the petitioner in the 
present petition is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the petitioner to claim any right 
which flows from the settlement between the union and the Bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the 
grievance of the petitioner that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the petitioner has been 
denied by the Bank Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind 
of relief sought for by the petitioner. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs.” 


Therefore, the claim of workman in the present matter can not be considered beyond the terms and conditions of 
aforesaid settlement between Bank Management and Federation of employees. 


Further, in the case of State of U.P. v. Harish Chandra AIR 996 SC 273, the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


"Notwithstanding the aforesaid Statutory Rule and without applying the mind to the aforesaid Rule, the High Court 
relying upon some earlier decisions of the Court came to hold that the list does not expire after a period of one year 
which on the face of it is erroneous. Further question that arises in this context is whether the High Court was 
justified in issuing the mandamus to the appellant to make recruitment of the Writ Petitioners. Under the Constitution 
a mandamus can be issued by the Court when the applicant establishes that he has a legal right to the performance of 
legal duty by the party against whom the mandamus is sought and said right was subsisting on the date of the petition. 
The duty that may be enjoined by mandamus may be one imposed by the Constitution or a Statute or by Rules or 
orders having the force of law. But no mandamus can be issued to direct the Government to refrain from enforcing the 
provisions of law or to do something which in contrary to law. This being the position and in view of the Statutory 
rule contained in Rule 26 of the Recruitment Rules we really fail to understand how the High Court could issue the 
impugned direction to recruit the respondents who were included in the select list prepared on 4.4.87 and the list no 
longer survived after one year and the rights, if any, of persons included in the list did not subsist." 


Similarly in the case of Syndicate Bank and other Vs. Shankar Paul AIR 997 SC 309], it was held : 


"Temporary were made from the empanel of eligible candidates prepared by calling names from employment 
exchange, the empanel was valid for only year. When the said employee claimed permanent absorption in service, the 
Apex Court has held that, whatever conditions regarding these empanelled candidates had they come an end on the 
expiry of one year." 


In the present matter also, since the panel list [99], which was prepared for the vacancies arising up to December 
994, expired on 3].03.]997, and it could be extended after the said expiry date and moreover, the panel list 
exhausted from the vacancies available upto !994 with the absorption of empanelled senior employees. Thus, the 
workman being junior in that panel list could not get regularization / absorption in the service. Therefore, the 
workman failed to prove his claim as alleged in his petition. 


Points No. I & II is answered accordingly. 
22. Point No. II:- 


In view of the findings given in Points No. I & II, the claim of the workman for regularization in the service of 
Respondent Bank is unfounded and devoid of merits. Therefore, the workman is not entitled for any relief of 


2826 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 
reinstatement or regularization in the employment of Respondent Bank. Hence, his claim petition is liable to be 
dismissed. 

ORDER 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri Ch. Paradesi, is legal and justified. Hence, the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for and 
consequently petition stands dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. P. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant and corrected by me on this the 37 day of 
July, 2023. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Ch. Paradesi MWI: Sri Alluru Rama Rao 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


Ex.WI: Photocopy of News paper advertisement 

Ex.W2?: Photocopy of I* panel list 

Ex.W3: Photocopy of service certificate dt. nil 

Ex.W4: Photocopy of service certificate dt. 8.8.88 

Ex.W5S: Photocopy of service certificate dt. !4.2.89 

Ex.W6: Photocopy of service certificate dt. .6.9] 

Ex.W7: Photocopy of service certificate dt. .8.92 

Ex.W8: Photocopy of service certificate dt. 29.7.95 

Ex.W9: Photocopy of service certificate dt. 4.2.98 

Ex.W0: Photocopy of Panel lapsed circular dt.25.3.997 

+5.0४। |: Photocopy of news paper advertisement 

+.४४| 2: Photocopy of 24 panel list 

+5.४४| ३: Photocopy of Transfer Certificate of school DT.!7.7.84 
+5.४४| 4: Photocopy of caste certificate of ४४४७। 

Ex.WI5: Photocopy of employment registration certificate dt.l8.6.83 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M?: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.M5S: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 


Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2827 


Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of 989 messenger panel. 


Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 NonOmessenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 
+ह./ | 2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.l886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 47 अगस्त, 2023 
का.आ. 333.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम i947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (5/200l) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं., Yot-L-l202/294/2000-srgarR(-I) ] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the [70 August, 2023 


9७.0. 333.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. i5/200l) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of State Bank of India and 
their workman. 


[No. L-202/294/2000-IR(B-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
In The Central Government Industrial Tribunal Cum Labour Court At Hyderabad 
Present: Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 25" day of July, 2023 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. 5/200 

Between: 
Sri M. Seshagiri Rao, 
S/o Nagendrudu, 
87 ward, Avanigadda 
Krishna District. ... Petitioner 
And 

The Assistant General Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, RG-II, 

Labbipet, 

Vijayawada -520 004. ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner: Sri Suman, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjith Reddy, Advocate 

AWARD 


The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by its order No. L-202/294/2000-IR(B.I) dated 9.4.200I 
referred the following dispute under section l0()(d) of the I.D. Act, !947 requiring this forum to decide the question: 


2828 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


THE SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the management of State Bank of India, Vijayawada Zone in dismissing services of 
Shri M. Seshagiri Rao, Ex.Messenger, by way of oral orders w.e.f. 3.3.997 is justified? If not, what relief 
the workman is entitled?” 


After receipt of the reference, it was numbered as ID 5/200] and notices were issued to both the workman and the 
management. 


2: Earlier this reference was answered by this Tribunal by a common award dated [7.5.2005, along with other 
batch cases, and the claim of the workman was dismissed. Workman challenged said award before the Hon’ble High 
Court vide WP No. 6470/2006 & batch wherein Hon’ble High Court of A.P., vide decision dated 23.6.204 set aside 
the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad 
and directed the Respondent bank to reengage the workmen in the positions which they had been occupying prior to 
termination. Being aggrieved by the said order in WP No. 6470/2006 & batch, Respondent bank preferred appeal 
WA Nos. 268/204 and batch cases wherein Division Bench of Hon’ble High Court held:- 


“() affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the “extent it sets aside the common 
award dated /7.35.20035 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) The further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated; 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer 
limit of five(5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


५ 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in WA No.268/204 and other batch, held that, “ Hearing the learned 
senior counsel for the SBI and the Learned Senior Counsel for the contesting unofficial respondents, we see that while 
the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award of the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than 
one. Firstly, in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims 
as to the length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the 
post for each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each 
case ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and the most 
important aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a 
relief that could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not 
have been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating 
body, which has to do_ that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would 
sustain the order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the 
further findings and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases HCJ&ARR,J 
WA No. /266 of 2074 & Batch 6 have to be sent back for consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before 
the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the materials already on record and also by affording an 
opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the management to place their rival contentions and further 
material before the Tribunal//The learned counsel appearing for the workmen are justified in pointing out that 
enormous delay has already happened and further action by the Tribunal in this line may be expedited.” 


Therefore, in compliance with order dated 20.3.20l9 of Hon’ble High Court of A.P., Hyderabad passed in WA 
No.268/204, this Industrial Tribunal conducted hearing proceedings in this reference on an individual basis and 
both parties have been provided ample hearing opportunity during the proceeding. 


The factual matrix of the present industrial dispute is as follows: 


3. The workman filed his claim statement with the averments in brief as follows: 


The petitioner, Sri M. Seshagiri Rao, was working as a Messenger in the State Bank of India since 985. He worked 
until .4.!997 when he was stopped from working based on the orders of the respondent panels the Petitioner 
belongs to Scheduled Caste. It is submitted that the workman joined in the services of the Management Institution as 
Messenger on 985 to rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 5 years, and by dint of hard 
work till his services were terminated by oral orders w.e.f. .4.997. It is submitted that the Management of Bank 
decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment " by wait- 
listing them, by offering permanent appointment or wait-listing till such opportunity arises. It is submitted that on 
7..987 a Settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management of 
Bank Settlement-l. Under this Settlement, three categories of employees were listed - (a) Those who have completed 
240 days in l2 months or less after .7.!975; (b) Those who have completed 270.days in any continuous block of 36 
calendar months after .7.975; and (c) Those who have completed minimum of 30 days aggregate in a continuous, 
block of 2 calendar months after I.7.975. Persons who satisfy any of the above three categories were to be 
interviewed by a Selection Committee. The said Selection Committee determine suitability of the said candidate for 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2829 


permanent appointment. Therefore, the bank first had opportunity to notice and observe the work of the workmen, 
then prescribed certain qualification and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications. The suitable 
candidates were enlisted by a Selection Committee Clause (7) of the said agreement provided that the selected 
candidates would be waitlisted in order of their respective categorization and the select panel he valid upto December 
99 Clause (0) of the Settlement specifically provided that henceforth. "there will be no temporary appointments in 
the subordinate cadre", except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from amongst empanelled candidates as 
per existing guidelines of the Bank". Clause (.) of the agreement excluded categorized persons who are ineligible. 
The workman further submitted that consequent upon the said agreement and the Draft, a Notification was issued in 
the Newspapers. The last date for responding to the advertisement was 30.6.[988. A written examination followed by 
viva-voce in May 989 was held. A select panel was prepared. As per clause (7) of the Agreement (Settlement-I) the 
select panel was to be valid up till December, 99. It was however, given currency and renewed upto 997. 
However, this did not put to an end the legitimate claims of various persons like the workman. It is submitted that the 
Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 6.8.990. By and under the said Circular, the 
Chief Executives of all Public Sector Banks including the management were specifically instructed that until the 
problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no Bank be permitted to make any temporary 
appointments. The workman further submits that some of the persons similarly situated like the workman aggrieved 
by the inaction on the part of the Management Bank in not regularizing their services from out of the select panel and 
not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P.No. 494/97 on the file of the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh. It is specifically averred in the said writ petition that the management of the Bank had failed to implement 
the Settlement and that it violates the various Fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution of India. The 
Hon'ble High Court by an order dated 5.3. [997 directed the Bank to implement the Settlement as amended from time 
to time. It also directed the Bank to carry out the terms of the Settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The 
High Court also recorded a finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the settlement. In view 
of the directions granted by the High Court in W.P. No. 494/97 all candidates whose names appeared in the select 
panels prepared on the basis of the agreement entered into on 7.!.!987 under which the panel was valid upto 
December, !99! and on the basis of a Settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 
3.3.997 under which the panel was valid upto December. 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which 
the panel was valid upto 992 and on the basis of the Settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made 
alive upto 3!.3.997 were under the bonafide impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and 
were living on the basis of the said reasonable expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the directions given by the High 
Court on 5.3.997 in WP No 494/97 and contrary to the settlements entered into between the parties. The Bank 
issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, 27.3.997 and 3].3. 997 instructing the various authorities of the Management 
not to continue the temporary employees those who are in services of the Bank from .4.!997. The said order was 
followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said action the workman and similarly situated candidates have filed 
a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court by way of writ petition No 9206/97 seeking a declaration that the 
proceedings issued by the Deputy General Manager and the Assistant General Manager (respondents No.3, 4 and 5) 
on 25.3.997. 27.3.997 and 3].3.997 as illegal and also non-continuance of the petitioners service by absorbing 
them in the services of the Bank as violative of Section 2(p) and I8(/) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought 
for specific direction to the Bank to absorb them in service. The workman further submits that in the counter affidavit 
filed in the writ petition No. 9206/97, the Bank submitted that it has about 805 Branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It 
has stated that due to exigencies of circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its Banks, it employed 
temporary employees in subordinate cadre. It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent needs or the 
nature of temporary employees that it had engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the 
Bank either on the ground of urgent need or of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. 
It is designed to, on the one hand, keep the employees in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that 
benefits that a model employer will extend under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by 
the Bank. A reading of the counter affidavit would show that the Bank would opines that being just fair and 
reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is a facet of unfair labour practice. It is further submitted that 
the Bank refers in its counter affidavit to three Settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988 and 27. 0.988. The Bank in 
the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.990 stated in its counter affidavit as 
follows: 


“Government of India. vide its letter dated /6.6. /990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to recruitment aha absorption of temporary employees in public sector bunks. The said guidelines 
were issued to implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. The Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks 
may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days 
of temporary service in 2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be 
decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who 
had put in less than 240 days of service in /2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided 
and however if the management so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the 


2830 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


representative union. In para 6(h), it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in 
temporary service of 90 or more days after 7.7./962 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. 
Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in 
temporary service of 90 or more days, the Bank by way of further concession entered into settlements even 
in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. 


As such, it could be seen that the settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. 
The approach paper also specify at para 6 (c) that the Banks would provide one time opportunity to all the 
temporary employees and for that purpose temporary employees worked in the Bank on or after 7././962 
could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. The respondents have gone further 
wherein even persons working after /9/735 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para (k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary 
workmen covered by the settlement would mean that the Government of India guide lines would cover only 
those persons who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, 
it is submitted that the respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact 
covered cases of the employees who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does 
not arise and in any case those were only broad guidelines and not directives". 


It is submitted that clause (l0) of the Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be absorbed or 
appointed in the Bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlkement. Even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed cither for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. It is submitted that the respondent Management has 
indulged in unfair labour practices. The said practice is evident from the actions of the Management Bank. In case of 
similarly situated workmen like Ch. Survanarayana. B. Venkateswarlu and P. Hussain Saheb who are empanelled by 
an order dated 3.9.994 with a direction that their services to be on a very restricted basis against temporary 
vacancies for not more than 200 days in any continuous block of !2 months so as not to give them statutory right. 
The caption for such selections has been brought to attention that it was for absorption of temporary employees. That 
is how the panels for absorption were prepared according to each category ‘A’, ‘ B’ and ‘C’. In view of the 
regularization of the workmen who served the Bank ranging between 30 days and above has a right for absorption. 
The same is evident from the proceedings issued by the Management wherein they have specifically mentioned that 
their cases will be considered for absorption as and when the vacancies arose, till such time they shall be continued on 
temporary basis. Contrary to the said proceedings, now the Management indulged in unfair labour practices and 
terminated the service of similarly situated candidates like the workman with effect from .4.997. Hence. the said 
practice of the Management is highly arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to their own guidelines and violative of the 
constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the Constitution of India. It is submitted that the 
workman and other similarly situated workmen who are working as on 3!.3.997 were orally asked not to come to 
duty from I.4.997. In para 3 of the proceedings dated 27.3.997 it is stated that the panels of temporary employees 
on daily wages/casual labour maintained by Zonal Offices stand lapsed by 3[.3. [997 and reads as follows: 


"3. The panels of temporary employees and daily wagers casual labour maintained by Zonal Offices stand lapsed by 
34.3. ॥99/7.,. Please confirm by return of post that the above instructions are meticulously complied with at your 
branch w.e.f .4./997., Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been decided by 
the competent authority that now onwards, no further daily labour or temporary employees/appointments should be 
resorted to/engaged/employed. This is very important and should be meticulously followed/iimplemented invariably 
without fail": 


It is submitted that there is no indication in any of the settlements as to who is the competent authority to decide about 
the validity or the life of the panels or to put an end to it and the so-called DGM is not stated to be the competent 
authority. It is submitted that the first settlement fixed the validity of the panels till 3.2. [99] never used the word 
that it is going to be lapsed on |.!.992. Similarly when the validity was extended in the subsequent settlements to be 
operated at least till 3!.3.997. Sometimes even without the extension of the panels would lapse after 3[.3.997, it is 
strange as to how the so-called competent authority or the authorities of the bank thought or decided to lapse them 
from .4.997. It is submitted that the balance of unabsorbed candidates like the workman and the similarly situated 
candidates cannot more than !0% of the total empanelled candidates. Therefore, unless the Bank is able to 
demonstrate that the balance of unabsorbed candidates as on 3!.3.997 was only 0% of the total empanelled 
candidates, the theory of the lists becoming lapsed leaving no scope for absorption becomes an ingenious theory. It 
can be shown out of 6,932 empanelled candidates. 3,[78 were not absorbed and it should have been more than 0%. 
It is submitted that though an empanelled list was pending for absorption of such candidates on the date of first 
settlement, new lists of empanelled candidates in three categories were prepared by virtue of the subsequent 
settlements which were sought to be implemented with all seriousness. Although such panels could not be fully 


[भाग I—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 283| 


exhausted by the date of the last settlement dated 26.4.99], the existing panels were enlarged by allowing others also 
to join such panels with supplementary panels to be used after the earlier panels of temporary employees have been 
exhausted. This will only mean that the bank was capable of absorbing all the cand|dates in the panels which were in 
existence as on 26.4. 99. It is submitted that the Banks were directed that recruitment of all temporary employees in 
the Clerical or Subordlinate cadres shall be stopped forthwith. In pursuance of such directions an advertisement was 
issued in the local Newspapers as per the settlements and based upon that panels were prepared after an interview. 
Two salient features of the instructions of the Government are that there must be one tine and whole time settlement to 
consider the absorption of such temporary employees in the existing panels and till then no Bank will be permitted to 
make any temporary appointment. It is submitted that the action of termination such employees like the workman by 
virtue of impugned proceedings without implementing the settlements would be illegal and it would be denial of 
unfair labour practice within the meaning of Section 2(a) of Industrial Disputes Act which cannot be allowed to be 
perpetuated. It is submitted that discontinuance of workmen after 3].3,[997 to serve in the Bank in any capacity 
amounts to retrenchment. It could not have done without notice and it violates Section 25(ff) of I.D. Act and the said 
action is violative of principles of natural justice guaranteed under Chapter-III of the Constitution of India. Therefore, 
the action of D.G.M. the so-called competent authority who has passed the impugned proceedings amounts to 
retrenchment of the workman without one month's notice or payment in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of 
notice. Thus the impugned proceedings are issued in colourable exercise of power, without jurisdiction, arbitrary, 
illegal and are therefore liable to be quashed. The workman submits that though the respondent management 
informed in its letter dated 0.0.990, the Central Government stating that they are implementing the instructions 
issued in proceedings dated I6.8.990. In fact the management failed to implement the same for the reasons best 
known to them. It is further submitted that the M.O.U. dated 27.2.997 said to have been entered into between the 
parties does not binds the workmen as it has no legal entity. However, the said M.O.U. has not published anywhere 
to brought to the notice of the workmen whose rights are being affected. In fact, when settlements were arrived at in 
the year 987, the Central Government directed the respondent management to give vide publicity by its letter dated 
30..987 and 29.2.987. Accordingly those settlements were brought to the notice of workmen by way of 
advertisement. The said process was not followed while entering into M.O.U. dated 27.2.997, through which the 
affected parties like the workman was kept in dark about the lapse of the selected panels. It is further submitted that 
the management has failed to implement the selected, panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the 
back door methods contrary to the settlements and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings 
dated 8..993, a copy of the same is filed in the material papers and the same may be read as part of the Claim 
Petition. It is submitted that the management adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its 
instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995. The same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being 
vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment Exchange instead 
of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the workman herein. It is pertinent to mention here that the 
respondent management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the workman in the month of June. 
997, subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating the 
issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, copies of call letters issued are filed 
herein along with Claim Petition. The workman reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but not for 
termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 
The workman submitted that ever since the date of his removal from service, he remained unemployee, as he could 
not secure any alternative employment inspite of his best efforts. Thus, the action of the respondent Management in 
terminating the services of the workman by oral order with effect from 3.3.!997 is unjust, illegal, opposed to 
principles of natural justice besides being violative of various provisions of I.D. Act and the same is liable to be set 
aside. 


4. The Respondents filed counter refuting the averments made by the Petitioner _in the claim petition, and the 
contention of the Respondent in brief runs as follows: 


The respondent submits that the claim petition is not valid and goes against the Industrial Disputes Act, !947. They 
deny the allegations made in the claim statement and demand proof of those allegations. The respondent bank used to 
hire temporary subordinate staff to cope with staff shortages and government-imposed restrictions. The All India State 
Bank of India Staff Federation advocated for temporary employees with less than 240 days of service to be considered 
for permanent appointments. Discussions were held between the federation and the bank, leading to a settlement that 
aimed to provide fair treatment to temporary employees. The settlement includes various factors, some of which are 
relevant to the current application. 


5. On 47..967, an agreement was signed between the Federation and the management Bank under Section 
2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the ID Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 967. 


As per settlement the temporary employees were categorized into three categories, detailed as under: 
i) Category 'A': 


Those, who have completed 240 days of temporary service in 72 calendar months or less after 97.07/.7975. 


2832 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ii) Category 'B': 


Those, who have completed 270 days aggregate temporary service in any continuous block of 36 calendar months 
after 097. 07.975. 


iii) Category 'c': 


Those, who have completed a minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after 0/.907.4945 
or minimum of 70 days aggregate temporary service in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after 97. 07. /9/5. 


In the initial settlement, it was agreed that temporary employees would be given an opportunity for permanent 
appointments in the bank for vacancies expected to arise from 987 to !99l. However, on July 6, 988, a subsequent 
agreement was reached between the Federation and the bank, extending the consideration period for vacancies from 
987 to 992. This agreement was signed under relevant sections of the Industrial Disputes Act and its associated 
rules, and it will be referred to as the second settlement. 


6. Later, on October 27, 988, another agreement, referred to as the third settlement, was reached between the 
Federation and the bank. It introduced a new clause, l-A, after clause | in the initial settlement. This clause stated that 
individuals engaged on a casual basis to fill in for leave or casual vacancies in positions like messengers, farrashes, 
cash coolies, water boys, sweepers, etc., would also be considered for permanent appointments in the bank for 
vacancies expected to arise from 988 to !992. Therefore, not only temporary employees receiving scale wages but 
also casual or daily wagers would be eligible for permanent absorption into the bank. 


Ts Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.990 issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to the absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement 
along the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The Government 
of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach 
paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes 
Act might be decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. With respect to temporary 
employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be 
avoided, however, if the Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative 
union. In para 6(h) it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days 
or more days after |.l.82 would be eligible for consideration under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines 
envisaged a settlement in respect of temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, 
the Bank by way of further concession entered into settlements even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 
days. 


8. According to the settlement dated November [7, !987, temporary employees who had worked with the bank 
from July 4, 975, to December 3l, 987, were given an opportunity to be considered for permanent appointment 
against future vacancies. The eligible candidates were categorized into three groups based on their completed days of 
service: Category A (240 days), Category B (270 days), and Category C (70 days). The waitlisted candidates’ panel 
would remain valid until December 3l, 99!. Through a modification in the second settlement on July 6, 988, the 
qualifying service date was extended to July 3l, [988, instead of December 3, 987. An advertisement was issued on 
August |, |988, calling for applications from temporary employees who received scale wages, region-wise, to fill the 
vacancies in different regions. 


9. The third settlement on October 27, 4988, was a result of the union's advocacy for casual or daily wage 
workers. It was decided to consider all candidates for vacancies likely to arise between 988 and 992. While the 
number of vacancies in some regions exceeded the waitlisted temporary employees, the Chennai circle was an 
exception as there were more waitlisted temporary candidates than available vacancies. 


0. On January 9, 499], the fourth settlement was reached, extending the validity of the panel from 99] to 
994. After December 3l, 994, the remaining candidates on the panel would have no claim. Following the third 
settlement, the bank issued an advertisement on May |, 99], inviting applications from casual/daily wage workers 
for consideration for permanent appointment. This created concerns among temporary employees who felt threatened 
if a common list was created. However, if the casual daily wagers were placed at the end of the list, there would have 
been no cause for concern. 


ll. In response, the SBI Employees Union filed a writ petition (Writ Petition No.7872 of 99) seeking relief to 
operate the waitlist based on the August l, 988, advertisement and not to operate any list based on the May I, 99], 
advertisement. An interim stay was granted regarding the latter aspect, which lasted for more than eight years until 
July 23, [999., Consequently, no list of casual posts/daily wage workers could have been drawn up during this period, 
and the list of temporary employees should have been in operation. The writ petition was finally disposed of on July 
23, 999, by which time the relief sought in the petition would have been implemented. 


2. The 57 settlement was arrived at on 307 July 996 requiring the panel to be kept alive up to 3%t March, 997 
and this was in respect of the vacancies which became available up to 3l** December 994. 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2833 


3. The respondent submits that the petitioner has not worked for more days than those who have been absorbed 
into the vacancies as agreed upon. They deny the petitioner's claim of continuous years of work and state that the 
petitioner, who has worked for less than 240 days in a !2-month period from 975 to 988, has no right to seek 
absorption in the bank except under the settlements. The case of the petitioner has already been considered under 
several settlements, and therefore, all the provisions and terms of those settlements are binding on them. The 
respondent submits that the applicant and other ex-temporary employees do not have an independent right, and their 
claims are based solely on the settlkements. The preparation and maintenance of panels are in compliance with the 
agreed terms of the settlements. The panels, including the applicant, have ceased to exist after the designated period, 
and the remaining candidates have no right or claim against the bank. The settlements explicitly stated that the panels 
would not be kept alive until all candidates were absorbed. The applicant is barred from questioning the validity of the 
settlements after accepting the benefits and empanelment. According to the settlement dated January 9, 99], 
vacancies until December |994 were to be filled based on seniority from the 989 panel. After that, the panel lapsed, 
and the remaining candidates have no claim for permanent absorption. The same applies to the 992 panel. The 
respondent submits that only the temporary service rendered from January |, !975, to July 3, 988, is considered for 
permanent absorption, and days worked after that period are not counted since the panels had already lapsed. The 
bank never promised to absorb all candidates in the panel, as the advertisement clearly stated that candidates would be 
considered for absorption in vacancies until [992, According to the respondent, the vacancies were identified and the 
ex-temporary employees in the panels were absorbed based on seniority, as per the settlements between the Federation 
and the management Bank. The respondent submits that mere empanelment does not guarantee absorption for the 
petitioners, and keeping the panels alive after March 3, [997, goes against the settlements. The respondent submits 
that the settlements between the State Bank of India and the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation have the 
force of law and are binding on the parties. The petitioners themselves have acted upon the settlements by being on 
the panel, and therefore, they are bound by the terms of the settlements. The maintenance of panels is in line with the 
agreed terms of the settlements, and the Bank has strictly adhered to these terms. The present application is based 
solely on the settlkements and not on any independent right or provision of the Industrial Disputes Act. The panels 
under the settlements had a specific time limit, and this term cannot be modified in any legal proceedings. Therefore, 
those temporary employees who could not be accommodated due to lack of vacancies have no further rights for 
regularization under the settlements or otherwise. The bank has fully complied with the settlements, and the 
mentioned circulars and letters were merely directives to discontinue the practice of engaging temporary employees, 
which was also a term of the settlements. It is submitted that some writs were filed by certain temporary employees 
who were also called for interview and empanelled. In writ petition No.!2964/94, the Hon’ble High Court went into 
similar contentions in detail and the Learned Judge also referred to the settlements and subsequently held that the 
Petitioners therein were not entitled to any relief and the only relief they can claim is enforcement of settlements, if 
there is any right flowing from it or it has been violated. The relevant operative portion of the said judgement is as 
follows: 


"Tt is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which 
is the majority union and the bank management is binding on the petitioners also. It is not, at all the case of the 
petitioner that any of the terms of the settlement has been violated by the bank’s management. If the Petitioner had 
worked in the bank on part-time basis before 37.35. 94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services 
should be regularized on permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Petitioner in the 
present petition is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Petitioner to claim any right 
which flows from the settlement between the union and the bank management. As already pointed out that it is not 
the grievance of the Petitioner that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Petitioner has 
been denied by the bank management. Therefore, I domestic enquiry not find any ground, let alone substantial 
ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Petitioner. Writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No 
costs.” 


The respondent submits that the settlements clearly state that the panels would cease to exist at the end of the 
designated period, and there would be no further temporary or casual recruitment. The relief sought by the applicant, 
if granted, would essentially make temporary employment permanent through a backdoor entry, which goes against 
the settlements, as well as Articles l4 and 6 of the Constitution. It would also deprive rightful claimants of their 
chances through proper recruitment procedures. The settlements were intended as a one-time measure to end the 
practice of temporary engagement, and the rights of the applicant were determined by these settlements. Therefore, 
there is no legitimate expectation or estoppel, as contractual rights arising from an industrial settlement take 
precedence. The bank did not make any statement or representation guaranteeing permanent appointment, as clearly 
stated in the advertisement issued pursuant to the first settlkement, which outlined the process of being considered for 
permanent appointment and being wait-listed based on suitability and subject to vacancies, with the waitlist valid until 
99]. 


4. The ex-temporary employees in the panels filed a writ petition before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, 
which was initially allowed by the Single Judge. However, the bank appealed this decision, and the Division Bench of 
the High Court set aside the Single Judge's order. The ex-temporary employees then filed a Special Leave Petition 


2834 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


before the Supreme Court, which was also dismissed. Therefore, the reference to the Single Judge's judgment in the 
writ petition is irrelevant, as it has been overturned. The petitioner has not worked for the required 240 days in any 
preceding 2-month period, so the reference to Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act is not relevant. The 
petitioners’ claim regarding their service and educational qualifications require strict proof. The allegation of 
termination is incorrect, as the vacancies were filled based on seniority, and the non-engagement of the petitioner does 
not constitute termination. Temporary employees are subject to the availability of work, and there is no obligation to 
continue their employment when there is no work. The bank has not engaged in unfair labour practices, and the 
settlements are binding on the petitioner, having been fully implemented without violating any provisions of the 
Industrial Disputes Act. The issue has been addressed in various judgments of the Supreme Court and High Courts, 
and the petitioner's industrial dispute lacks merit and should be dismissed. 


5. The Petitioner in support of his claim examined himself as WWI and also filed photocopies of 6 documents 
which were marked as Ex.W to W6. Ex.W] is the news paper advertisement, Ex.W2 is panel list, Ex.W3 to W4 are 
service certificates, Ex.W5 is form of notification of vacancies to the employment exchange and Ex.W6 is circular 
dated 4.7.999. On the other hand, Respondent filed photocopies of !2 documents which were marked as एड. ४] to 
MI2. Ex.M] to M4 are settlements between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation. Ex.M5 is 
conciliation proceedings. Ex.M6 is another settlement. Ex.M7 is Memorandum of understanding. Ex.M8 is statement 
giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. Ex.M9 is statement of !989 non-messenger panel. Ex.MI0 is 
statement of l992 panel. Ex.MII is order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 and Ex.M]2 is order in SLP 
No.i886-888. 


6. On the basis of the pleadings and the submissions made by the parties, following points emerge for 
determination:- 


I. Whether the action of the Respondent Management in terminating the services of the workman, Sri M. 
Seshagiri Rao, Ex-Messenger w.e.f, 3.03.997 is legal and justified? 


II. Whether the workman in terms of settlements arrived at between the Respondent Bank Management and the 
Federation of Employees is entitled for regularization absorption in the service of Bank? 


Ill. To what relief, the workman is entitled for? 

Findings: 

7. Points No. I & I:- The workman claims that he had been working with the Respondent Bank since 985 on 
temporary basis. In the year 988, Respondent No. 2 issued advertisement for calling applications from the then 
temporary subordinate employees for the post of messenger. The workman moved application and he received 
interview call letter from bank to attend the interview, workman attended interview and Respondent Bank prepared a 
panel List of all the successful candidates in the year [99] and the Petitioner’s name appeared also in the panel list. 
The Respondent Bank utilized the services of the empanelled employees and workman on temporary basis till March 
997 and some of the empanelled employees were given permanent appointment basing on the number of days of 
service put up by them. Thereafter, the Respondent No.2 issued a Letter dated 25.03.997 directing all Branch 
Managers not to utilize the services of the empanelled Messenger and to declare that the panel list of 99l will lapse 
by 3.03.997. Therefore, all the remaining empanelled employees as per the panel list of 999, were denied 
employment after 3!.03.997. It is further submitted by the workman that Respondent No.2 issued another 
advertisement in the year 99 calling application for interview from the then temporary working messengers and 
selected some of the candidates among the applicants and prepared another panel list of 80 employees. The said 
panels lapsed in March 997. However, surprisingly all the temporary employees as per Second panel List of 993 
were given permanent appointment and that order was issued just |5 days before the lapse of the panel List. It is 
further submitted that the empanelled employees of Second panel List of !993 were juniors to the temporary 
employees’ of first panel list of 99] in terms of number of days of service put up by them. Therefore, the act of 
Respondent Bank appointing the junior employees of second panel list ignoring the senior employees of the first 
panel list of l99] is discriminatory, arbitrary and illegal which goes to indicated that the Respondent Bank chose to 
favour the employees of second panel List of 993 for the reason best known to the Respondent Bank. 


8. On the other hand, the Respondent countered the allegations made by the workman and submitted that the 
persons who do not have the requisite number of days of service as per the settlement, could not be considered for 
permanent absorption. It is contended that the bank had never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be 
absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that the candidate will be considered for the absorption in the 
vacancies that may arise up to 992. Since the panel list had already lapsed on 3].03.[997, and the vacancies were 
already filled up by absorbing the temporary attendants and daily wagers/casual employees respectively in order of 
their seniority in the empanelment, therefore, the consideration of engaging their services including workman could 
not have arise. Therefore, panel list of daily wagers prepared in the year 992 was used for filling vacancies which 
arose up to end of 994 and the said panel list automatically lapsed after the filling of the aforesaid vacancies. 


9. In support of his claim, the workman has examined himself as WWI and in chief examination, he reiterated 
his claim as made in his petition. Further he stated that Ex. W2 is the document referred List of empanelment Ex. 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2835 


W3-W4 are service certificates according to which the workman has worked for total number of 34] days. In cross 
examination, WWI states that he was not given any posting order at the time of joining the service nor at any other 
time. On the oral instruction of Branch Manager, he worked in the Branch. He further admitted in the cross 
examination, “I was appointed as temporary attendar for 85 days initially w.e.f. 2.4.985. I was not sponsored by any 
employment exchange. I did not undergo the regular selection process before my appointment as a temporary 
attendar. I did not work for 240 days in any year in my entire service in the bank. I applied in response to an 
advertisement issued by the bank as per the settlement entered between the bank and the union. I was called for 
interview and my name was included in the panel of temporary attendars. The panels were prepared basing on the no. 
of days of service put in by the temporary employees. Some of the employees whose names were included in the 
panel were given regular employment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel. I am not having any 
document to show that any person who had worked for less no. of days than me was given regular appointment in the 
bank. I am not having any document to show that any of my juniors are continuing in service. I was not given any 
letter stating that I was terminated form service.” He further states that he is not aware of any settlements between the 
Management and the Union. On the other hand, the Respondent has examined ७५७७] and in his chief examination the 
witness had stated that the petitioner was included in the panel list 99l however, as the existing vacancies at that 
time were exhausted, his turn didn’t come, and he could not be given permanent employment in the bank. All the 
appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlement between the SBI management and the SBI Staff 
Federation. The witness has also stated that as per the seniority was determined on the basis of number of days as 
temporary service put in by the employee in the given period and all the appointments were made as per seniority. 
Witness states that the petitioner had not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. 
The petitioner and other temporary employees were not terminated from service by the Bank. The vacancies were 
filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panel list and which were expired in terms of 
settlement on 3|.03.997 and there were no vacancies to absorb rest of the empanelled employees. 


20. In view of the above statement of witness, it manifests that, the workman did not work for 240 days 
continuously in any year in the service. Therefore, the protection of the provisions under Section 25 (f) of Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 against the retrenchment is not available to the workman. The initial burden of proof was on the 
workman to show that he had completed 240 days of continuous service in the employment of bank from the date just 
preceding date of termination, but he failed to discharge his burden of proof. 


In the case of Mohan Lal v. Management BEL 98 SCC 225, the Hon’ble Apex Court have held that: 


"Before a workman can claim retrenchment, not being in consonance of Section 25 of the ID act. he has to 
show that he has been in continuous service of not less than I year with the employer who had retrenched 
him from service.” 


"Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction to treat a workman in continuous service for a period of one year 
despite the fact that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered 
period of 240 days during the period of 72 calendar service for months counting backwards and just 
preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. In other words, in order to invoke the fiction 
enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine 


first the relevant date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After 
that date is ascertained, move backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment 
and then ascertain whether within the period of /2 months, the workman has rendered service for a period 
of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively answered in favor of the workman pursuant to the 
deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed that the workman is in continuous 
service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification enacted in Section 25-F" 


Therefore, in view of the above law, the claim of the workman that Respondent has not exhausted procedure before 
his retrenchment from service is not tenable. 


2i. Further, the workman claimed that his name was included in the empanelment of 99] for regularization on 
temporary posts, but he was not regularized in the service and the temporary employees junior to him in service 


were appointed on permanent posts from the empanelment of 993. However, ४५७४] in cross-examinations has 
admitted that he was not sponsored by the Employment Exchange. He could not indicate any instance of regularizing 
the temporary employee junior to him, from the panel list of !99l. Since, as per settlements arrived at between the 
Federation of Bank Employees and Respondent Bank Management, the vacancies for the empanelled employees of 
99] were available which would arise upto December, 994 and those vacancies were absorbed from the panel list 
99] in order of seniority. Therefore, due to non-availability of the vacancies, and the workman not having the 
requisite number of days in service as compared to the other employees who were ranked senior to him in the list. 
Therefore, workman being junior to other workmen in the panel, could not be granted regularization/absorption as a 
permanent employee in the Bank. It is admitted by the workman that the panel list was prepared in terms of 
settlement arrived at between the State Bank Management and Federation of State Bank Management Employees 
Association and therefore, same is binding on both parties under the provision of Section 8 (l) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act. Therefore, in view of the above, settlements and awards is also binding on the workman. 


2836 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


In the case of National Engineers Industries v. St. of Rajasthan Civil Appeal No. 6832/996 dated 0.2.999, 
three judges bench of Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“In Ram Pukar Singh and Ors. Vs. Heavy Engineering Corporation and Ors. //994॥ 6 SCC /45 this Court 
said that a settlement arrived at between the management and the sole recognised union of workmen 
under section 72(3) read with section उ6 of the Act would be binding on all the workmen whether members 
of the union or not.” 


Therefore, mere enlisting the name of workman, a in the list of employees for regularization, it does not 
entitle workman for absorption in the Bank’s service as a permanent employee unless the vacancy is 
available at the stage of his seniority. As per the settlement, the panel lists expired on 3!.03.997, and 
thereafter, the life of the panel list could not be extended. In the Writ Petition No. 2964/994, the Hon’ble 
High Court observed:- 


‘It is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation which is the majority union and the bank management is binding on the petitioners also. It is 
not at all the case of the petitioner that any of the terms of the settlement has been violated by the Bank's 
Management. If the petitioner had worked in the Bank on Part-time basis before 37.3.94, that itself would 
not vest in his a right to claim that his services should be regularised on permanent basis against a full 
time cadre post. The claim put forth by the petitioner in the present petition is therefore misconceived and 
not tenable. However, it is open to the petitioner to claim any right which flows from the settlement 
between the union and the Bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
petitioner that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the petitioner has been denied 
by the Bank Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the 
kind of relief sought for by the petitioner. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs.” 


Therefore, the claim of workman in the present matter can not be considered beyond the terms and conditions of 
aforesaid settlement between Bank Management and Federation of employees. 


Further, in the case of State of U.P. v. Harish Chandra AIR 996 SC 273, the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


"Notwithstanding the aforesaid Statutory Rule and without applying the mind to the aforesaid Rule, the High Court 
relying upon some earlier decisions of the Court came to hold that the list does not expire after a period of one year 
which on the face of it is erroneous. Further question that arises in this context is whether the High Court was 
justified in issuing the mandamus to the appellant to make recruitment of the Writ Petitioners. Under the Constitution 
a mandamus can be issued by the Court when the applicant establishes that he has a legal right to the performance of 
legal duty by the party against whom the mandamus is sought and said right was subsisting on the date of the petition. 
The duty that may be enjoined by mandamus may be one imposed by the Constitution or a Statute or by Rules or 
orders having the force of law. But no mandamus can be issued to direct the Government to refrain from enforcing the 
provisions of law or to do something which in contrary to law. This being the position and in view of the Statutory 
rule contained in Rule 26 of the Recruitment Rules we really fail to understand how the High Court could issue the 
impugned direction to recruit the respondents who were included in the select list prepared on 4.4.87 and the list no 
longer survived after one year and the rights, if any, of persons included in the list did not subsist." 


Similarly in the case of Syndicate Bank and other Vs. Shankar Paul AIR 997 SC 309], it was held : 


"Temporary were made from the empanel of eligible candidates prepared by calling names from employment 
exchange, the empanel was valid for only year. When the said employee claimed permanent absorption in service, the 
Apex Court has held that, whatever conditions regarding these empanelled candidates had they come an end on the 
expiry of one year." 

In the present matter also, since the panel list [99], which was prepared for the vacancies arising up to December 
994, its life expired on 3i.03.997, and it could not be extended after the said expiry date. Further, the panel list 
exhausted due to from the vacancies available upto 994 with the absorption of empanelled senior employees. Thus, 
the workman being junior in that panel list seniority could not get regularization / absorption in the service. 
Although numerous pleas have been taken by the Petitioner in his claim statement, but as per settled law, here, we are 
confined to the reference through which the dispute of dismissal of workman has been referred to the Tribunal for 
adjudication. In view of fore gone discussion, workman failed to prove his claim as alleged in his petition against the 
dismissal from service as well as claim for regularization and as such, the action of the Respondent bank in 
dismissing the services of Sri M. Seshagiri Rao, Ex.Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 3[.3. [997 is justified. 


Points No. I & II is answered accordingly. 
22. Point No. II:- 


In view of the findings given in Points No. I & IL, the claim of the workman against the dismissal order and for 
regularization of his service in Respondent Bank is unfounded and devoid of merits. Therefore, the workman is not 
entitled for any relief of reinstatement or regularization in the employment of Respondent Bank. Hence, his claim 
petition is liable to be dismissed. 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2837 


ORDER 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in dismissing the 
services of Sri M. Seshagiri Rao, Ex.Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 3.3.997 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for and consequently petition stands dismissed. Reference is 
answered accordingly. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. P. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant and corrected by me on this the 25" day 
of July, 2023. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 

Petitioner Respondent 

WWI: Sri M. Seshagiri Rao MWI: Sri Rupakula Prakash Babu 

Documents marked for the Petitioner 

Ex.WI: Photocopy of News paper advertisement 

Ex.W2?: Photocopy of panel list 

Ex.W3: Photocopy of service certificate dt. 6.8.88 

Ex.W4: Photocopy of service certificate dt. 9.2.98 

Ex.W5S: Photocopy of form of notification of vacancies to the employment exchange dt.8.4.!999 

Ex.W6: Photocopy of Circular dated 4.7.999 

Documents marked for the Respondent 

कि. ।: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M2: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.MS: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of 989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 NonOmessenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.MII: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

हि. ]2: Photocopy of order in SLP 0२0.886-8886 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2023 
का.आ. 4334.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम i947 (947 का १4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार इंडियन बैंक के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार आद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, चेन्नई के Ware (668/200) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं. एल L-20I2/252/998-3TTg3mR(aT- ID] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


2838 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the !7th August, 2023 


9.0. 334.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 668/200l) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Chennai as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Indian Bank and their 
workman. 


(No. L-202/252/998-IR(B-II)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CGIT-CUM-LABOUR COURT & 
EPF APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 


CHENNAI 
ID 668/200I 
(CGID 252/99) 

Present: 

DIPTI MOHAPATRA LLM 

Presiding Officer 

Dtd. 2.07.2023 

BETWEEN 

Sri B. Anandan : Petitioner 

C/o Sri Bhavaraghamurthy 

Odiyathur Village & Post 

Villupuram (via) 

Pincode-60570I 

AND 

The Management of Indian Bank : Respondent 

Head Office 

3, Rajaji Salai 

Chennai 

Appearance: 

For the “ Party/Petitioner : Advocate, M/s K.M. Ramesh 

For the 2"4 Party/Respondent : Advocate, M/s Aiyar & Dolia 

AWARD 


The Central Government, Ministry of Labour & Employment vide its Order No. L-202/252/98/IR (B.ID 
dtd. 9.04.999 referred the following Industrial Dispute to this Tribunal for adjudication. 


The schedule mentioned in that order is : 


“Whether the management of Indian Bank is justified in terminating the services of Sri B. Anandan w.e,f. 
22.035.996 and if not, to what relief the workman is entitled?” 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2839 


2 The Petitioner briefly states his case that he joined as Sub-Staff on 0!.07.974 in the Respondent Bank at 
Chennai and discharged his duties efficiently. He was suspended on 0l.07 976 in contemplation of initiation of 
Disciplinary Proceeding on allegation of misconduct. He was alleged to have drawn a Pay Order for Rs. 5,000/- from 
the account of one R. Subramanian to favour one Sri V. Arumugam. For the purpose, the Petitioner forged false 
document and signature. A Criminal Case was also lodged before the Villupuram Police Station in Crime No. 
459/976 and a criminal was registered in CC No. 343/976-060/76 the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Villupuram which 
was disposed of with an Order of Conviction. The Petitioner was sentenced to undergo 2 years Rigorous Imprisonment 
and imposed fine of Rs. 500/- vide the judgment 08.02.!980. Consequent to his conviction, the Petitioner was issued 
with an order of dismissal on 2.04.980 with effect from 08.02.980. The Petitioner challenged the Conviction order 
before the District & Sessions Judge, Cuddalore in CA 84/980, which was allowed in his favour and the Petitioner 
was acquitted vide the Session’s Court Order dtd. 20.04.982. The Petitioner was reinstated on 2.0.982 and paid 
with all arrears and allowances in view of the acquittal order of the Session’s Court. Thereafter, he was again placed 
under suspension in contemplation of initiation of Domestic Enquiry against him. The Petitioner moved the Hon’ble 
Court challenging the order of suspension and obtained a Stay Order on all further proceedings. The Respondent 
approached the Hon’ble Court and obtained the Vacation Order of the Stay. The Respondent was permitted to proceed 
with the enquiry but not to implement the result of the enquiry until permission is accorded by the Court. Accordingly, 
the Enquiry was proceeded with and concluded on 07.09.986 and the Enquiry Officer rendered findings on 
30.06.987. The Respondent sought permission from the Hon’ble Court to implement the result of the Enquiry. At this 
stage the Petitioner Withdrew the Writ Petition. Thus the Respondent issued the 2" show cause Notice on 5.04.996 
and finally the Disciplinary Authority terminated the Petitioner from job vide his order 22.5.996 following the 
Domestic Enquiry. The Petitioner exhausted the Appeal remedy and being unsuccessful, raised the dispute under 
Section-2(A). The matter was referred to Principal labour Court, Chennai in CGID No. 252/[999., After constitution of 
CGIT-cum-Labour Court, Chennai, the case was received from Principal Labour Court and re-numbered ID 668/200I. 
The ID case was disposed of on hearing the parties. The Tribunal held the punishment of dismissal imposed on the 
Petitioner by the Respondent was proper and justified. The case was disposed of vide Order dtd. 05.02.2003. The 
relief sought for by the Petitioner was denied. 


3. The Petitioner moved the Hon’ble High Court of Madras in WP No; !6604/2003 challenging the Tribunal’s 
order dtd 5.2.2003 raising question on the on the validity of the Domestic Enquiry . The Hon’ble High Court of 
Madras Vide order dtd 28.02.20l7 while set aside the Order dtd 05.02.2003 of this Tribunal, remanded the case for 
fresh hearing of the parties and to decide the validity of the Domestic Enquiry by framing a Preliminary Issue and 
other issues. 


4. In compliance to the direction of the Hon’ble Court, Preliminary Issue was framed and the parties were afforded 
with sufficient opportunity to present their submission on the point of validity of the fairness of the Domestic Enquiry. 
The Preliminary Issue was decided by this Tribunal on dtd. 7.02.2020 as per Separate Sheet. The Domestic Enquiry 
was held fair and proper and the parties were granted with liberty to adduce their evidence / submission with regard to 
other issues i.e. 


(i) ‘If the punishment of dismissal imposed on the Petitioner is disproportionate to the gravity of guilt 
established? 


(ii) If not, to what relief the Petitioner is entitled to? 


The Petitioner examined himself as WWI whereas the Respondent declined to examine any Witness. Both 
parties relied on the documents already filed during the initial period of hearing of the case. 


Points (i) and (ii) 


5. Both the above points, since interlinked inter-alia are taken up together for a common discussion. The 
Petitioner challenges the validity of the domestic enquiry on some points (i) that the findings of Enquiry as perverse 
as much as the proceeding lingered for an unusual time (ii) the very initiation of the disciplinary proceeding overriding 
the final verdict of a Sessions Court is not permissible, illegal and bad in law. While he adduced evidence that the 
imposition of punishment of dismissal is beyond the principles of natural justice and such punishment pushed him to 
severe financial crisis as has not been in any gainful employment after his termination. Besides, the Petitioner 
mentions in his Affidavit-Evidence that he has already reached the superannuation on 3!.0.2008. Thus, his prayer for 
reinstatement in his Claim Statement is not possible but in lieu of that he is entitled to monetary benefits from the date 
of termination of service till the date of reaching the age of superannuation and other terminal benefits. So far the 
validity of the domestic enquiry is concerned, it is contended by the Petitioner that the Respondent is debarred to 
proceed with a domestic enquiry on the same allegation wherein the Petitioner was acquitted by the Sessions Court. 


6. In this context, the Counsel for the Respondent advances his argument that in view of the Acquittal Order 
dtd. 20.04.982 in CA 84/980 passed by the District & Sessions Judge, Cuddalore, the Respondent reinstated the 
Petitioner on 2!.0.982 and paid with all arrears and allowances. Besides, the order of acquittal of the Petitioner 
by the Sessions Court while is binding upon the Respondent so far the reinstatement of the Petitioner is concerned and 
which was implemented with immediate effect, the said Acquittal Order is not binding upon the Respondent to 


2840 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


withhold the departmental enquiry. Thereafter, in contemplation of initiation of domestic enquiry, the Petitioner was 
put under Suspension. Ironically, the judicial verdict of the Apex Court which is relied by the Petitioner in the case of 
Captain M. Paul Anthony Vs. Bharat Gold Mines and Another in Civil Appeal No. 79060999 dtd. 30.03.999 
reported in 7/999-(3)-5९-629 is applicable to the case of the Respondent. The Service Law with regard to the 
departmental enquiry and simultaneous continuance of with criminal proceedings is discussed and observed by the 
Hon’ble Court that “Law on this point restated that scope of these two proceedings are different and they can be 
continued independently”. 


ve Therefore, the initiation of departmental proceeding against the Petitioner is held proper. So far the allegation 
of delay in proceeding of domestic enquiry, it is pertinent to mention that when the Enquiry was fixed for hearing 
onl8..84, the petitioner moved the Hon’ble Court vide inl0l22/984 claiming he should be represented through a 
Counsel. And also moved the Hon’ble Court in WP 9967/985 in WMP 5058/l985 and obtained ex-parte interim 
injunction on 27.09.I985 restraining the Bank from holding enquiry. The Respondent Bank approached the Hon’ble 
Court in WMP 284/[986 for vacation of the ex-parte interim injunction. The Hon’ble Court vacated the interim 
injunction on .02.986 and granted due permission to the Respondent to proceed with the Enquiry, but directed to 
hold the implementation of the result of the Enquiry till permission is accorded by the Hon’ble Court. In between 
several Writ Petitions which were raised by the Petitioner remained pending disposal and some were disposed of. The 
Enquiry was concluded on 07.09.986, and the Enquiry Officer rendered findings on 30.06.987. The Respondent 
sought permission from the Hon’ble Court to implement the result of the Enquiry. At this stage the Petitioner 
Withdrew the Writ Petitions WP 022/84 on 24.03.94 and the WP 9967/985 on 2..95.. Thus, the delay in 
proceeding was not attributed by the Respondent but by the Petitioner who tried his level best to stall the proceeding. 
He could manage to drag the proceeding for an unusual period by approaching the Hon’ble Court every now and 
then. 


8. Admittedly, the Petitioner was suspended in contemplation of initiation of domestic enquiry for the alleged 
offence that he has forged and manipulated documents and managed to draw Rs. 5,000/- from the account of one 
R. Subramanian to favour one Sri V. Arumugam. The Petitioner issued token bearing no. 552 in favour of his Brother 
Sri Sanjeevi and entered the token number in Pay Order and also the folio no. 9/4235 to mislead that the Pay Order has 
been debited in Ledger. The Petitioner further put a “Pay Cash” stamp on the Pay Order and also for the signature of 
the Accountant in the space provided for passing the Pay Order making it appear that the Pay Order has been passed 
for payment. The Petitioner payment further kept the Pay Order in Token Register alongwith other genuine Pay Orders 
and Cheques and placed the said Register in Cash Counter at its usual place thereby enable his brother to receive the 
payment under the forged Pay Order. The above facts was duly established by the evidence led through the Witnesses 
during the enquiry proceedings. In this context, it is further contended that the explanation submitted by the Petitioner 
to the Show Cause Notice proposing the punishment was lack of any substance and also contrary to the provision of 
the Law. The issuance of Show Cause Notice proposing the punishment never defeated the principles of natural justice 
as the guilt of the Petitioner was amply established in the enquiry. It is pertinent to mention the technicality of 
Evidence Act does not apply in the case of domestic / departmental enquiry. Reliance is placed in the case of State of 
Haryana and Another Vs. Rattan Singh reported in AIR 997 SC 4572 wherein their Lordships had held “it is well 
settled that in a domestic enquiry sophisticated rules of evidence under the Indian Evidence Act may not apply. All 
materials which are logically probative for the prudent mind are permissible. There is no allergy to hearsay 
evidence, provided it has reasonable nexus and credibility” . 


Besides, the alleged commission of the fraudulent action of the Petitioner is a gross misconduct so far as the Service 
Rule is concerned. By such fraudulent action the Petitioner was found guilty of misconduct specified in Clause -9.5(j) 
of Bipartite Settlement dtd. 9.0.966. 


9. Further, when the general public repose great confidence in Banking business, the employees / staffs are 
required to maintain the highest level of integrity, honesty, sincerity and devotion to duty. Any deviation in this regard, 
if caused by any of the Bank officials / Staffs, would shatter the confidence reposed by the general public, and 
certainly tarnish the reputation of the Bank. In such circumstance, the misconduct committed by any such Officer / 
Staff is viewed seriously and cannot be pardoned at any stretch of circumstance. Thus, even if the Petitioner was 
acquitted in a Criminal Case, it would not be sufficient ground to consider his claim for reinstatement with an 
established guilt of misconduct much less from such a Financial Institution which gained highest reputation from the 
Society at large for rendering faithful / trustworthy services in financial sector even in providing mini-micro level 
requirements of the general public. 


0. The acts of misconduct proved against the Petitioner are very serious and grave in nature and the findings of 
the Enquiry Officer in the punishment thereof is appropriate as much as the integrity of the Petitioner, when is 
questionable, his continuance in financial institutions like Respondent Bank is highly un-desirable. Hence, the 
punishment of dismissal imposed by the competent Authority of Respondent on the Petitioner is held just, proper and 
proportionate to the guilt of ‘’Gross miscounduct” against him and warrants no interference. 


In the result. The Petitioner is not entitled to any relief as sought for. 


The Points (i) and (ii) are answered against the Petitioner. 


[भाग AVE 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 284] 


The ID case stands dismissed. 


The reference is answered accordingly. 


DIPTI MOHAPATRA, Presiding Officer 


ID 668/200|/ CGID 252/99 


Witnesses Examined in Preliminary Issue : None from both sides 


Witnesses Examined for Other Issues: 


For the |7 Party/Petitioner 


WWI, Sri 8. Anandan 


For the 2"4 Party/Management : None 


Documents relied on by both parties 


as per the Exhibit List enclosed with 
Final Order dtd. 05.02.2003 


On the petitioners side 


Ex.No. 
Ext.Wl 
Ext.W2 
Ext.W3 
Ext.W4 
Ext.W5 


Ext.W6 


Ext.W7 


Ext.W8 


Date 

26.07.976 
09.0.976 
20.04.982 
9.03.996 
5.04.996 


22.05.996 


05.07.996 


8.2.96 


Description 

Show Cause Notice issued to the Petitioner 

Explanation to the Show Cause Notice 

Judgment in CA No. 84 of 90 

Second Show Cause Notice issued to the Petitioner 

Petitioner’s explanation to the Second Show Cause 
Notice 

Order of the Respondent terminating the services of 
the Petitioner 

Petitioner’s appeal to the General Manager of the 
Respondent 

Letter from Petitioner to the General Manager of 


the Respondent 


On the Respondent’s side 


Ex.No. 
।०) ९4 ह। 
Ext.M2 
Ext.M3 
Ext.M4 


Ext.M5 
Ext.M6 
Ext.M7 


Date 

0.07.976 
8.2.978 
08.02.980 
2.0.982 


07.09. 986 
[|.0.997 
30.06.987 


Description 
Complaint to the Police 
Charge Sheet framed against the Petitioner 
Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate Judgment 
Respondent’s order revoking the order of 
termination and placing the petitioner under 
suspension. 
Enquiry Proceedings 
Appellate Authority letter 
Findings of Enquiry Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 47 अगस्त, 2023 


का.आ. 4335.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (i947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 


सरकार साउथ सेंट्रल रेलवे के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औघोगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (2/20l2) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं, Vet-2025/0/2023-3g3i& (sI-I)-75] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


2842 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the !7th August, 2023 


9७.0. 335.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 2/20I2) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of South Central Railway 
and their workman. 


[No. L-2025/0/2023-IR(B-I)-75] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 3" day of July , 2023 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No._ 2/202 
Between: 
Sri Bhogi Raja Mogili, 
S/o B. Mallaiah, 
R/o Madikonda, 
Hanamkonda(M), Warangal District. ......Petitioner 
AND 
The General Manager, 


South Central Railway, 


Rail Nilayam, Secunderabad. ....Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : M/s. R. Yogender Singh, C.V.N. Rama Krishna & S. Maheshwarudu, Advocates 
For the Respondent: M/s. K. Sunil Goud and V. Kiran Kumar, Advocates 
AWARD 


Sri Bhogi Raja Mogili who worked as Gangman Class-IV (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed 
this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 against the Respondents South Central Railway 
seeking for setting aside the removal order dated 47.7.2003 issued by Respondent as illegal, arbitrary and 
consequently directing the Respondents to reinstate the Petitioner into service duly granting all the consequential 
benefits and such other reliefs as this court may deems fit. 


2: The averments made in the petition in brief are as follows: 


) The Petitioner was appointed by the Respondent as Gangman Class-IV W.e.f- |7.7.2003 he served the Respondent 
organization without any complaint or stigma on his service conduct. Unfortunately, his services were terminated 
w.e.f. 8-07-2003, on the ground of unauthorized absenteeism from the duties for the period commencing from 
09.I.200I to 2.2.200 for a period of 69 days. It is submitted that a charge sheet was issued and an enquiry was 
conducted, wherein it was observed that he was absented for !69 days in broken spells in addition to 33 days for 
which period there is no Charge sheet or any other evidence. Basing on this, an order of removal was passed on 
7.7.2003. After so many Appeals and Reviews, representations and letters the Respondent has issued proceedings 
dated 29.07.200, stating that all his Appeals and Reviews were dismissed, if at all he wants any relief he can apply 
for "Compassionate Pension". It is further submitted that, in each and every Appeal, the Petitioner submitted to the 
Respondent about the reason for his alleged absence. Even in his last representation dated 8.3.200, he submitted the 
reason in detail which is as follows: For the above charge of allegation, I submit that I had not availed the said leave 
of (66) days and (33) days leave during the years 200] and 2002 deliberately or intentionally, but I had availed the 
said leave of (66) days as Casual leave or Special Casual leave or other than Casual leave in different months, on 
different dates in broken spells in piece - meal as 0l day, 02 days, 03 days, 08 days, 0 days, ll days, 3 days, [7 
days, l8 days, 9 days and in one month 3] days respectively on (7) Occasions during the year January, 200] to 


[भाग II—a€ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2843 


December, 200l as shown above for attending on my insane and mentally mad son, aged (8) Years, who was met 
with an accident by Auto Riksha, while going to School on a bicycle and finally died on !.6.2003 by drowning ina 
tank and also to attend on my old aged father, who was suffering from Asthma disease and other ailments in old age as 
detailed below:- “"Sir, I submit that my job is the only source of our livelihood, I have to maintain and feed my family 
members out of my monthly Salary only. My family consisting of (07) members including me. I have no other 
properties or income to maintain my family. So, I always attended to my duties regularly, and continuously by 
maintaining punctuality. I never absented to my official duties during my [2 Years service from [99] to 2003, except 
in the years 200] and 2002 for the following reasons under dire need of my presence at my home under compelled and 
unavoidable circumstances. So, in view of my above stated facts, I always give my first preference to my duties, 
rather than to my domestic affairs. My motto is Work is Worship" It is submitted that, after this the Petitioner filed an 
Industrial Dispute before the Hon'ble Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), vide his Application dated 8..202, 
posted on 20..202, but there is no response from that authority which resulted into filing of this case. It is 
submitted that the Petitioner has filed this case after exhausting all departmental remedies. Moreover, the absence 
from duties is neither wanton nor deliberate. As per the Judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in 2003 (4) SCC 
27 (Nilajkar Vs. Telecom District Manager) which says that "Point of Limitation cannot be taken into consideration. 
When the Petitioner is agitating the case for considerable period". Here in this instant case, the Petitioner was 
agitating before the Department, which is establishing his need of employment and his need to his family members 
wherein 6 members of the family are depending on his income. His family is consisting of his bed-ridden father and 
mother his two daughter and wife. In view of the above, it is prayed that this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to set 
aside the removal order dated 7.7.2003, which was taken upto the Appeal and which was at last confirmed through 
Proceedings dated 29.7.200 by considering his need of employment and his devoted past record and length of service 
by directing the Respondent to reinstate him into their service and pass such other order or orders as this Court may 
deem fit and proper in the circumstances of the case. 


3. The Respondents filed counter denying the averments made in the petition, with the averments in brief 
which runs as follows: 


It is humbly submitted that the petitioner was removed from service for unauthorized absence by the competent 
authority after following the laid down rules for initiating disciplinary action. The petitioner had participated and 
accepted the charges of unauthorized absence during the inquiry and had not responded to the inquiry report. He was 
unauthorisedly absent for a period of !69 days from 09.0I.200l to I2.2.200l in different spells despite being 
unauthorisedly absent for another 33 days from 0!.0I.2002 to 28.2.2002. Charge memo was issued to him which 
was duly acknowledged by him on 25.05.2002. It is submitted that an inquiry was ordered and the inquiry officer 
submitted his report holding the charges as proved. The copy of the inquiry report was sent to him and the petitioner 
did not respond to the inquiry report. The disciplinary authority therefore, imposed the penalty of removal from 
service which was affirmed in appeal and revision. The petitioner under the pension rules loses his pensionary benefits 
but however, he is entitled for compassionate pension equaling to 2/3 of the pension if the competent authority feels 
so he may grant the same to the petitioner. However, the petitioner has to apply for the same but instead he preferred 
mercy appeals to the ADRM, and DRM and later to the General Manager which is not provided under the rules. The 
petitioner is not entitled for special casual leave and casual leave for the serving employees is restricted to only 8 days 
per year. Under such circumstances, how the petitioner can contend that he had availed special casual leave and casual 
leave for 66 and 33 days during the year 200! and 2002 respectively? The petitioner ought to have sought for leave 
from the competent authority and got it sanctioned for attending to his son's illness and the fact remained that he did 
not seek for sanction of leave nor his absence covered by medical certificate. Under such circumstances, it has to be 
treated as unauthorized absence only. The problems faced by the petitioner with his son is in no way entitling him to 
remain unauthorisedly absent. The appropriate remedy for the petitioner lies in approaching the Hon'ble Central 
Administrative Tribunal which is constituted for redressal of the grievances of the Central Government Employees. 
The petitioner had approached the wrong forum by filing the LC herein. As per the Administrative Tribunals Act, 
985 the aggrieved person should approach the court of law within a period of one year from the date of order by 
which he is aggrieved. The petitioner cannot sleep all the while and approach the court of law after a period of ten 
years. The petitioner was given the option of seeking grant of compassionate allowance under Rule No. 69 of the 
Pension rules, but without approaching the appropriate forum and without seeking for compassionate allowance, he is 
approaching this Tribunal. 


4. Petitioner got examined himself as ५७] and marked photocopies of seven documents Ex.WI to W7. 
Ex.WI is the representation of WWI. Ex.W2 is charge sheet; Ex.W3 is removal order; Ex.W4 is Appellate order; 
Ex.W5 is order in revision; Ex.W6 is order of Appellate Authority; and Ex.W7 is appeal to RLC(C) along with postal 
receipt and acknowledgement. 


Ds Heard argument of Learned Counsel for the Petitioner. Perused the record. 
6. On the basis of the rival pleadings of both parties, the following points emerge for determination: - 


I. Whether the claim of the Petitioner is delayed and has become stale claim? 


2844 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Il. Whether domestic enquiry held by Respondent Management against Petitioner is legal and valid? 

Ill. Whether this Tribunal has got jurisdiction in the present claim? 

IV. Whether termination order dated 7.7.2003 of the Petitioner from service passed by Respondent 
Management is illegal and liable to be set aside as alleged in the claim statement? 

V. Whether punishment imposed on the Petitioner is disproportionate to the charge levelled against the 
Petitioner? 

VI. To what relief is the petitioner entitled? 


Findings:- 
7. Point No. I: Respondent has contended that as per law, the Petitioner has filed present petition after a 


period of 0 years. The Petitioner can not sleep all the while and approach the court of law after a period of 0 years. 
Therefore, Petition is time barred. 


8. Perused the record. After holding the enquiry against the Petitioner, the Disciplinary Authority has 
removed the Petitioner from service vide order dated [7.7.2003 and feeling aggrieved by the order of the 
Disciplinary Authority Petitioner had filed an appeal before Appellate Authority and in appeal order of Disciplinary 
Authority of removal of Petitioner from service was confirmed through proceeding dated |..2003 vide Ex.W4. 
Thereafter present claim petition has been filed by the Petitioner challenging the removal order dated [7.7.2003 and 
appellate order |..2003, in the year 20I2 after a long delay of about 9 years. Further, the Petitioner has submitted 
that in the case of Nilajkar Vs. Telecom District Manager 2003 SCC 27 have held that, “ Point of limitation can 
not be taken into consideration under the circumstances of the case for considerable period”. Since Petitioner in the 
present matter was agitating before the Department by moving representation then Department has passed the order on 
29.7.200 and therefore, he filed this petition. Hence, itis not time barred. 


9. Perused the record. It reveals from the record that Disciplinary Authority has passed removal order on dated 
7.7.2003, and against that Petitioner has filed an appeal which was decided by Disciplinary Authority vide order 
dated ..2003. Thereafter the Petitioner has moved a revision petition and that has also been decided by the 
Respondent Management vide order dated 0.3.2004 as the Ex.W5 shows. But Petitioner has not furnished any 
plausible explanation for not filing the petition against the impugned order thereafter until 20!2. As regard the 
contention of the Petitioner that he moved the representation to Respondent Management which got decided by the 
authority on 29.7.200, thereafter, he filed this present petition. But, merely moving the representation after passing 
of order dated .!.2003 by Appellate Authority, it can not be said in any circumstances that the Petitioner was 
pursuing under legal process during said period. The legal remedy of filing the representation before Appellate 
Authority as per rules has already been exhausted vide order dated |..2003 of Appellate Authority and also vide 
order dated 0.3.2004 passed by Revision Authority. The appropriate legal remedy which was available to the 
Petitioner against the impugned removal order was to approach proper forum of Tribunal but he did not do so within 
reasonable after impugned order dated 7.7.2003. Mere filing of representation repeatedly can not be considered a 
plausible explanation for delay in approaching Tribunal against the removal order dated 7.7.2003 and ..2003. 
Thus, the claim petition filed by the Petitioner is filed with inordinate delay and the same has become stale in view of 
the circumstances of the case. 


Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Nedungadi Bank Ltd., Vs. K.P. Madhavankutty and ors. Civil appeal No.638/2000 
decided on 28..2000 have held, 


“Law does not prescribe any time limit for the appropriate Government to exercise its powers under Section 70 of the 
Act. It is not that this power can be exercised at any point of time and to revive matters which had since been settled 
Power is to be exercised at any point of time and to revive matters which had since been settled. Power is to be 
exercised reasonably and in a rational manner. There appears to us to be no rational basis on which the Central 
Government has exercised powers in this case after lapse of about seven years of order dismissing the Respondent 
from service. At the time reference was made no industrial dispute existed or could be even said to have been 
apprehended. A dispute which is stale could not be the subject-matter of reference under Section 709 of the Act. As to 
when a dispute can be said to be stale would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. When the matter 
has become final, it appears to us to be rather incongruous that the reference be made under Section /9 of the Act in 
the circumstances like the present one. In fact is could be said that there was no dispute pending at the time When the 
reference in question was made.” 


Therefore, as present claim has been filed by the Petitioner after inordinate delay of about 9 years, and no plausible 
explanation has been furnished or shown by Petitioner for such long delay. Thus, the Petitioner’s claim against 
impugned order has become a stale claim. 


Thus, Point No. I is answered accordingly. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 26, 2023/भाद्र 4, 945 2845 


0. Point No.II: From the perusal of the record, it reveals that the Petitioner has neither challenged the validity 
of domestic enquiry nor has raised any points regarding validity of domestic enquiry in his claim statement. 
Therefore, the validity of domestic enquiry is held legal and valid. 


Thus, Point No.II is answered accordingly. 


Il. Point _No.III:- This point pertains to the question whether the Industrial Tribunal has got jurisdiction to 
adjudicate the present claim. In this context, Respondent contended that the proper remedy for the Petitioner lies in 
approaching the Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal which is constituted for the redressal of grievances of the 
Central Government employees. As per Administrative Tribunal Act, [989, the aggrieved person should approach the 
Court of law within a period of one year from the date of order by which he is aggrieved. The Petitioner cannot 
sleep all the while and approach the court of law after a period of ten years. 


2. Perused the record. Present Petition u/s 2A(2) of the I.D. Act, !947 has been filed by the Petitioner to set 
aside the removal order dated 7.7.2003 passed by Respondent authority after conducting the departmental enquiry 
against the Petitioner. Petitioner feeling aggrieved by that order has filed this petition in this Tribunal. In this context, 
the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Telecom District Manager and others vs. Keshab Deb, 
2008(8) SCC 402, is relevant wherein, Hon’ble Apex Court have held, 


“24.In a case of present nature where inter alia an employee maintains a writ petition not only on the ground of 
violation of equality clause enshrines under Articles 4 of the Constitution of India but also on the ground of violation 
of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, /947, he has an option to choose his own forum. Section 28 does not 
bar the jurisdiction of the Central Administrative Tribunal. It saves the jurisdiction of the Industrial Tribunal. An 
employee who claims himself to be a workman, therefore, will have a right of election in the matter of choice of forum. 
It is, therefore, not correct to contend that the Central Administrative Tribunal had no jurisdiction to pass the 
impugned judgement. Furthermore the Respondent claimed regularization in services. Such an application was 
maintainable. As to whether he would be entitled to such a relief or not, however, is a different question.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, Petitioner has option to choose the 
forum to file petition for redressal of his grievance against removal order. Therefore, this Tribunal has got 
jurisdiction to decide the present dispute. 


Thus, Point No.III is answered accordingly. 


3. Points No.IV & ९५ :- In the present matter Petitioner has set up his case that charge sheet was issued and an 
enquiry was conducted wherein it was observed by Disciplinary Authority that he was absented for 69 days from 
duty in broken spells. But in addition, thereto, he has also been held guilty for absence from duty for further 33 
days and for that conduct of the Petitioner for absenteeism of 33 days no charge sheet has been served upon the 
Petitioner. Therefore, the order of removal passed against Petitioner basing upon the absenteeism of !69 days in 
broken spells in addition of !33 days absenteeism is illegal. 


4. In this context perusal of the removal order dated 7.7.2003 goes to reveal that Disciplinary Authority has 
passed the removal order of the delinquent workman from service for the proved charge of unauthorized absence for 
69 days in broken spells for the period from 9.!.200l to 2.2.200l. After charge has been proved against the 
delinquent the Disciplinary Authority decided to impose the penalty of removal of the Petitioner from service with 
immediate effect. The said punishment order dated 7.7.2003 does reveal that charge for 69 days absenteeism 
against the Petitioner has been proved and he has been held guilty. The removal order of the Petitioner was passed 
for said charge only. The conduct of Petitioner for absenteeism from duty for further [33 days has been mentioned in 
the punishment order just to reflect the habitual conduct of the Petitioner and lack of devotion to the duty. Therefore, 
this contention of the Petitioner is misconceived in this regard and same is liable to be disallowed. Therefore, the 
plea taken by Petitioner in this regard is not acceptable. 


5. Further, it is submitted by the Petitioner that he has submitted the reasons before enquiry for his alleged 
absence from duty during the said period as alleged in the charge sheet but the Disciplinary Authority did not 
consider his ground. Reason has been assigned by the workman for his absenteeism is that “ since he was attending 
his insane/mentally mad Son and was also attending his old aged father”. But the said reason will not become an 
excuse for the Petitioner for absence from duty without seeking sanction order of leave from the competent authority. 
Therefore, the plea taken by the Petitioner is not acceptable under these circumstances for his unauthorized absence 
for long duration from duty. 


6. In this context, the Respondent has contended that the Petitioner is not entitled for any special leave or casual 
leave, as serving office employees have been restricted to only 8 days casual leave per year. Under such 
circumstances, Petitioner can not take the plea that he had availed special casual leave or casual leave for 66 days or 
33 days during the years 200l and 2002 respectively. It is further contended that Petitioner has sought only leave 
from the competent authority and not even get it sanctioned. Non- sanction of leave and his absence not covered by 
the medical certificate. Under such circumstances, it is to be treated as unauthorized absence only. The Petitioner’s 
plea is that his Son was insane and he was looking after him, for this reason Petitioner become unauthorizedly 


2846 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 26, 2023/BHADRA 4, 945 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


absent. It is mentioned in the removal order dated [7.7.2003 that he Petitioner remained unauthorizedly absent for 
69 days in broken spells from 9..200I to 2.2.200l without having covered in any leave or document. Therefore, 
without sanctioned leave Petitioner remained absent from duty unauthorizedly. 


7. As far as proportionate punishment of removal of Petitioner from service is concerned, the Petitioner was 
charged for unauthorized absence from duty totaling for !69 days during the period from 9..200I to 2.2.200I and 
charge has been proved against him during the enquiry. He failed to furnish any plausible explanation for his 
unauthorized absence from duty. Since the Petitioner was employed in the Railway Department which comes under 
the necessary services of public utility, therefore, such long unauthorized absence of Petitioner from duty amounting 
to serious misconduct and same cannot be tolerated by any reasonable employer. Any reasonable employer in such 
circumstances would impose punishment of removal from service of such employee. Therefore, keeping in view the 
seriousness of the charge, it can not be said that the punishment of removal imposed upon the Petitioner is 
disproportionate to the charge. Hence, the removal order passed on the Petitioner is held legal and justified. 


Thus, Points No. IV and V are answered accordingly. 


8. Point No. VI: In view of the fore gone discussion and finding in Points No. I to V I am of the considered view that 
the Petitioner is not entitled to any relief as prayed for. 


ORDER 
In the result, the petition is dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Dictated to Smt. P. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her and corrected by me on this the 3™ 
day of July, 2023. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Bhogi Raja Mogili MWI: Nil 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Ex.WI: Photocopy of representation dt.8.3.200 
Ex.W2?: Photocopy of charge sheet dt. 3.6.2002 
Ex.W3: Photocopy of removal order व. 7.7.2003 
Ex.W4: Photocopy of appellate order |..2003 
Ex.W5S: Photocopy of revisional order 0.3.2004 
Ex.W6: Photocopy of order on the appeal dt.8.3.200 
Ex.W7: Photocopy of appeal to RLC(C) along with postal receipt and acknowledgement. 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


NIL 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-0064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-0054. MANOJ KUMAR 


