रजिस्ट्री सं" डी" were 


(एन)04/0007/2003---23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


Rad क राजपतन्र 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-02082023-247786 
CG-DL-E-02082023-247786 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग I— खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


we ॥7] नई दिल्‍ली, मंगलवार, अगस्त , 2023/ श्रावण 0, 945 (शक) 
No. 7] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, AUGUST I, 2023/SRAVANA 0, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on Ist August, 2023:— 
But No. !2 07 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Government of National Capital Territory 
of Delhi Act, 99. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (J) This Act may be called the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Short title and 
(Amendment) Act, 2023. commencement. 


(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the !9th day of May, 2023. 


[ of 992. 2. In the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 99! (hereinafter Amendment 
referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, after clause (e), the following clauses shall be of section 2. 
inserted, namely:— 


(९९) "Lieutenant Governor" means the administrator appointed under article 239 
of the Constitution for the National Capital Territory of Delhi and designated as 
Lieutenant Governor by the President; 


Amendment 
of section 4]. 


Insertion of 
new Part IV-A. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(eb) "Minister" means a member of the Council of Ministers referred to in 
clause (4) of article 239AA of the Constitution, by whatever name called and includes 
a Deputy Minister;’. 


3. In section 4] of the principal Act,— 


(A) in the marginal heading, for the words "act in his discretion", the words "act 
in his sole discretion" shall be substituted; 


(B) in sub-section (/),— 


(a) in the opening paragraph, for the words "act in his discretion", the 
words "act in his sole discretion" shall be substituted; 


(b) in clause (ii), the word "; or" shall be inserted at the end; 
(c) after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(iii) in discharge of his functions under Part IV-A of this Act."; 


(C) in sub-section (2), for the words "not a matter as respects", the words "not 
a matter in respect of " shall be substituted. 


4. In the principal Act, after Part IV, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:— 
"PARTIV-A 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE MAINTENANCE OF THE DEMOCRATIC AND 


ADMINISTRATIVE BALANCE IN THE GOVERNANCE OF NATIONAL CAPITAL 
TERRITORY OF DELHI 


45A. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires— 


(a) "All India Services" means any service created under the All India 
Services Act, !95, except the Indian Police Service; 


(b) "Authority" means the National Capital Civil Service Authority 
constituted under sub-section (/) of section 45E; 


(c) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under 
clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 45E; 


(d) "Chief Secretary" means the Chief Secretary of the Government of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi appointed by the Central Government; 


(e) "Council" means the Council of Ministers referred to in clause (4) of 
article 239AA of the Constitution; 


(f) "DANICS" means the Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar, Lakshadweep, 
Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli (Civil) Services; 


(g) "Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board" means the Delhi 
Subordinate Services Selection Board constituted by the Government of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi through its Resolution No. F-3(7)/93-S.IIIL, dated 
4th October, !996 read with Resolution F. 3(24)/DSSSB/2008-S.I/764, dated 
2th May, 2008; 


(h) "Department" means a Department or office specified in the Schedule 
to the Business of Delhi (Allocation) Rules, 993; 


6l of 95].. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(i) "Group 'A' officers" means the officers serving in the affairs of the 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi— 


(a) belonging to All India Services, except the officers of the Indian 
Police Service; 


(b) who are classified as Group 'A' officers, under rule 4 of the Central 
Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, !965, 


but shall not include the officers who are serving in connection with any subject 
matter, whether fully or in part connected with Entries , 2 and 8 of List II of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of List II of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution insofar as they relate to Entries |, 2 and 
8 or any other subject matter which is connected therewith or incidental thereto; 


(j) "Group 'B' officials" means the Group 'B' officials, as such classified 
under rule 4 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) 
Rules, !965, but shall not include the officials who are serving in connection 
with any subject matter, whether fully or in part connected with Entries |, 2 and 
8 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, and Entries 64, 65 and 
66 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution insofar as they relate 
to Entries |, 2 and 8 or any other subject matter which is connected therewith or 
incidental thereto; 


(k) "Group 'C' officials" means Group 'C' officials as such classified under 
rule 4 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 
965, but shall not include the officials who are serving in connection with any 
subject matter, whether fully or in part connected with Entries |, 2 and 8 of 
List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of 
List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution insofar as they relate to 
Entries |, 2 and 8 or any other subject matter which is connected therewith or 
incidental thereto; 


(J) "National Capital Territory of Delhi" means the Union territory of Delhi 
as defined in clause () of article 239AA of the Constitution; 


(m) "Member" means a member of the Authority and includes the 
Chairperson; 


(n) "Principal Home Secretary" means the Additional Chief Secretary or 
Principal Secretary or Secretary, as the case may be, who is Head of the Home 
Department of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi; and 


(o) "Secretary" means the Additional Chief Secretary or Principal Secretary 
or Secretary, as the case may be, who is Head of the concerned Department of 
the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. 


45B. (/) The Union Public Service Commission shall be the Public Service 


Commission for Group 'A' and Group 'B' gazetted posts in the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi. 


(2) The Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board shall be the recruitment 


agency for appointment to the Group 'B' non-gazetted posts and Group 'C' posts in the 


National Capital Territory of Delhi. 


Public Service 
Commissions 
for National 
Capital 
Territory of 
Delhi. 


Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules 
under this Part. 


Power to 
appoint 
authorities, 
boards, 
commissions 
or statutory 
bodies. 


Constitution 
of National 
Capital Civil 
Service 
Authority. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


45C. The Central Government may make rules to provide for any one or more of 
the following matters, in connection with the affairs of the Government of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi under this Part, namely:— 


(a) the tenure of office, salaries and allowances, provident funds, pensions, 
gratuities, leave of absence and other conditions of service of officers and other 
employees appointed or posted; 


(b) the powers, duties and functions of officers and other employees 
appointed or posted; 


(c) the qualifications of candidates for appointment to the posts and the 
manner of selection for the appointments; 


(व) transfer or posting of the officers and other employees posted; 


(e) the procedure to be followed in imposing any penalty, suspension 
pending departmental inquiries before the imposition of such penalty and the 
authority by whom such suspension or penalty may be ordered; and the officer 
or authority to whom an appeal or revision shall lie; 


(f) any other matter which is incidental to or necessary for the purpose of 
regulating the appointment and conditions of service of persons appointed to 
services and posts; and 


(g) any other matter for which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
provisions are to be made by rules. 


45D. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, any authority, board, commission or any statutory body, by whatever name it 
may be called, or any office bearer or member thereof, constituted or appointed by or 
under— 


(a) any law made by the Parliament for the time being in force, applicable 
to the National Capital Territory of Delhi, shall be constituted or appointed or 
nominated by the President; and 


(b) any law made by the Legislative Assembly of National Capital Territory 
of Delhi for the time being in force, the Authority shall recommend a panel of 
suitable persons for constitution or appointment or nomination by the Lieutenant 
Governor, in accordance with the provisions of section 45H. 


45E. (7) There shall be an Authority to be known as the National Capital Civil 
Service Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, and discharge the functions 
assigned to it under this Part. 


(2) The Authority, referred to in sub-section (/), shall consist of the following 
Members, namely:— 


(a) the Chief Minister of Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi, 
who shall be the Chairperson of the Authority, ex officio; 


(b) the Chief Secretary of Government of National Capital Territory of 
Delhi, Member, ex officio; and 


(c) the Principal Home Secretary, Government of National Capital Territory 
of Delhi, who shall be the Member-Secretary to the Authority, ex officio. 


(3) All matters required to be decided by the Authority shall be decided by 
majority of votes of the Members present and voting. 


(4) All recommendations of the Authority shall be authenticated by the 
Member-Secretary. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(5) The head office of the Authority shall be at Delhi. 


45F.(/) The Authority shall meet at such time and place as the Meetings of 
Member-Secretary may decide with approval of the Chairperson of the Authority, as Authority. 
and when so required. 


(2) The Chairperson of the Authority shall preside over the meetings of the 
Authority. 


(3) The quorum for the meeting of the Authority shall be of two Members. 


450. (7) The Central Government, in consultation with the Authority, shall eee 
determine the nature and the categories of officers and other employees required to ea 
assist the Authority in the discharge of its functions and provide the Authority with Authority. 


such officers and employees, as it may deem fit. 


(2) The officers and other employees of the Authority shall discharge their 
duties and functions under the general superintendence and control of the Authority. 


(3) The salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other 
employees appointed under sub-section (/) shall be by rules made by the Central 
Government. 


45H. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being Powers and 
functions of 


in force, the Authority shall have the responsibility to recommend the transfers and nines 
uthority. 


postings of all Group 'A' officers and officers of DANICS serving in the affairs of the 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi but not officers serving in connection 
with any subject matter, either fully or in part, connected with Entries ।, 2 and 8 of 
List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of List II 
of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution insofar as they relate to Entries l, 2 and 8 
or any other subject matter which is connected therewith or incidental thereto, to the 
Lieutenant Governor: 


Provided that Authority may, ifit deems appropriate, by way of a recommendation, 
delegate the responsibility to any other authority of the Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi. 


(2) The Authority shall have the responsibility to recommend for all matters 
connected with and falling under the subject of vigilance and non-vigilance matters 
for the purpose of initiation of disciplinary proceedings and recommend for grant of 
prosecution sanctions to the Competent Authorities under the relevant Constitutional 
or statutory provisions against all the Group 'A' officers, including the officers of the 
All India Services and DANICS, serving in the affairs of the Government of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi but not officers serving in connection with any subject 
matter, either fully or in part, connected with Entries |, 2 and 8 of List II of the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution, and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of List Il of the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution insofar as they relate to Entries l, 2 and 8 or any other 
subject matter which is connected therewith or incidental thereto, to the Lieutenant 
Governor: 


Provided that the Authority may, if it deems appropriate, by way of a 
recommendation, delegate the responsibility in respect to such officers serving in the 
affairs of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi to an officer of All India 
Services. 


(3) The Lieutenant Governor, after the receipt of such recommendation under 
sub-section (/) or sub-section (2) of this section, may pass appropriate orders giving 
effect to the recommendation made: 


Disposal of 
matters by 
Minister. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Provided that the Lieutenant Governor, before passing appropriate orders on 
such recommendation, may ask for any relevant material regarding the Group 'A' officers, 
including the officers of the All India Services and DANICS, serving in the affairs of 
the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi: 


Provided further that in case the Lieutenant Governor differs with the 
recommendation made, whether based upon the material so called for or otherwise, the 
Lieutenant Governor may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, return the 
recommendation to the Authority for reconsideration by the Authority: 


Provided also that in case of difference of opinion, the decision of the Lieutenant 
Governor shall be final. 


(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in 
sub-section (/), the Authority shall— 


(a) make recommendations to the Lieutenant Governor for framing policies 
on— 


(i) stability of tenure of posting of officers and other employees; 


(ii) rotational transfers and postings from sensitive to non-sensitive 
posts and vice-versa; 


(iii) determining suitability of officer for posting as Head of the 
Department; 


(iv) transfers and postings of all officers and other employees serving 
in the affairs of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi; 


(b) make policy insofar as it relates to— 


(i) the capacity building of the officers and other employees serving 
in the affairs of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi; 


(ii) ensuring effectiveness in public services delivery in the 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi; 


(iii) ensuring good governance and e-governance in public 
administration in the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi; 


(iv) ensuring greater transparency in the administration of the 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi; 


(v) ensuring the presence of a citizen centric administration in the 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi; and 


(vd) any other matter connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


45-I. (7) The Minister in-charge may, by means of standing orders, give such 
directions as he deems fit for the disposal of proposals or matters in his Department: 


Provided that no such standing order shall be issued in contravention of the 
provisions of the Constitution or any other law for the time being in force including the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or the statutory powers conferred 
under any law upon the officials, and financial powers delegated under the Delegation 
of the Financial Powers Rules, 978. 


(2) The Minister, in consultation with the Secretary concerned, may issue standing 
orders, concerning the matters or classes of matters which are to be brought to the 
personal notice of the Minister: 


Provided that no such standing order shall be issued in contravention of the 
provisions of the Constitution or any other law for the time being in force including the 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or the statutory powers conferred 
under any law upon the officials, and financial powers delegated under the Delegation 
of the Financial Powers Rules, 978. 


(3) The copies of directions and standing orders shall be forwarded to the 
Lieutenant Governor and the Chief Minister. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (/) and (2), in addition 
to the proposals or matters required to be placed before the Lieutenant Governor 
under any law for the time being in force, the following proposals or matters shall be 
submitted to the Lieutenant Governor for his opinion through the Chief Minister and 
the Chief Secretary, before issuing any orders thereon, namely:— 


(7) matters which affect or are likely to affect the peace and tranquility of 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi; 


(ii) matters which affect or are likely to affect the interest of any particular 
community, the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the socially and 
educationally backward classes or any other class of persons; 


(iii) matters which affect the relations of the Government of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi with the Central Government, or any State Government, 
the Supreme Court of India or the High Court of Delhi and such other authorities 
as may be determined; 


(iv) matters pertaining to the Secretariat of the Lieutenant Governor and 
personnel establishment and other matters relating to his office; 


(vy) matters on which the Lieutenant Governor is required to make an order 
under any law or instrument in force in his sole discretion; 


(vi) matters specified under general or special order issued by the Lieutenant 
Governor under proviso to sub-section (2) of section 44; 


(vii) petitions for mercy from persons under sentence for death and other 
important cases in which it is proposed to recommend any revision of a judicial 
sentence; 


(viii) matters relating to summoning, prorogation and dissolution of the 
Legislative Assembly, removal of disqualification of voters at elections to the 
Legislative Assembly, Local Self Government Institutions and other matters 
connected therewith; and 


(ix) any other matter of administrative importance which the Chief Minister 
may consider necessary. 


45J. (7) The Secretary of the Department concerned shall be responsible for Duties of 
preparing and authenticating every memorandum including the Cabinet Notes, for Secretaries. 
consideration of the Council of Ministers and for obtaining approval of the Minister 
in-charge and the Chief Minister. 


(2) In case of proposals involving more than one Department, the views of all 
concerned Secretaries and the Ministers of all Departments consulted on the proposal 
shall be clearly and separately reflected in writing and signed by the Minister and the 
Secretary in the memorandum so as to ensure that in case of disagreement, the Council 
of Ministers shall take a decision. 


(3) In case the Secretary to the Council of Ministers is of the opinion that the 
proposal considered and decided by the Council of Ministers is not in accordance 
with the provisions of any law for the time being in force or any rules of procedure 
made under section 44, it shall be the duty of the Secretary to the Council of Ministers 
to bring it to the notice of the Lieutenant Governor for taking a decision thereon. 


Power to 
make rules. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(4) Any matter which is likely to bring the Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi into controversy with the Central Government or with any State 
Government, the Supreme Court of India or the High Court of Delhi and such other 
authorities as may be determined, the Secretary to the Department concerned shall, as 
soon as possible, bring it to the notice of the Lieutenant Governor, the Chief Minister 
and the Chief Secretary in writing. 


(5) The Chief Secretary and the Secretary to the Department concerned shall be 
responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made under 
section 44, and when either of them considers that there has been any material departure 
from the same, instead of giving effect to such departure, he shall personally bring it to 
the notice of the Minister in-charge, the Chief Minister and the Lieutenant Governor 
immediately in writing. 


45K. (7) The Central Government may, by notification published in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Part. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Part shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rules or both Houses agree that the rules should not be made, the 
rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.’ 


5. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of Part IV-A of the 
principal Act, as inserted by the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
(Amendment) Act, 2023, the President may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of Part IV-A of the principal Act, as 
inserted by the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (Amendment) Act, 2023, as 
may appear to him to be necessary or expedient for the purposes of removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament. 


6. (J) The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 2023 is hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal 
Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under 
the principal Act as amended by this Act. 


Ord.| of 
2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, [99] was enacted 
to supplement the provisions of the Constitution relating to the Legislative Assembly 


and a Council of Ministers for the National Capital Territory of Delhi and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


2. Delhi being the capital of India is administered by the President of India directly. 
Article 239AA of the Constitution provides for special provisions with respect to Union 
territory of Delhi. The said article provides for various functional and administrative 
networked issues balancing the participation of the Union Government in the affairs 
relating to the administration of Delhi in general, and particular, under the provisions 
contained in sub-clause (b) of clause (3) and clause (7) of the said article. Several 
important National and International institutions and authorities like the President, the 
Parliament, the Supreme Court, various constitutional functionaries, foreign diplomatic 
missions, international agencies, etc., are located in Delhi and high dignitaries from 
other nations pay official visits to Delhi, and in the national interest of the country, 
highest possible standards are required to be maintained in the administration and 
governance of the National Capital Territory of Delhi. 


3. Any decision taken in respect of Delhi not only affects the residents of Delhi 
but also affects entire country and shall have the potential of putting the national 
reputation, image, credibility and prestige at stake in the international global spectrum 
and therefore, the entire nation is vitally interested in the governance of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi. Delhi being the capital of India has a unique status and 
certain distinguished features and there is need to promote the national interests without 
compromising the aspirations of the residents of Delhi. Article | of the Constitution 
defines the territory of India, comprising of States and Union territories and article | 
read with article 239 provides that the Union territories are to be governed solely by the 
President. 


4. In the absence of a Parliamentary legislation on "services" as contained in 
Entry 4] of List Il of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution in respect of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi, the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered a reference concerning 
the subject "services" in the National Capital Territory of Delhi and it was pleased to 
pass a judgment in C.A.No. 2357 of 20I7 on llth May, 2023 in the matter of Government 
of National Capital Territory of Delhi Versus Union of India. 


5. In view of the special status of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, a scheme 
of administration has to be formulated by a Parliamentary legislation to balance both 
local and national interests to reflect the aspiration of the people through the joint and 
collective responsibility of the Government of India and the Government of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi. 


6. With a view to give effect to the intent and purpose behind the provisions of 
article 239AA of the Constitution, a permanent authority, headed by the Chief Minister 
of Delhi along with the Chief Secretary, Government of National Capital Territory of 
Delhi and the Principal Secretary, Home, Government of National Capital Territory of 
Delhi, is being constituted to make recommendations to the Lieutenant Governor 
regarding matters concerning transfer postings, vigilance and other matters. This would 
balance the interest of the nation with the interest of the Union territory of Delhi in the 
administration of the capital to the manifestation of the will of the people reposed in the 
Central Government as well as the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. 
The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (Amendment) Bill, 2023, inter 
alia, provides for amendments to the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
Act, |99] (hereinafter referred to as the Act)— 


(a) to define the terms "Lieutenant Governor" and "Minister"; 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) to insert a new Part IV-A in the Act relating to the maintenance of 
democratic and administrative balance in the governance of the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi, which provides for— 


(i) definitions of certain terms used in Part IV-A; 


(ii) Public Service Commissions for the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi; 


(iii) empowering the Central Government to make rules in connection 
with the affairs of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
including the functions, terms and other conditions of service of officers 
and employees; 


(iv) constitution of the National Capital Civil Service Authority, the 
powers and functions of the Authority and other incidental matters; 


(c) for removal of difficulties by a Presidential Order, in case of any difficulty 
arises in giving effect to the provisions of newly inserted Part IV-A in the Act; and 


(d) to repeal the National Capital Territory of Delhi (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 2023. 


7. The provisions of the Bill are being brought into force from the |9th May, 2023 
i.e., the date of coming into force of the said Ordinance. 


8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The 27th July, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ll 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (Amendment) Bill, 2023, if 
enacted, is not likely to involve any expenditure either recurring or non-recurring, from and 
out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY _ [Part II—Szc. 2] 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 

Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert new Part IV-A in the Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi Act, !99!. The proposed sections 45C and 45K, inter alia, empowers the 
Central Government to make rules to provide for the tenure of office, salaries and allowances, 
provident funds, pensions, gratuities, leave of absence and other conditions of service of 
officers and other employees appointed or posted; the powers, duties and functions of 
officers and other employees appointed or posted; the qualifications of candidates for 
appointment to the posts and the manner of selection for the appointments; transfer or 
posting of the officers and other employees posted; the procedure to be followed in imposing 
any penalty, suspension pending departmental inquiries before the imposition of such penalty 
and the authority by whom such suspension or penalty may be ordered; the officer or 
authority to whom an appeal or revision shall lie; any other matter which is incidental to or 
necessary for the purpose of regulating the appointment and conditions of service of persons 
appointed to services and posts. 


2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made in accordance with the provisions 
of the Bill are matters of procedure and detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in 
the Bill itself. 


3. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH, 


Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054. |] पर 


Mohan 


