रजिस्ट्री सं" Sle एल० 


(एन)04/0007/2003---23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


WR क राजपतन्र 
The Gazette of Gudia 


Och. -S7. Wet. -37.-0502023-24954 
CG-DL-E-0502023-24954 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा --- खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं" 20) नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, अगस्त 4, 2023/ श्रावण 3, 945 (शक) 
No. 20] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, AUGUST 4, 2023/SRAVANA 3, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2023:— 
Bit No. 63 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of a Permanent Bench of the High Court of Kerala 
at Thiruvananthapuram. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the High Court of Kerala (Establishment of a Permanent Short title and 
Bench at Thiruvananthapuram) Act, 2023. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the High Court of Kerala at Establishment of 
Thiruvananthapuram and such Judges of the High Court of Kerala, being not less than five @ Permanent 
in number, as the Chief Justice of that High Court may, from time to time nominate, shall sit oe . ae 
at Thiruvananthapuram in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being ,, 
vested in that High Court in respect of cases arising in the district of Thiruvananthapuram — Thirwvananthapuram. 


and such other territories within that State as the President may by notification specify. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The principal seat of the Kerala High Court is at Ernakulam, which is situated at a 
distance of 200 kilometers from the State Capital, Thiruvananthapuram. Ever since the 


formation of the State of Kerala in 956, there has been a demand for the establishment of a 
permanent Bench at the State Capital. 


It has been observed that the State is a principal litigant in a majority of cases pending 
in the High Court of Kerala. This leads to the State Government incurring considerable 
expenditure on account of travelling allowance and leave allowance given to the Government 
employees for travelling from Thiruvananthapuram, the state capital to Ernakulam for 
depositions. 


Moreover, it has been the policy of the successive Governments that justice should 
be taken to the doors of the litigants and therefore the litigants should not be compelled to 
go long distance to the Court. In the interest of administration of justice, the court must be 
easily accessible to the litigants and witnesses. 


It will be, therefore, appropriate if a Bench of High Court is established at 
Thiruvananthapuram in the State of Kerala. 


Hence this BIII. 


New DE Lut; SHASHI THAROOR 
February \7, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


Bit No. 99 67 2023 


A Bill to prohibit violence against healthcare personnel and damage or loss to property 
of healthcare Institutions and for matters connected therewith and incidental 
thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Healthcare Personnel and Healthcare Institutions 
(Prohibition of Violence and Damage to Property) Act, 2023. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
Commencement. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of State, the Government of 
that State and in all other case, the Central Government; 


(b) “Healthcare Institutions” means— 


(i) a hospital, maternity home, nursing home, dispensary, clinic, 
sanatorium, mobile medicare units, e-medicine and tele-medicine centres or an 
institution by whatever name called that offers services, facilities requiring 
diagnosis, treatment or care for illness, injury, deformity, abnormality or 
pregnancy in any recognized system of medicine established and administered 
or maintained by any person or body of persons, whether incorporated or not; 
or 


(ii) a place established as an independent entity or part of an institution 
referred to in sub-clause (7), in connection with the diagnosis or treatment of 
diseases where pathological, bacteriological, genetic, radiological, chemical, 
Biological investigations or other diagnostic or investigative services with the 
aid of laboratory or other medical equipment, are usually carried on, established 
and administered or maintained by any person or body of persons, whether 
incorporated or not; and shall include a healthcare institution owned, controlled 
or managed by— 


(a) the Government or a department of the Government; or a Public 
Sector Undertaking or Autonomous Body of the Government; 


(b) a trust, whether public or private; 


(c) acorporation (including a society) registered under a Central, or 
Provincial or State Act, whether or not owned by the Government; 


(d) a local authority; and 
(e) a single doctor. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, a mobile medical unit or an ambulance 
shall be deemed to be a healthcare institution if such vehicle is fitted with medical equipment 
and is used for providing healthcare service. 


(c) “healthcare personnel” include— 


(i) a registered medical practitioner, possessing a recognized medical 
qualification as defined in clause (r) of section 2 of the National Medical 
Commission Act, 20I9, and enrolled in a State Medical Register as defined in 30 of 20]9. 
clause (v) (w) of that section; 


(ii) a medical practitioner registered for practising in any other system of 
medicine which is recognized under any law for the time being in force; 


(iii) a registered dentist, registered dental hygienist and registered dental 
mechanic shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the Dentist’s 
Act, 948; 6 of 948. 


(iv) aregistered nurse, midwife, auxiliary nurse-midwife and health visitor 
who is registered as such under section I5A of the Indian Nursing Council 
Act, |947; 48 of 947. 


(v) a medical student who is undergoing education or training in any 
system of medicine recognized by any law for the time being in force; 


(vi) a nursing student who is undergoing education or training in nursing 
profession; 


(vii) para-medical workers, para-medical student; 


45 of 860. 


2 of 974. 


45 of 860. 


2 of 974. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(viii) diagnostic services provider, and ambulance driver and helper; 
(ix) security personnel designated by the healthcare institution; 

(x) administrative and other staff of the healthcare institution; 

(xi) Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA); and 


(xii) any other category of persons notified by the appropriate Government 
from time to time; 


(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(e) “property” means any property movable or immovable or medical equipment 
or medical machinery owned by or in possession of, or under the control of any 
healthcare personnel or healthcare Institution; 


(f) “verbal abuse’ means the words used with the intention to insult or humiliate 
the healthcare personnel; 


(g) “violence” includes any of the following acts committed by any person 
against healthcare personnel which causes or may cause— 


(i) harassment impacting the living or working conditions of such 
healthcare personnel and preventing them from discharging his duties; 


(ii) harm, injury, hurt, intimidation or danger to the life of such healthcare 
personnel, either within the premises of a healthcare institution or otherwise; 


(iii) obstruction or hindrance to such healthcare personnel in the 
discharge of his duties, either within the premises of a healthcare institution or 
otherwise; or 


(iv) loss or damage to any property or documents in the custody of, or in 
relation to, such healthcare personnel; and 


(h) words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the 
Indian Penal Code, |860 or in the Code of Criminal Procedure, |973 shall have the 
same meanings, respectively as assigned to them in those Codes. 


3. No person shall indulge in any act of violence against a healthcare personnel or Prohibition of 
cause any damage or loss to any property in a healthcare institution. 22300. 


4. (/) Whoever commits an act of verbal abuse to a healthcare personnel shall be Offences and 
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend up to three months, or with Penalties. 
fine which may extend up to fifty thousand rupees, or with both. 


(2) Whoever commits violence or abets or incites commission of violence against any 
healthcare personnel or abets or incites or causes damage or loss to any property of a 
healthcare institution, shall, upon conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than six months but which may extend up to five years, and with fine, 
which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend up to 
five lakh rupees; 


(3) Whoever, while committing violence as referred to in sub-section (2) causes 
grievous hurt as defined in section 320 of the Indian Penal Code, 860 to any healthcare 
personnel, shall, upon conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than three years, but which may extend up to seven years, and with fine, which 
shall not be less than two lakh rupees, but which may extend up to ten lakh rupees. 


5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, an Offence to be 


offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable. ead and 
non-bailable. 


Information, 
investigation 
and trial of 
offences. 


Composition 
of Certain 
Offences. 


Presumption 
as to certain 
offences and 
culpable 

mental state. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, !973,— 


(7) upon a written request of the aggrieved healthcare personnel, it shall be 
mandatory for the person in charge of a healthcare institution to inform the officer in 
charge of the concerned police station of the commission of an offence under this 
Act; 


(ii) on receiving a complaint either from the institution or the affected healthcare 
personnel, a First Information Report should be registered within one hour of receiving 
the complaint; 


(iii) any case registered under this Act shall be investigated by a police officer 
not below the rank of Inspector and investigation of such cases shall be completed 
within a period of thirty days from the date of registration of the First Information 
Report and such investigation shall be supervised by senior police officer not below 
the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police; 


(iv) in every inquiry or trial of a case under this act, the proceedings shall be 
held as expeditiously as possible, and in particular, when the examination of witnesses 
has once begun, the same shall be continued from day to day until all the witnesses 
in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds the adjournment of the 
same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded, and an 
endeavour shall be made to ensure that the inquiry or trial is concluded within a 
period of one year: 


Provided that where the trial is not concluded within the said period, the Judge 
shall record the reasons for not having done so: 


Provided further that the said period may be extended by such further period, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, but not exceeding six months at a time; 


(v) for the purpose of providing for speedy trial, all cases registered under this 
Act shall be tried in designated special courts, which the State Government shall, 
with the concurrence of the High Court by notification in the official Gazette, set up in 
each district; and 


(vi) for every Special Court the State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, designate Special Prosecutor for the purpose of conducting cases in 
that court. 


7. Where a person is prosecuted for committing an offence punishable under 
sub-section (/) and sub-section (2) of section 4, such offence may, with the permission of 
the Court, be compounded by the personnel against whom such act of violence is committed. 


8. (/) Where a person is prosecuted for committing an offence punishable under 
sub-section (3) of section 4, the Court shall presume that such person has committed such 
offence, unless the contrary is proved. 


(2) In any prosecution for an offence under sub-section (3) of section 4 which requires 
a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the Court shall presume the existence of 
such mental state, but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no 
such mental state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) a fact is said to be proved only when the Court believes it to exist beyond reasonable 
doubt and not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance of probability; 
and 


(b) “culpable mental state” includes intention, motive, knowledge of a fact and the 
belief in, or reason to believe, a fact. 


2 of 974. 


l of 890. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY | 


9. (J) In addition to the punishment provided for the offence punishable under 
sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of section 4, the convicted person shall be liable to pay, 
by way of compensation,— 


(i) such amount, as may be determined by the Court for causing hurt or grievous 
hurt to any healthcare personnel. 


(ii) in case of damage to any property, or loss caused, the compensation payable 
shall be twice the amount of fair market value of the damaged property or the loss 
caused, as may be determined by the Court. 


(2) If the convicted person does not pay the compensation granted the said sum shall 
be recovered as an arrear of land revenue under the Revenue Recovery Act, !890 in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


0. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not, save as otherwise 
expressly provided, in derogation of any other law for the time being in force. 


Il. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


2. (/) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act in respect of matters which do not fall within the purview of 
section II. 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 


(a) installation of CCTV cameras and round the clock Quick Reaction Teams 
with effective communication, security gadgets particularly at casualty, emergency 
and areas having high footfalls; 


(b) security of sensitive healthcare institution to be managed by a designated 
and trained force; 


(c) entry restriction of entry of undesirable persons in the healthcare institution 
premises and other areas as may be specified; 


(d) display of important information addressing the stakeholders in every 
healthcare institution and police station; 


(e) appointment of Nodal Officer to monitor registered cases of medical 
negligence; 


(f) expeditious filling up of vacant posts of doctors and para-medical staff in 
healthcare institution and Primary Health Centres (PHCs) to avoid excessive pressure 
on doctors and to maintain global doctor-patient ratio; 


(g) better infrastructural facilities and medical equipment and provision of extra 
monetary incentive for the doctors and para-medical staff serving in remote areas as 
compared to major and metro cities with better career prospects; and 


(A) standard operating procedures regarding the manner in which persons in 
custody, accused or otherwise are to be presented in healthcare institution and before 
healthcare personnel. 


Composition 
for acts of 
violence. 


Application of 
other laws not 
barred. 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make rules. 


Power of State 
Government 
to make rules. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The increasing and repeated instances of violence against healthcare personnel 
represents a complex and grave challenge that must be addressed on a priority basis. 
Violence in any form and in any setting is reprehensible. However, acts of violence against 


medical professionals and on healthcare institutions are the most extreme and should be 
dealt with an iron hand. 


While there is no central data on the number of assault cases against healthcare 
personnel or health facilities, the Indian Medical Association (IMA) estimates that 
75 percent of all doctors face some form of verbal and physical abuse during their service, 
with cases of violence severely underreported. International organizations, such as the 
World Health Organization (WHO) and the International Council of Nurses (ICN), have also 
recognized the issue of violence against healthcare workers as a global concern. 


The legislative lacunae only further complicate our ability to address this challenge. 
Currently, no national-level law, including the Indian Penal Code (IPC), 860 and Code of 
Criminal Procedure (CrPC), !973 comprehensively and categorically addresses the issue. 
State Laws vary: the existing laws are weak in their implementation, vary a lot and lack scope 
to protect all Healthcare personnel. Infact, several States and Union Territories have no 
laws at all. 


It is submitted that while ‘Health’ and ‘Law and Order’ are state subjects, the Parliament 
is competent to legislate on matters related to ‘Legal, Medical and other professions’ as 
listed in Entry 26, List 3 (Concurrent List) of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of 
India. Infact, in 209, the Central Government had introduced a draft Bill titled the Healthcare 
Service Personnel and Clinical Establishments (Prohibition of Violence and Damage to 
Property) Bill which would have made such violence a non-bailable and cognisable offence 
with a jail term of up to five years. But this was withdrawn before it could be considered by 
Parliament. 


Our healthcare professionals are neither adequately appreciated nor protected and it 
is imperative to realise that this is not just a medical fraternity issue. Violence against them 
also weakens the healthcare ecosystem and affects the quality of services provided to 
patients, in turn, leading to a further risk of violence. 


On May 0, 2023, a young doctor, committed to using her training and education in the 
serve of humanity, had her life tragically taken away from her at the hands of a patient she 
was seeking to heal. Her death must not just serve as a reminder of the consequences of our 
inaction but become a call to action, particularly towards ensuring that the legislative 
lacuna is addressed so that no doctor has to worry about their own safety in the line of duty. 


This, therefore, necessitates a comprehensive central legislation to put a check on 
such violence at the earliest, to promote a safe work environment for doctors and other 
healthcare personnel and to serve as a model for state laws. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DE Lut; SHASHI THAROOR 
July 3, 2023. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |! and Clause [2 of the Bill empower the Central Government and the State 
Government respectively to make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the 
rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


Butt No. 250 oF 2022 


A Bill to provide for prevention of violence against journalists and protection of 
journalists, their institutions, properties and for matters connected therewith or 


incidental thereto. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third year of Republic of India as follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Journalist (Prevention of Violence and Damage or Short title, 
Loss to the Property) Act, 2022. extent and 
commencement. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Violence 
against 
journalist to 
be punishable. 


Compensation. 


Cognizance of 
offence. 


Investigation. 


Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 


Application 
of Code of 
Criminal 
Procedure. 


Power to 
make rules. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “journalist” means a person whose principal avocation is that of a journalist 
and who is employed as such, either whole-time or part-time, in, or in relation to a 
visual or print media establishment, such as editor, a leader writer, news-editor, 
sub-editor, feature-writer, copy-tester, reporter, correspondent, cartoonist, 
news-photographer, news reader, news videographer but does not include any such 
person who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; 


(b) “institutions” includes any registered newspaper establishment, news 
channel establishment, news based electronic media establishment or news station 
establishment and all institutions of Journalist involved in discharge of his service as 
a Journalist; 


(c) “offenders” means a person who either by himself or as a Member or Leader 
of group of persons commits or attempt to commit, abate, provoke or incite the 
commission of violence under this Act; 


(d) “property” means any property movable or immovable, owned or in 
possession of or under the control of any journalist or any Institution for discharging 
his service or duty as a journalist; and 


(e) “violence” means an act which causes any harm, injury or endanger of life or 
intimidation, obstruction or harassment or coercion or assault of criminal force or 
threat to journalist in discharge of his service or duties or causes to be the reason for 
damage or loss to the property or reputation of a journalist or an institution. 


3. Whoever commits violence against a journalist shall be punished with imprisonment 
for one year or with imprisonment of either description of a term which shall not be less than 
one year and which may extend upto three years and shall also be liable to pay fine. 


4. In addition to the punishment specified under section 3, the offender shall be liable 
to pay compensation for damage or loss caused to the property of journalist or any Institution 
as may be determined by the Court and he shall also be liable to reimburse medical expenditure 
incurred by the journalist: 


Provided that if the offenders fails to pay the compensation and medical expenditure 
imposed, the same shall be recovered as if it were arrears of land revenue. 


5. Any offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable non-bailable and triable 
by the Court of Judicial Magistrate of First Class. 


6. Any case registered under section 3 shall be investigated by a Police Officer not 
below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police in such manner as may be prescribed. 


7. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of provisions 
of any other law for the time being in force. 


8. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973 (Act No. 2 of 974) shall 
apply to the proceedings as per the provisions of the Act. 


9. (/) The Central Government shall after taking consent of the Bar Council of India by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ll 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The violence against the Journalists are increasing. The journalist exposed to every 
kind of attack including police violence against the reporters and reprisals instigated by 
criminal groups or corrupt local officials. There have been consistent attacks on Journalists 
who question or criticise the ruling dispensation. The violence pervades the profession of 
journalism today. The Journalist in India face a range of threats including censorship, 
economic hardships and job insecurity. The journalists are routinely threatened, intimidated, 
arrested, booked and silenced. The situation adversely affect the right granted by 
Article l9(/) of the Constitution for freedom of speech and expression. The independent 
and fearless media is required to strengthen the democracy. 


Hence the protection of Journalists, their institutions and property against violence 
is necessitated. The Bill, therefore, seeks, to provide for the prevention of violence against 
the Journalists, their institutions and property. 


New DE Lut; N.K. PREMACHANDRAN 
November i9, 2022. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and State Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purpose of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details 
only, the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


Bell No. 257 of 2022 


A Bill to provide for prevention of violence against Advocates and protection of Advocates, 
their institutions, properties and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Advocates (Protection) Act, 2022. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Punishment 
for committing 
violence 
against 
advocate. 


Compensation 
for damages 
caused. 


Offence to be 
non-bailable. 


Jurisdiction. 


Advocate 
deemed to be 
officer to legal 
institution. 


Act not to be 
in derogation 
of other laws. 
Application of 
the Code of 
Criminal 
Procedure, 
973. 


Power to make 
rules. 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “advocate” shall have the same meaning as provided under Section 2 (/) (a) 
of the Advocates Act, 96]; 


(b) “institution” means all institutions discharging of legal services; 


(c) “offender” means a person who either by himself or as a member or leader of 
group of persons commits or attempt to commit, abate, provoke or incite the commission 
of violence under this Act; 


(d) “property” means any property movable or immovable, owned by or in 
possession of or under the control of any advocate or institution for discharging his 
service or duty as an advocate; and 


(e) “violence” means an act which causes any harm, injury or endanger of life or 
intimidation, obstruction or harassment or coercion or assault or criminal force or 
threat to advocate in discharge of his service or duties or causes to be the reason for 
damage or loss to the property or reputation of an advocate or an institution. 


3. Whoever commits violence against an advocate shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for two years or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine: 


Provided that if offender fails to pay the compensation and medical expenditure 
im- posed the same shall be recovered as if it were arrears of land revenue. 


4. In addition to the punishment specified in Section 3, the offender shall be liable to 
pay compensation for damage or loss caused to the property of an advocate as may be 
determined by the Court and he shall also be liable to reimburse medical expenditure incurred 
by the advocate. 


5. An offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable, non-bailable and triable 
by the Court of Sessions. 


6. Notwithstanding anything contained in Code of Criminal Procedure, !973 the Police 
Officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police shall investigate any offence under 
this Act. 


7. Any advocate appearing for a party before the court or tribunal or authority 
including police shall be deemed to be an officer of such institution and entitled for protection 
available to such officers as public servant. 


8. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of provisions 
of any other law for the time being in force. 


9. The provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, !973 shall apply to the proceedings 
as per the provisions of this Act. 


0. (/) The Central Government shall, after taking consent of the Bar Council of India, 
by notification in Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


25 of ॥967, 


2 of 974. 


2 of 974. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of 
Offenders in Havana, Cuba, !990 in which India was a participant has adopted the basic 


principles on the role of Lawyers. Clause |6 to l8 of the same guarantees for the functioning 
of Lawyer. 


The Supreme Court of India also observed that the bar is an extension of system of 
justice, an Advocate is an officer of Court. The recent incidents of assault, criminal force, 
intimidation and threats caused to Advocates while discharging their professional duties is 
also grave in nature. Advocates in due discharge of their professional duties also face the 
threat of malicious and frivolous prosecution by the rival parties including Police and other 
authorities. The United Nations Human Rights Council on Independence of Judges and 
Lawyers —A/HRC/RES/29/6 wherein, while acknowledging the fact that the principle of 
confidentiality in lawyers’ communication with clients is violated, and they are denied free 
access to their clients and documents it was decided as follows: 


“Calls upon all States to guarantee the independence of lawyers who promote and 
defend human rights. Provide assistance to human rights defenders, journalists and activists 
and their ability to perform their functions accordingly, including by taking effective 
legislative, law enforcement and other appropriate measures that will enable them to carry 
out their professional functions without interference, harassment, threats or intimidation of 
any kind”. 


The aforesaid United Nations Resolutions, Supreme Court Judgments and the recent 
incidents necessitated a legislation for the protection of advocates in the country. 


The Bill therefore seeks to provide for the prevention of violence against the 
Advocates, their institutions and property. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DE Lut; N.K. PREMACHANDRAN 
November 2, 2022. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause L0 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of 
legislative powers is of a normal character. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of article 20]. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Butt No. 25 of 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In article 20l of the Constitution, for the words “President shall declare”, the 
words, “President shall, within a period of six months from the date of receipt of message 
regarding declaration by the Governor that he reserves the Bill for consideration of the 
President, declare’’. 


STATEMENT OF OBJECT AND REASONS 
Article 20 of the Constitution specifically states that “When A Bill is reserved by a 
Governor for the consideration of President, the President shall declare either that he assents 


to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom”. But no time stipulation is provided in the 
Constitution. 


Due to the lack of time stipulation various Bills passed by the Legislature of different 
States are pending for long time without a declaration. If no decision is taken on the Bills 
passed by State Legislature it will adversely affect the Legislative process. The declaration 
regarding the assent is prolonged taking the advantage that there is no time stipulation. 
Hence it is necessary to amend article 20 by inserting specific time limit for assents to the 
Bill by the President. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DE Lut; N.K. PREMACHANDRAN 
November 2, 2022. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l7 


Bit No. 228 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Census Act, /946. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. () This Act may be called the Census (Amendment) Bill, 2022. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect. 


37 of 948. 2. For section 3 of the Census Act, 948, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), Substitution of 


the following section shall be substituted, namely:— new section 
for section 3. 


“3. (l) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, Central 
declare its intention of taking a census in the whole or any part of the territories to Government 
which this Act extends, decennially (every ten years), and thereupon the census shall °° ‘ke census. 
be taken. 


(2) The Central Government shall release the latest Census data in the year 2024 
and thereupon the Census shall be conducted and be made public decennially: 


Provided that in exceptional circumstances, the release of Census data may be 
delayed by not more than two years: 


Provided further that if when the Central Government fails to release decennial 
Census data, the Central Government shall lay the reasons for such delay before each 
House of Parliament and get approval of the House with at least two thirds majority.” 


Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,— 


“(a) ‘census’ shall include information about the education, income and 
caste of the population (individuals or households), in addition to the 
demographic parameters; 


(b) “income” of the population shall include the source of income, level 
of income and any other parameters representing disposable income of the 
households; and 


(c) “caste of population” shall mean the self declaration of the name of 
the caste and sub-caste by individuals or households.”. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Census Act, 948 governs the conduct and release of census data in India. This 
law in its present form does not have provisions mandating the timing and frequency of 
census in our country. For a diverse country like India, census data is very crucial as it 
provides information about the growth, development of citizens across gender, communities, 
age groups and regions. This serves as an important tool through which the Government 
can design new policies for population groups that are stagnating and identify target 
populations for their policies. 


In India where there is much diversity in social, income and education status, census 
can also validate backwardness of certain communities. In K.Krishna Murthy and others 
v/s. Union of India (200), the Supreme Court held that it cannot comment on the quantum 
of reservation provided for Other Backward Classes (OBCs) without contemporaneous 
empirical data about the nature and implications of backwardness. It held the Executive 
responsible for conducting rigorous empirical inquiry into the patterns of backwardness 
that act as barriers to political participation of OBCs. 


Following the judgment, to study the social, educational and economic backwardness 
of OBCs the Centre initiated empirical enquiry into OBCs on 02 October, 20 in the form of 
Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC), 20. But this SECC, 20] data is withheld by 
the Central Government on the pretext of inaccuracy of the data, when in fact the Registrar 
General and Census Commissioner of India has deposed before the Standing Committee on 
Rural Development in 206 that data has been examined and 98.87% data on individuals’ 
caste and religion is error free. The Central Government contradicted itself by further claiming 
in the Parliament that no study was undertaken by them on OBCs. 


Since the political participation of more than 56,000 OBCs in Maharashtra and 9 lakh 
OBCs across India, through reservation in local Government is threatened, it is imperative 
to conduct a census that includes information about the education, income and caste of the 
population, in addition to the demographic parameters. 


This Bell aims to precisely do this, by stipulating timing and frequency of census and 
by inclusion of caste, income related parameters in the regular census itself. This provision 
does away with the need for undertaking a completely new Socio-Economic and Caste 
Census. The Bill, thus, bestows liability on the Central Government to conduct empirical 
study on the progress and backwardness of various communities across the country and 
release the data decennially (every ten years). 


Political reservation of communities and their participation in local-self government is 
important as it empowers the community that the elected representative belongs to. The 
objectives of democratic decentralisation are not only to bring governance closer to the 
people, but also to make it more participatory, inclusive and accountable to the weaker 
sections of society. Many States including Maharashtra, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh and Kerala are experiencing roadblocks to conducting local body elections 
due to a lack of empirical data on OBCs. 


New DELHI ; SUPRIYA SULE 
9 November, 2022. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


Butt No. 273 of 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and 
their Rehabilitation Act, 2073. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers 
and their Rehabilitation (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 2 of the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their 
Rehabilitation Act, 203 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (/), 


(i) for clauses (d) and (e) the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(d) “hazardous cleaning” by an employee, in relation to sewer or septic 
tank means entering into a septic tank or sewer to manually clean it;’ 


(e) “insanitary latrine” means a latrine which requires human excreta to be 
cleaned or otherwise handled manually, either in situ or in an open drain or pit 
into which the excreta is discharged or flushed out, before the excreta fully 
decomposes. 


(ii) in clause (g), in the explanation for clause (a), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely: 


‘(a) “engaged or employed” means being engaged or employed on a 
regular, contract, private, casual or daily wage basis or any other forms of 
employment;’ 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Amendment 
of section 6. 


Insertion of 
new sections 
TA, 7B, 7C 
and 7D. 
Conversion of 
manhole into 
machine hole 
in mission 
mode. 


Central to 
procure sewer 
and septic 
tank cleaning 
machine. 


Licence to 
Private 
Entities. 


Prohibition 
on cleaning 
of sewer and 
septic tanks 
without 
machines 
approved. 


Substitution of 
new section 
for section 8. 


Penalty for 
contravention 
of section 5 
or section 6 
or 

section 7. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


3. In section 6 of the principle Act, after sub-section (2) the following sub-section 


shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(3). If any government agency, body or officer engage in a contract with a 
private entity for sewer or septic tank cleaning and that private entity employ manual 
scavengers for the purpose, then the government officer concerned shall also be 
liable under this act and shall be punished herewith under section 8.”. 


4. After section 7 of the Principle Act, the following sections shall be inserted namely: — 


“7A. The Central Government shall convert every manhole in the country to 
machine hole by the December 2024 in mission mode. 


“7B. The Central Government shall procure sewer and septic tank cleaning 
machines and employ person either on contractual or permanent basis by 
October 2023: 


Provided that:— 


(a) preference in employment shall be given to those who left manual scavenging 
and are currently unemployed but willing to work with machines. 


(b) minimum wage per day of the persons employed shall be not less than one 
thousand rupees. 


(c) person so employed shall be given health insurance by Union Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare and a register in this behalf shall be maintained by the 
Ministry of all such employees, whether contractual or permanent.” 


“7C.() No private entity shall employ workers for sewer and septic tank cleaning, 
using machines unless the requisite licence has been issued by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs. 


(2) For issuance of licenses, the private entity shall submit details of 
machines, its memorandum and additional details covered under the Companies 
Act, 203 in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) Every employee employed by the private entity shall be eligible for 
the benefit available under section 7B. 


(4) The Ministry of Home Affairs shall have power to conduct enquiry 
into the working of the Private Entity as and when it deems fit and it may revoke 
its license if private entity is found guilty of violation of any provision of this 
Act. 


7D. No manual scavenger shall be employed in cleaning of sewer and 
septic tanks without machines that have been approved solely by the Union 
Ministry of Home Affairs.” 


5. For section 8 of the principle Act, following section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“8. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 5 or section 6 or section 7 
shall for the first contravention be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to five years or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees or with both, 
and for any subsequent contravention with imprisonment which may extend to 
seven years or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.”. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY | 


6. For section 9 of the Principle Act, the following sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“9. Whoever found guilty for the death of manual scavenger due to hazardous 
cleaning of sewer and septic tank shall be punished under section 304 of Indian Penal 
Code, 860 and the case shall be tried by a judicial officer with rank of not less than 
judicial Magistrate first class; 


Provided that the expenditure of the court proceedings on behalf of deceased 
manual scavenger shall be borne by the concerned State Government in case of State 
judiciary and in case appeal goes to Supreme Court, the expenditure shall be borne by 
the Central Government.” 


9A. The dependent family members of the deceased manual scavengers who 
has died due to hazardous cleaning of sewer and septic tanks shall be compensated 
with an amount not less than twenty lakh, within two months of death by concerned 
appropriate State Government.” 


7. In section L0 of the principle Act, for the words “except upon a complaint’, the 
words, “either suo moto or upon a complaint” shall be substituted. 


8. In section [3 of the principle Act, in sub-section (/) inserted after clause (f), the 
following clause shall be namely:— 


“(fa). He shall be given additional five per cent horizontal reservation apart from 
the existing Scheduled Casts or the Scheduled Tribes reservation in education and 
employment opportunities by 3lst May, 2023”. 


9. In section 20 of the principle Act, 


(a) after sub-section (/), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
“Provided that at least six inspectors shall be appointed in each district” 


(b) in sub-section (2) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(da) maintaining a register scavengers present in his district and record 
deaths of manual scavengers happened during hazardous cleaning of sewer 
and septic tank;”. 


0. For section 2 of the principle Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


# 2], Offences under this Act shall be tried by not less than a first class judicial 
magistrate. 


(a) An appeal against the order of judicial Magistrate First Class under 
sub-section (/) shall be filed either to the High Court or to the Supreme Court within 
ninety days of the judgement and appeal shall lie with district and session judge.”’. 


IL. In Section 3] of the Principal Act, in Sub-Section (/) after clause (d) the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(da) conduct survey and invite application for identification of manual 
scavengers to be filled by the applicant on its website or directly by requested post or 
through mail: 


(db) inquire into the application within fifteen days of receipt of such application 
and reject or accept it within this time and the intimation of rejection or acceptance 
shall be sent immediately on the fifteenth day to the applicant; 


Substitution of 
new section 
for section 9. 


Penalty in 
case of death 
of Manual 
Scavenger due 
to Hazardous 
cleaning of 
sewer and 
septic tank. 


Compensation 
to the 
dependent 
family 
members of 
deceased 
manual 
scavenger. 


Amendment 
of section 0. 


Amendment 
of section 3. 


Amendment 
of section 20. 


Amendment 
of section 2]. 


Offences to be 
tried by a 
judicial 
magistrate 
court. 


Amendment 
of section 3]. 


Insertions of 
new section 
33A. 


Awareness 
Programs and 
introducing 
chapter on 
Manual 
Scavenging in 
India in 
school 
curriculum. 


Insertions of 
new section 
35A. 


A Centralized 
Web 
Application 
where people 
can upload 
videos 
depicting 
manual 
scavenging. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(dc) identify a person to be a manual scavenger either suo moto or through the 
help of local authorities or any non-Governmental Organisation. 


(dd) review application of a migrant manual scavengers for identification and 
being accepted as manual scavengers he shall be provided all the benefits available 
under this Act and provide assistance as mentioned in this act: 


Provided that the migrant manual scavenger shall be a permanent resident of 
that place at least for last five years from the date of filling of application for 
identification.” 


2. After Section 33 of the principle Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“33A. The Central Government shall start awareness programs in general public 
to attract attention to problems of manual scavenging in India and for this purpose a 
separate chapter shall be introduced in school curriculum for students above 6th 
class, to create awareness and address this discriminatory practice.”. 


3. After Section 35 of the principle Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“35A. A video application on the internet shall be maintained by the Central 
Government where any person can upload videos of manual scavengers indulging in 
hazardous cleaning of sewer and septic tanks with relevant information including 
place and people involved. 


Provided that:— 


(a) general public shall have access to view every uploaded videos on the 
application; 

(b) the identity of the person who had uploaded video shall be kept secret; and 

(c) only special inspector shall have a direct access to uploader’s identity and 
he shall investigate the case within thirty days and upload the summary of the case 


and the action taken under the video on the application, barring the identity of the 
parties involved.”. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 
203 was enacted to completely ban manual scavenging in the country. It contains detailed 
provisions to eradicate this discriminatory and menacing practice. However, even after a 
decade of enforcing the Bill, Manual Scavenging still persists in the Country. Still, people 
die cleaning sewers and septic tanks. They are neither provided with any safety gears, nor 
a decent wage. Till date, a specific caste is made to do this menial job. They are stigmatized 
as soon as they are born and even in death, they are given no dignity. Throughout their life, 
they inhale toxic gases, are made to clean man holes with bare body and in case of mishaps, 
better to be described a murder; they are given no justice. It is very unfortunate that since 
its inception, hardly any conviction has been recorded in a manual scavengers’ death case 
under this act. 


According to the Government’s reply this year in the Parliament, 347 people died 
during sewer and septic tanks cleaning in the last five years (20!7-2022). The numbers are 
so grossly under reported, that it makes it hard to rely on them. As per the National Safai 
Karamchari Finance and Development Corporation’s 20th Annual Report (206-7) there 
were 26 lakh insanitary latrines in the country, of which 3.29 lakh were in urban areas and 
2.7] lakh in rural areas. The report states that as of 3lst March 207, |2,742 manual scavengers 
have been identified in |3 states, which is prima facie disproportionate. It is inconceivable 
that [3,000 manual scavengers can excavate 26 lakh insanitary latrines. Under the Swachh 
Bharat Mission, sanitary latrines are being built in large numbers displacing insanitary ones 
but it has aggravated the problem instead of reducing it. These sanitary latrines require 
major buildup of sewer and septic tanks which in absence of machines and machine holes 
are to be cleaned by manual scavengers only. 


A very large numbers of manual scavengers are contractually employed by private 
entities. Their minimum pay is not fixed and they are not given any social security or health 
and financial benefits. Municipalities provide the contract to these private entities and 
often turn a blind eye when sewers and manholes are cleaned by these manual scavengers 
in direct contact with human excreta and filth. Several instances have been reported when 
District Magistrates refuse to acknowledge manual scavengers in order to provide them 
rehabilitation under this act. In 208, insanitary latrines were built for a religious festival in 
Karnataka and Avarnas were brought from Uttar Pradesh to clean these toilets. Permission 
to do all this was granted by none other than the deputy commissioner, who is supposed to 
be responsible for the implementation of the 203 Act. As far as Panchayats are concerned, 
they are mostly ruled by caste based hierarchies. Manual scavengers even face banishment 
from the village when they come out as manual scavengers to the concerned authorities of 
the villages. 


Vigilance committee, State and Centre committee meetings hardly take place and there 
is no accountability as such to keep a check on their working. Lack of efficient implementation 
of this Act has resulted in hundreds of deaths across the country in sewers and septic 
tanks. Here, arises a need to make this act more efficient and make concerned authorities 
accountable. 


Hence, this Bill. 


New DELHI ; SUPRIYA SULE 
November 2, 2022. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of Bill vide proposed new sections 7A and 7B provides that the Central 
Government shall procure machines for cleaning sewer and septic tanks and convert every 
man hole in the country to machine hole. Clause |2 vide proposed section 33A provides for 
the Central Government to start awareness programms in general public to attract attention 
to problems of manual scavengers. Clause |3 vide proposed section 35A provides that the 
Central Government shall introduce a web application where people can upload videos if 
they encounter any scene of manual scavenging. The Bell, therefore, if enacted, would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about ten thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of India is likely to be 
involved. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


Butt No. 255 6 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Representation of the People Act, /9509. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2022. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


43 of 950. 2. In section 23 of the Representation of the People Act, 950,— Amendment 
of section 23. 
(i) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted:— 


“(5A) The collected Aadhaar data shall be discarded within three hours 
of its intended use and in case of violation or any leak of the Aadhaar data, the 
Election Commission shall be liable for it and may be sued for compensation: 


Provided that the Electoral Registration Officer may ask the person to 
permanently link only his Aadhaar Biometric Data to his Election Photo Identity 
Card (EPIC) and in case of affirmation, shall update the same in Electoral Roll in 
such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided further that it shall be the duty of Election Commission to keep 
the collected data safe and it shall not be used for any other purposes or to be 
shared to any other authority or institution or private entity. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section “liability” means 
that if any Employee of Election Commission violates provision of this act, the 
Election Commission shall be the tortfeasor or defendant in the court of law, 
representing the accused and paying liability as such.’’. and, 


(ii) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(6A) (/). The Electoral Registration Officer shall record biometric data of 
fingerprint and iris scan for every new entry, application, replacement request 
and alteration request for the EPIC and issue a unique identification number in 
case of any new entry, replacement request or alteration request: 


Provided that the Electoral Registration Officer shall first check whether 
Biometric data of the new entrant, while applying for EPIC is already available in 
the electoral roll or not. 


(2) The biometric identification data along with the original EPIC may be 
used at the election booth to prevent electoral fraud including preventing 
multiple or duplicate entry of a person in electoral roll by initiation of identification 
through biometric data.”’. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


In December 202], Parliament passed The Election Laws (Amendment) Bill to amend 
the Representation of the People Act, !950 and the Representation of the People Act, 95 
and to give powers to Electoral Registration Officer to ask Aadhaar number during registration 
of Voter ID or any further updating. The purpose is to authenticate the entries in electoral 
roll and to identify registration of name of the same person in the electoral roll of more than 
one constituency or more than once in the same constituency. However, the Act doesn’t 
mention how exactly Aadhaar number would be used for the purpose. Even though, the 
submission is voluntary and doesn’t attract deletion of the person’s name from electoral roll 
upon non-submission of Aadhaar number but linking Aadhaar ID with Voter ID seems 
unsettling. Aadhaar number which has the same meaning as assigned to it in ‘clause (a) of 
section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and 
Services) Act, 20l6.’ contains vast information about the person. It is that Unique 
Identification number which an Indian resident use in almost every official and unofficial 
work ranging from applying for jobs and Government schemes to book a hotel room and 
even to get an entry in a premises. 


Given its importance, arises a need for securing its data; but UIDAT has eventually 
failed in doing so. In 208, nearly |.! billion registered Citizens Aadhaar data was breached 
and sold for 500 rupees by criminals for l0 minutes. In June 2022 around I! crore Indian 
farmers’ Aadhaar data was leaked from Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi website. Given 
the vastness of information linked to one’s Aadhaar ID and its unsettling record of being 
leaked, it seems perturbing to link it to Voter ID. Moreover, the Act doesn’t mention the use 
of one’s Aadhaar if the person hadn’t provided his Aadhaar ID while registering for the 
Electoral roll in past. The Act should have envisaged to give Voter ID a Unique Identification 
itself so as to permanently give a person a single unique number throughout his life which 
would remain same even if he replace his Voter ID multiple times at multiple places. This Bill 
tends to do the same. 


The Bill makes it mandatory for Electoral Registration Officer to delete Aadhaar data 
of the person within three hours of its use from the main server but may permanently save 
Aadhaar biometric data with Voter ID upon taking consent from the concerned person. The 
Bill also provided that biometric data shall be required for new registration of Voter ID, any 
alteration or replacement request and every subsequent movement related to the person’s 
Voter ID and shall be updated in the Electoral Roll in the main server. The Bill intends to stop 
multiple entries via use of biometric data. Let’s put it this way. As linking Aadhaar ID with 
Voter ID could pose a threat to Privacy, the entire data minus biometric one shall be deleted 
within three hours of use. That biometric data once stored in main server shall come in 
handy when the person go for second entry in electoral roll as every new entry request 
requires biometric data submission. The main server would notify the Electoral Registration 
Officer if that person is already enrolled in Electoral roll, with the use of biometric data. This 
way, Aadhaar number could be used to identify multiple entries and its deletion within three 
hours would put Privacy issues at bay. Use of biometric data would pave way for establishing 
permanent unique identification of the person for life. 


The menace of multiple or duplicate entries in the Electoral roll put democratic structure 
of the country at risk. Conducting free and fair election in the largest Democracy of the 
world is a task that requires reformed and novel practices which doesn’t undermine citizens 
rights but strengthen them in the process. 


Hence this Bell. 


New DELHI; SUPRIYA SULE 
November 2, 2022. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


Butt No. 276 oF 2022 


A Bill to provide the right to paid leave during the period of menstruation for working 
women, menstrual leave for female students and free access to menstrual health 
products including menstrual cups, tampons and_ sanitary pads irrespective of 
status or region and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Right to Women to Menstrual Leave and Free Access 
to Menstrual Health Products Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) “Authority” means the Female Menstrual Health Products Price Regulating 
Authority established under section 4; 


(c) “educational institution” means any secondary or higher secondary school, 
college or institution or University imparting higher education; 


(d) “establishment” include an office of the appropriate Government, quasi 
Government or department including telegraph office, post office, telephone exchange, 
a mine, a plantation, an agricultural field, a hospital or nursing home, a shop or any 
business establishment, a brick kiln, construction site, any banking establishment, 
any private office or house, any school, college university or like institution, 
establishment for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances and 
any other such place where a women is employed for any work whatsoever; 


(e) “factory” means a factory as defined in the Factories Act, 948; 


(f) “industry” means an industry as defined in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947; 


(g) “menstrual health products” means products used to absorb or collect 
menstrual flow including menstrual cups, tampons, sanitary towels, panty liners, 
sanitary pads and articles; 


(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(i) “working woman” means a woman who is employed whether directly or 
indirectly through any agency or contractor, as the case may be, for wages in any 
establishment, factory or industry. 


3. Every women shall be entitled to the following rights: — 


(a) In case of working women— Right to paid leave and absence from work for three 
days during her menstruation in any establishment registered with the appropriate 
Government; 


(b) In case of female students— Right to leave of absence from educational institution 
for three days during her menstruation; and 


(c) Right to access to free menstrual heath products. 


4. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish 
on an Authority to be known as the Female Menstrual Health Products Price Regulating 
Authority for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Right of 
Women. 


Establish of the 
Female 
Menstrual 
Health Products 
Price Regulating 
Authority. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(2) The Authority shall consist of,— 

(a) Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Chairperson, ex-officio; 

(b) Union Minister of Women and Child Development, Vice-Chairman, ex-officio; 

(c) Union Minister of Finance, Education and Labour and Employment, Member, 
ex-officio; and 

(d) six other member to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner 
as may be prescribed: 


Provided that out of six nominated members, four shall be women. 


(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of 
members nominated under clause (d) of sub-section () shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Authority shall meet at least once in a month and shall regulate its own 
procedure. 
Function of 5. The Authority shall, — 


the Authority. 
(a) ensure availability and distribution of menstrual health products free of cost 


to every women; 
(b) regulate the prices of menstrual health products; 


(c) create awareness, responsiveness and consciousness regarding the 
importance of menstrual health products; 


(d) identify and give priority in access to menstrual health products to target 
group including women not enrolled in full-time education or living in poverty; 


(९) maintain accounts in accordance with international standards; 


(f) collaborate with the appropriate Government regarding availability menstrual 
health products under their jurisdiction; and 


(g) undertake such other functions as it deems necessary for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 


Duties of Local 6. Every local authority shall endeavour to ensure that menstrual health products are 

PIG available free of cost to every women under its Jurisdiction. 

Grievances 7. The Central Government shall for the purposes of redressal of complaints under 

inte this Act establish grievance redressal mechanism in such manner as may be prescribed. 
orum. 

Central 8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the Parliament by 

Government law in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, to the State Governments for 

to provide the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 

adequate fund. 

Act not in 9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 

P 8 y 

derogation of — law for the time being in force. 

other law. 

Power to 0. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 

make rules. for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in the making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Undoubtedly, menstrual awareness has increased in urban areas, with more women 
opting for sanitary pads rather than cloth. Not only women, people, in general, have developed 
a better understanding of menstruation in metro areas. Innovations in products are 
happening, like menstrual cups, menstrual discs, and much more. 


Unfortunately, society identifies women as the other half, but only for specific, indoor- 
bound duties, highlighting the biological difference as a mark of inferiority. Menstruation 
and its debilitating nature, though a reality, are often hushed. 


According to research, approximately 40 per cent of girls miss school during their 
periods. The type of absorbent used, lack of privacy at school, restrictions imposed on girls 
during menstruation, the mother’s education, and the source of menstrual information were 
all found to be important factors in school absenteeism. Nearly 65 per cent said it had an 
impact on their daily activities at school and that they had to skip class tests and lessons as 
a consequence of discomfort, anxiety, shame, and concerns about leakage and uniform 
discolouration. 


While access to menstrual products is critical, equal attention should be paid to the 
mental trauma that girls experience during their periods. Girls should receive comprehensive 
counselling on menstruation and other associated issues. 


The need is to ensure that all who crosses the age of menarche may avail paid leave for 
three days for working women and three days of leave with attendance and compensation 
of academic activities for girl students who menstruate. It is also required that access to 
menstrual products, at no cost shall be available to them as and when required. 


It is intended to remove any barriers which stop women, girls and trans people 
accessing female health and hygiene products — items which are essential to the health, 
hygiene and wellbeing of those who has crossed menarche till the period of menopause. 


The idea behind the proposed Bell is that certain circumstances make access to 
sanitary products difficult for women and trans people. These include homelessness, 
coercive, controlling and violent relationships and health conditions such as endometriosis. 


This Bill provides for the novel idea of a type of leave where women and trans women 
may have the option of taking a paid leave for three days from their workplace during the 
period of menstruation. Here ‘leave’ shall mean full entitlement of a women to complete 
wages during the period of menstruation subject to maximum of 3 days per month for a 
working women and of 3 days for a non-working women including students. 


Countries like Japan, Taiwan, China, Korea, Indonesia, and Mexico have introduced 
within their legal framework the policy of menstrual leave, for the benefit and the welfare of 
women. Sanitation is considered to be the central pillar of health according to the World 
Health Organisation. Our directive principles of states policy propound that necessary 
provisions shall be made by the state to improve health and hygiene of its citizens. Several 
companies and organizations in the United Kingdom and Australia have also introduced 
within their local constitution, a policy of menstrual leave. But a legal framework in India is 
not envisaged yet. 


The concept of menstrual leave is an expansion of article 2, the right to life under the 
constitution of India; one should not be expected to work during menstruation, because of 
the menstrual pains, and the body being weak and vulnerable, basic sanitation problems 
like lack of proper sanitary facilities, lack of clean, safe, and private facilities for women, and 
lack of adequate menstruation alternatives result in the infringement of their basic right to 
health and also human right to health. 


Moreover, due to hormonal actions most menstruating girls and women are having 
mental issues facing those days. Worrying about their physically unfit situation and the 
availability of hygiene facilities, they feel tortured. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Our Constitution is always concerned about the protection of the vulnerable as it is 
committed to the principle of inclusiveness. Prioritising women’s health and safety is the 
primary sign of a civilized and egalitarian society. 


Many of developing and developed countries are taking the happiness index to 
evaluate the good governance of their state. As our country is also looking forward to such 
new scales for measuring the well-being of the people, we should also think about such 
revolutionary ideas out of the traditional way of thinking. It is sure that this Bill will be a 
milestone in that category which concerns the happiness of nearly half of the population of 
India. 


Considering all the objectives stated above, in line with the principle of inclusiveness 
as envisioned by our founding fathers, there is a greater urgency for such a Bell. 


Hence this Bell. 


New DE Lut; HIBI EDEN 
November 2, 2022 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of Female Menstrual Health Products 
Price Regulating Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act. It also provides for 
appointment of member to the Authority. Clause 7 provides for the Central Government to 
establish grievances redressal mechanism for redressal of complaints under this Act. Clause 
8 provides for the Central Government to provide requisite funds. The Bell, therefore, if 
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an 
annual recurring expenditure of rupees fifteen hundred crore is likely to be incurred from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause L0 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 


out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3] 


Bit No. 08 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the protection, enrichment and welfare of Pokkali farmers and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Pokkali Farming (Protection, Enrichment and Welfare) 
Act, 2023. 
(2) It extends to the whole territory of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date, not being later than three months 


from the date of assent of the President, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Declaration 
of Pokkali 
Farming as an 
industry. 


Measures of 
Pokkali 
farming. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 

Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “pokkali farming” means the farming of paddy and prawn in a coordinated 
manner in the coastal areas of the country; 


(b) “coastal areas” means the areas specified as such by the Central Government 
by notification in the Official Gazette; and 


(c) “farmer” means a person engaged in pokkali farming. 
CHAPTER IT 
PROTECHTION AND ENRICHMENT OF POKKALI FARMING 


3. The Central Government shall declare pokkali farming as an industry and shall take 
necessary steps to provide all necessary facilities and support for the growth and 
development of the industry. 


4. The Central Government shall take necessary measures for the protection of pokkali 
farming, including,— 


(a) measures to protect the rights of the farmers; 
(b) measures to prevent the exploitation of the farmers; 
(c) measures to ensure that the farmers get a fair price for their produce; 


(d) measures to prevent the conversion of pokkali farming land for other 
purposes; 


(e) measures to provide technical support and assistance to the farmers; 
(f) measures to promote research and development in the field of pokkali farming; 


(g) measures to provide financial assistance to the farmers for the purpose of 
improving the quality of their produce; 


(h) measures to provide market support to the farmers; and 
(i) measures to promote the export of Pokkali farming produce. 
CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANEOUS 


5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


6. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty: 

Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


7. () The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: 


(a) the manner in which the protection and enrichment of pokkali farming shall 
be carried out; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


(b) the manner in which the rights of the farmers shall be protected; 
(c) the manner in which the exploitation of the farmers shall be prevented; 


(d) the manner in which the farmers shall be provided with a fair price for their 
produce; 


(e) the manner in which the conversion of pokkali farming land shall be prevented; 


(f) the manner in which technical support and assistance shall be provided to 
the farmers; and 


(g) the manner in which research and development in the field of pokkali farming. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


The Pokkali farming system, which involves the coordinated cultivation of paddy and 
prawn in the coastal areas, is a unique and important aspect of the Indian agricultural sector. 
Despite its significance, this traditional system has been facing various challenges in recent 
years, such as land conversion, exploitation of farmers, and a lack of technical support and 
financial assistance. 


The need is to provide for the protection and enrichment of Pokkali farming, so as to 
preserve this traditional system and ensure its growth and development. It is also required 
to declare Pokkali farming as an industry and provide all necessary facilities and support for 
its growth and development. It also provides for measures to protect the rights of farmers, 
prevent their exploitation, and ensure they receive a fair price for their produce. Measures 
to promote and encourage the growth of Pokkali farming, including providing technical 
support, promoting research and development, and providing financial assistance to farmers 
for the purpose of improving the quality of their produce is also required to be taken. 


The present Bill aims to address the challenges faced by Pokkali farmers and ensure 
that this unique and valuable system continues to thrive and contribute to the Indian 
agricultural sector. 


The Bill, therefore, proposed for the protection and enrichment of Pokkali farming, so 
as to ensure the growth and development of this important traditional system and the well- 
being of its farmers. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI ; HIBI EDEN 
March (3, 2023. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for Central Government to take various measures for the 
protection and enrichment of pokkali farming. Clause 5 provides for the Central Government 
to provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated 
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees hundred crore per annum would be involved 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


Butt No. 05 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the protection of healthcare professionals from violence, harassment, 
and acts of aggression in the course of their duty and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


WHEREAS violence, harassment and acts of aggression against healthcare 
professionals have become a growing concern in the country, posing a threat to their 
physical and mental wellbeing, thereby affecting the quality of healthcare services in the 
country. 


AND WHEREAS the existing laws to deal with such incidents are inadequate and 
require a comprehensive legislation to protect healthcare professionals from such violence 
and harassment. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Healthcare Professionals (Protection from Violence 
and Harassment) Act, 2023. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Offence of 
violence and 
harassment 
against 
healthcare 
professionals. 


Protection 
and 
compensation 
for healthcare 
professionals. 


Obligations of 
hospitals. 


Cognizance 
and 
investigation 
of offences. 


Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(2) It shall extend to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(/) “healthcare professional” means any person who is registered under any 
law for the time being in force and is involved in the delivery of healthcare services, 
including doctors, nurses, pharmacists, and other medical and paramedical staff; 


(2) “hospital” means any institution, whether run by the Government or private, 
which provides healthcare services to the public; 


(3) “patient” means any person who seeks healthcare services from a healthcare 
professional; 


(4) “violence” means any act of physical or mental harm, including verbal 
abuse, threats, intimidation, or damage to property, which is committed against a 
healthcare professional in the course of their duty; and 


(5) “harassment” means any unwanted conduct, which has the purpose or 
effect of violating the dignity of a healthcare professional in the course of their duty. 


3. (7) Whoever commits an act of violence or harassment against a healthcare 
professional in the course of his duty shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to rupees five lakh. 


(2) The punishment provided under sub-section (/) shall be in addition to any other 
punishment provided for the offence under any other law for the time being in force. 


4. () Any healthcare professional who is a victim of violence or harassment in the 
course of his duty shall be entitled to protection and compensation under this Act. 


(2) The Central Government shall establish a mechanism to provide protection and 
compensation to healthcare professionals who are victims of violence or harassment in the 
course of their duty in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The compensation provided under sub-section (2) shall be in addition to any 
other compensation payable under any other law for the time being in force. 


5. Every hospital shall,:— 


(a) take all necessary measures to prevent violence and harassment against 
healthcare professionals in the course of their duty; 


(b) establish a mechanism for reporting incidents of violence and harassment 
against healthcare professionals; and 


(c) provide necessary support and assistance to healthcare professionals who 
are victims of violence or harassment in the course of their duty. 


6. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, |973, 
an offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable. 


(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act except on a complaint 
made by the victim or the hospital where the victim was employed or associated. 


7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds forthe implementation of the provisions of the Act. 


8. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


9. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Power to 
make rules. 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The healthcare professionals of our country are the backbone of our healthcare 
system, and their safety and security is of paramount importance to ensure that quality 
healthcare services are available to the people. The instances of violence and harassment 
against healthcare professionals are increasing at an alarming rate, which poses a serious 
threat to their physical and mental wellbeing, and also affects the quality of healthcare 
services in the country. 


According to a survey, close to seventy-five per cent. of doctors in the country had 
faced physical abuse of some kind, and demands for a comprehensive legislation to check 
violence against healthcare professionals have been growing louder. The existing laws to 
deal with such incidents were weak and inadequate, and there is a need for a stringent law 
to prevent such incidents. 


The proposed Bill aims to provide a comprehensive legal framework for the protection 
of healthcare professionals from violence and harassment in the course of their duty. The 
Bill seeks to define the offences of violence and harassment against healthcare professionals 
and provides for stringent punishment for the same. 


The Bill also provides for the establishment of a mechanism for the protection and 
compensation of healthcare professionals who are victims of violence or harassment, and 
imposes obligations on hospitals to prevent and report such incidents. 


In view of the above, it is proposed to enact a law to ensure the safety and security 
of healthcare professionals healthcare services. 


Hence this Bill. in the country and to maintain the quality of healthcare services. 


New DELHuI; HIBI EDEN 
March 9, 2023. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the Central Government to provide compensation to 
all the healthcare professionals who are victim of violence or harassment in the court of his 
duty. Clause 6 provides for the Central Government to provide funds for carrying out the 
purpose of this Act. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. It is estimated that about rupees five hundred crore will be incurred per annum from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character. 


8 of 20]3. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


Butt No. 28[ oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Companies Act, 2073. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) Save as otherwise provided for in this Act, it shall come into force on such date as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different 
dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such 
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision. 


2. In section 2 of the Companies Act, 20l3 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
Act,— 


(i) for sub-section (52), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(52) “listed Company” means a company or an entity which has listed, 
on a recognized stock exchange(s), the designated securities issued by it or 
designated securities issued under schemes managed by it, in accordance with 
the listing agreement entered into between the entity and the recognized stock 
exchange(s); and 
(ii) after sub-section (56), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 

“506A. “National Business Responsibility Standard Board” means National 
Business Responsibility Standard Board constituted under section l38A.”. 

3. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause (m), the following 
clause be inserted, namely:— 

“(ma) the reporting framework as outlined in the Form V, under Rule 4 of 
Environment Protection Rules, 986, under the Environment (Protection) Act, 986 or 
as prescribed by the National Business Responsibility Standard Board.”. 

4. In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section (J), 

“for the words “all the documents”, the words ‘all the documents’ including 
Form V, as specified, under Rule 4 of Environment Protection Rules, 986 under the 
Environment Protection Act, l986 or as prescribed by the National Business 
Responsibility Standard Board while filing annual financial statement with the 
Registrar, shall be substituted. 


5. After Chapter IX of the principal Act, the following CHAPTER and sections 
thereunder shall be inserted, namely:— 


“CHAPTER IXA 
NATIONAL BUSINESS RESPONSIBILITY STANDARD BOARD 
38A. (J) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish 
a National level apex body in this Chapter called in the National Business Responsibility 


Standard Board, hereinafter referred to as the National Board, for carrying out the purposes 
of the act. 


(2) The head office of the National Board shall be at the New Delhi and the Board may, 
with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in 
the country. 


(3) The National Board shall consists of, 


(a) one full-time Chairperson, who shall be an eminent person having a minimum 
of fifteen years of work experience and expertise in the matter related to the 
environmental pollution, climate change and sustainable development; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of Section 2. 


Amendment of 
Section 34. 


Amendment 
of Section 
37. 


Insertion of 
new Chapter 
IIA. 


Establishment 
of National 
Business 
Responsibility 
Standard 
Board. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(b) one officer in the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India to be 
appointed by the Central Government as a full-time Member-Secretary of the Board; 


(c) following ex officio members to be appointed by the Central Government, in 
such manner as may be prescribed— 


(i) one officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of 
India each from the Union Ministries of Corporate Affairs, Finance (Department 
of Economic Affairs), Commerce and Industry (Department of Promotion of 
Industry and Trade), Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Health and 
Family Welfare, Science and Technology, Power, Road Transport and Highways, 
Petroleum and Natural Gas and Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare; 


(ii) one member from National Institution for Transforming India (NITI 
Aayog) not below the rank of Joint Secretary or advisor; 


(iii) one member from the Central Pollution Control Board; 

(iv) one member from the Indian Space Research Organization; 

(v) one member from Invest India; 

(vi) one member from the Securities and Exchange Board of India; and 
(vii) one member from the Reserve Bank of India. 


to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 
and 


(d) Following non-official members to be appointed from amongst specialists/ 
stakeholders— 


(i) one member from Indian Banks’ Association; 
(ii) three members from Industry Associations; 
(iii) two members from academia; 

(iv) two members from Civil Society; 


(v) such other members to be appointed by the Central Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


Functions of 38B. (/) The Board shall, 


the Board. ; : : d हे 
(a) carry out their functions in accordance with the following criteria and 


conditions, in so far as the functions contained herein are in compliance with the 
framework of rules and regulations made under this Act, including the rules thereof 
pertaining to the functions of a company registrar and other entities mentioned therein; 


(b) advise the Central Government on matters relating to the environmental 
concerns and steps required to improve the quality of the environment to abate all 
forms of environmental pollution; 


(c) update periodically the reporting framework for companies in consultation 
with stakeholders and ensure its compliance; 


(d) engage in consultation with stakeholders at regular intervals to update, 
revise and incorporate the reporting framework; 


(e) continuously oversee the reporting of companies; 
(f) publish annual report and maintain a year-round public visibility of the data; 


(g) develop and deploy comprehensive and relevant standards, indicators, and 
disclosure formats for various classes of industries conforming to best practices and 
globally accepted standards in consultation with stakeholders; 


(h) monitor compliance, issue notice, and take action in case of non-compliance; 


(i) undertake capacity building initiatives and continuous research and 
development work for achieving reporting standards and global practices and 
commitments; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4 


(j) promote adoption of the reporting frameworks by companies through 
appropriate subsidies and incentives; and 


(k) any other matter which the National Board may deem expedient for fulfilling 
the objective of reducing environmental pollution. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), the National Board may 
also require companies or classes of companies as defined in clause (20) and (2) of section 
2 to furnish any such information pertaining to factors involving responsible business 
practices or as laid by the Board, within such time as may be specified in the order:— 


Provided that if any company fails to comply with an order made under clause (k) of 
sub-section (/) or knowingly furnishes information which is incorrect or incomplete in any 
aspect intricately concerning sustainability, carbon emissions and environment, the 
Company shall be liable to the penalties in accordance with the quantum contained in under 
sub-section (4) of section 405. 


38C.(/) The National Board shall meet at such time and place and shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the 
quorum at its meetings) as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Chairperson of the National Board shall preside at the meetings of the Board:— 


Provided that if for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the 
National Board, any member of the Board chosen by the members present at the meeting 
shall preside at the meeting. 


(3) The Member-Secretary shall be the chief coordinating officer and the convener of 
the Board and shall assist the National Board in the discharge of its functions under this 
Act. 


(4) The Member-Secretary shall also discharge any other function as may be 
prescribed. 


38D. The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the Chairperson, Member Secretary ex-officio and other member shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 


38E. The Central Government may remove any member from the Board who, in its 
opinion, has — 


(i) been adjudged as an insolvent; or 
(ii) been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude; or 
(iii) become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or 


(iv) abused his position as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the 
public interest; or 


(v) acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his 
functions as a member: 


Provided that no such Member shall be so removed unless he has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 


38F. () The National Board may appoint such officers and other staff as it considers 
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of 
such officers and other staff of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.”. 


Meetings of 
the Board. 


Conditions of 
service of 
Chairperson 
and 
representatives. 


Removal of 
Members. 


Appointment 
of officers and 
staff. 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The global phenomenon of climate change has assumed alarming proportions now, 
and its severity as a threat to mankind has rapidly escalated owing to the vast quantum of 
emissions released cumulatively over time as a result of anthropogenic activities. 
Repercussions of climate-related impacts cannot be ignored anymore. The world has come 
together to address this amplifying crisis ensued by rapid emissions. The fundamental right 
to life enshrined in Article 2l of the Constitution of India also mandates the continuous 
pursuance of a clean, healthy, and pollution-free environment. It is a known fact that 
Industrialization has been a great contributor to lifting millions out of poverty and increasing 
social prosperity. At the same time, rapid industrialization has also led to an increase in 
emissions, and across the world, Industries are among the largest emitters of Green House 
Gases (GHG). Lately, at the global level, Environment, Social, and Governance (ESG) 
frameworks have become a prudent approach to holistically counter the threat of climate 
change from companies’ viewpoint. In India, The Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(SEBE) has been issuing periodic guidance in that regard and the reporting on such indicators 
will only be made mandatory through Business Responsibility and SustainaBelity Report 
(‘BRSR’) from Financial Year 2022-23 for the top l000 listed companies by market 
capitalization. This fragmented approach puts the onus only on select entities beyond a 
certain threshold while excluding the majority of companies from the ambit of ESG reporting. 
Further, every Industry is already reporting to State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) on 
the indictors outlined in the Form V, under Rule 4 of the Environment Protection Rules, 
986. Therefore, amending the Company Act with insertion of a section for mandatory 
reporting as per the already existing reporting framework, provisioned under the Environment 
Protection Act (EPA), can serve the purpose of pollution abatement to a greater extent. 
Instead of de novo arrangements, the proposed Bell, at ceteris paribus, provisions of 
reporting of Form V to the Company registrar instead of SPCBs and creation of an apex 
body to devise, monitor and ensure compliance. This could be a first step towards accurately 
quantify and report emissions and, going forward, keep formulating appropriate responses 
as the need may be. 


Further, to ensure Indian industry remains competitive globally, it has to pass muster 
with provisions like Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) proposed under the 
Green Deal by Euro-Zone. Therefore, it is important to empower the domestic entities operating 
at a smaller scale to efficiently deal with such international obligations. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI ; GAURAV GOGOI 
November 2, 2022 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill vide proposed section 38A provides for constitution of the 
National Business Responsibility Standard Board as an apex body to devise appropriate 
reporting frameworks, build capacity of Companies and monitor and check environmental 
pollution created by them. Also the proposed section 38F of this Bill also mandates the 
appointment of officers and staff for ensuring the smooth functioning of the Board. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore per 
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


Butt No. 27] oF 2022 


A Bill to amend the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region 
and Adjoining Areas Act, 2024. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Commission for Air Quality Management in National 
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 2 of the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital 
29 of 202. Region and Adjoining Areas Act, 202! (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),— 


(i) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(da) ‘Directorate General Occupational Safety and Health’ means 
Directorate General Occupational Safety and Health as per sub-section (/) of 
section 87 of the Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 
2020; 


(db) ‘Energy Intensive Industries’ means Energy Intensive Industries as 
per clause (e) of section 4 of the Energy Conservation Act, 200].”. 


3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause (d), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(da) a representative of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, not below 
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India;”. 


4. In section |] of the principal Act,— 


(i) in sub-section (3), after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“(ca) Directorate General of Mines Safety; and 


(eb) Directorate General Occupational Safety and Health from the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment;”. 


(ii) in sub-section (4), after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ca) one technical representative from the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare working in the field of medicine and research working or studying on 
the impact of air pollution on living beings.”. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Amendment 
of section 3. 


Amendment 
of section I]. 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Amendment 5. In section 2 of the principal Act,— 
of section 2. 


(i) in sub-section (2), for clause (vi), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely,— 


“(vi) carrying out and requiring investigations and research relating to 
problems of environmental pollution and air pollution in particular that have 
implications on air quality and health of the people in the region;”; 


(ii) in sub-section (6), for clause (/), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(h) encourage and incentivise the efforts of non-governmental 
organisations, institutions working in the field of air pollution, and Energy 
Intensive Industries that switch over to energy efficient equipments and invest 
in the energy efficient machinery and equipment;”; 


(iii) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(7) For the purpose of and without prejudice to the generality of sub- 
section (l) of section l3 and sub-clause (iii) of clause (c) of sub-section (6) of 
section |2, the Commission shall grant scholarship and fellowship every year 
to eligible persons and direct them to coordinate with the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare; Indian Council of Medical Research and any other institution 
as it deems fit.”. 


Insertion of 6. After section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
new section namely:— 
I2A. 


“[20., (L) The Commission shall establish, in every district in the National 
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas, a trust, as a non-profit body, to be called the 
District Air Pollution Monitoring Foundation. 


(2) The District Air Pollution Monitoring Foundation shall monitor the emission or 
discharge of environmental pollutants from various sources whatsoever that have 
implications on air quality in the district in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The composition and functions of the District Air Pollution Monitoring Foundation 
shall be such as may be prescribed.” 


Amendment 7. In section 3 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following sub-section 
of section 3... ह॥9 be substituted, namely,— 


“() The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government an annual report 
containing such details of the steps taken, proposals made, researches awaited and 
number of deaths occurred, number of people hospitalised during the year in the 
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (district-wise) due to air pollution and 
other measures undertaken by it in pursuance of its functions under section [2, in 
such form and manner as may be specified by regulations.”. 


Amendment 8. In section l6 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following proviso shall 
of section l6. be inserted, namely,— 


“Provided that the fund allocation for research relating to problems of 
environmental pollution mentioned in clause (vi) of sub-section (2) of section |2 is 
done every year and shall be at least ten per cent. of the total expenditure of the 
commission in a year.”. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

As Indira Gandhi, India’s former ‘green’ Prime Minister and an eminent environmentalist 
once said, “The problems created by the pollution of air and water, and by fear of the 
depletion of the mineral resources of the earth, have created a belated realization that we 
should be conservers, not destroyers, of this planet”. Laws dealing with air and water 
pollution, i.e. The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, !98! and Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, !974 were enacted during her tenure as Prime Minister of 
India. On !7 May 972, Indira Gandhi wrote to her Industry Minister: “The Water Pollution 
Bill has been passed. I do not know what is delaying the Bill regarding air pollution. This 
should be expedited”. Nothing could be more pressing, today, than upgrading the laws that 
govern the working of the agencies that fight against environmental pollution. The world 
has moved so much forward since the enactment of the Commission for Air Quality 
Management in the National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Amendment) Act, 202I. 


This Bill seeks to make amendments to the principal Act to enable the Commission to 
perform its functions better, aligning with the changing global scenario. The Bill, inter alia, 
ensures that: 


(i) the Commission allocates sufficient funds, every year, for research on air 
pollution; 


(ii) the Commission maintains a record of health hazards faced by the people 
residing in the NCR and the adjoining region, the number of deaths and hospitalizations 
occurred every year due to air pollution; 


(iii) the District level institution called ‘District Air Pollution Monitoring 
Foundation’ is established to monitor the emission or discharge of environmental 
pollutants from various sources; 


(iv) the commission acknowledges and incentivises the sources that emit a 
lesser quantity of pollutants to the environment; 


(v) the Commission consults representatives of the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare on the issues of air pollution and includes them in the ‘Sub-Committee 
on Research and Development’. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI ; GAURAV GOGOI 
November 2, 2022 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 6 of the Bill provides for establishment of a trust to be known as the District 
Air Pollution Monitor Foundation in every district in the National Capital Region and 
adjoining areas by the Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of 
rupees Ten Crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees Five Crore is also likely to be involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


Butt No. 256 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Energy Conservation Act, 2097 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Energy Conservation (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


52 of 200]. 2. In section 2 of the Energy Conservation Act, 200l (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act),— 


(i) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


(da) “carbon credit certificate” means the certificate issued by the Central 
Government or any agency authorised by it under section |4AA;”’; and 


(db) “carbon credit trading scheme” means the scheme for reduction of 
carbon emissions notified by the Central Government under clause (w) of 
section |4;”’; 


(ii) after clause (q), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(qa) “registered entity” means any entity, including designated 
consumers, registered for carbon credit trading scheme specified under clause 
(w) of 5 section 4;’’; and 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(iii) after clause (u), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ua) “virtual digital asset” means virtual digital asset as defined in sub- 
section (47A) of section 2 of the Income-Tax Act, 96I.’’. 


Amendment 3. In section 43 of the principal Act after clause (0), the following clause shall be 
of section [3.. inserted, namely:— 


“(ta) empanel technical experts, particularly Indian Citizens, to promote energy 
efficiency and carbon credit trading activities undertaken to meet the objectives of 
the Act;”. 


Amendment 4. In section |4 of the principal Act,— 
of section 4. 
(i) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted:— 


“(ea) direct Energy Intensive Industries to maintain minimum requirement 
of carbon credit certificates to buy carbon credit certificates, and specify the 
minimum requirement’; 


(ii) after clause (v), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(w) specify the carbon credit trading scheme; 


(x) establish mechanism to monitor and prevent illegal activities, involving 
carbon credit certificate by converting it into virtual digital asset; 


(y) establish mechanism to adjust the supply of carbon credit certificates 
to be auctioned in the market and maintain a reserve of carbon credit certificates 
for the said objective; and 


(z) specify minimum share of consumption of non-fossil sources by 
designated consumers as energy or feedstock, provided different share of 
consumption may be specified for different types of non-fossil sources for 
different designated consumers;”. 


Insertion of 5. After section I4A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
new section namely:— 

l4AA. 

Carbon Credit “I4AA,. (J) The Central Government, or any agency authorised by it shall 
Certificate. maintain a Registry of carbon credit certificates. 


(2) The Central Government or any agency authorised by it may issue carbon 
credit certificate to the registered entity which complies with the requirements of the 
carbon credit trading scheme and extinguish the carbon credit certificates from the 
registry upon redemption and update the records: 


Provided that the Central Government shall limit the issuance of carbon credit 
certificates, year on year, thereby reducing its availability in the carbon market. 


(3) The Central Government shall facilitate real time tracking of transaction of 
carbon credit certificates between registered entities, carbon emission projection and 
details of carbon credit certificates possessed by the registered entities and maintain 
the same on public domain. 


(4) The Central Government shall also designate an agency under clause (d) of 
section (/5) to ensure that the details possessed by the registered entities under sub- 
section (2) are not manipulated. 


(5) The registered entity shall be entitled to purchase or sell the carbon credit 
certificate in accordance with carbon credit trading scheme specified under clause (w) 
of section |4.”. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


6. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


#“[6, (l) There shall be constituted a Fund for the purposes of promotion of 
efficient use of energy and its conservation by the State Government to be called the 
State Energy Conservation Fund and there shall be credited thereto— 


(a) all grants and loans that may be made by the State Government or the 
Central Government or any other organisation or individual for the purposes of 
this Act; 


(b) all fees received by the State Government or the designated agency 
under this Act; 


(c) all sums received by the State Government or the designated agency 
from such other sources as may be decided by the State Government. 


(2) The Fund shall be utilised for meeting the expenses— 
(a) of the designated agency in the discharge of its functions; and 
(b) for the objects and purposes authorised by or under this Act. 


(3) The Fund created under sub-section (/) shall be administered by such 
person or authority and in such manner as may be prescribed by the rules made by the 
State Government: 


Provided that the State Government may appoint an Auditor to ensure that the 
Fund is utilised for the intended purpose. ”. 


7. In section |8 of the principal Act, before the existing Explanation, the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the Central Government shall not impose complete ban on the 
export of the carbon credit certificates to the foreign countries, that may affect India’s 
commitments or obligations to any international agreement.”. 


8. In section 26, for sub-section (JA), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(A) If any person fails to comply with the directions issued under clauses (n) 
and (z) of section I4, he shall be liable to a penalty which shall not exceed ten lakh 
rupees for each such failure: 


Provided that he shall also be liable to an additional penalty which shall not be 
less than twice the price of every metric ton of oil equivalent or the price of every 
carbon credit certificate whichever is less prescribed under this Act, which is in 
excess of the prescribed norms.”. 


Substitution of 
new section 
for section 6. 


Establishment 
of Fund by 
State 
Government. 


Amendment 
of section I8. 


Amendment 
of section 26. 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The establishment of the carbon market in India is a need of the hour. Making sure 
that the market falls in line with the global market trend is also equally important. A carbon 
market with a strong framework and checks and balances will last long withstanding economic 
shocks such as price rise and inflation. Because, industries/companies (registered entities) 
may pass on any increase in their costs to their consumers, thereby affecting the general 
public. While introducing the carbon trading concepts in India, the equal focus must be 
given to emission reduction of pollutants as given to the promotion of the use of non- fossil 
fuel sources. 


Incorporating global best practices is another important aspect of introducing the 
carbon market to India. The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative is the first cap-and-invest 
regional initiative implemented in the United States. The RGGI caps and reduces power 
sector CO2 emissions by issuing CO2 allowances, projecting the RGGI cap in CO2 allowances. 
The EU Emissions Trading System (ETS) works on the principle of ‘cap-and-trade’ too. The 
emission reduction is achieved by putting a limit/cap on the total amount of certain 
greenhouse gases emitted by the entities each year, which is reduced over me. This Bill 
seeks to incorporate necessary checks and balances in the Act, thus preventing delegation 
of too much power to the ruling dispensation which is dangerous for any democracy. 


The Energy Conservation (Amendment) Bill, 2022, inter alia, seeks to— 


(a) empower the Central Government to prevent illegal activities involving 
carbon credit certification by converting it into virtual digital assets; 


(b) give preference to Indian companies to establish the carbon market and 
implement the rules regarding the same, in India; 


(c) maintain a buffer stock of carbon credit certificates in India, to manage any 
economic shock in future; 


(d) establish a registry of carbon credit certificates; 


(e) give more powers to State Governments to monitor the utilization of the 
State energy conservation fund for the intended purpose of the Act; 


(f) ensure the penalty for the violators of the law does not become lenient over 
the years. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives. 


New DELHI; GAURAV GOGOI 
November 2\, 2022. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 6 of the Bill provides for constitution of the State Energy Conservation Fund. 
It also provides for crediting of grant and loans to the fund by the Central Government. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. A 
recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is likely to be involved per annum from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five crore is also likely to be involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9] 


Butt No. 44 07 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Representation of the People Act, /950. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (J) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, — Short title and 
2023 commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


43 of 950. 2. In section 20A of the Representation of the People Act, 950, for sub-section (3), Amendment 
the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— oi 


“(3) Every person registered under this section shall, if otherwise eligible to 
exercise his franchise, be allowed to vote at an election at the nearest Embassy or 
High Commission or Consulate General of India, if the person is residing outside 
India.” 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The framers of the Constitution of India viewed the right to vote as one of the most 
fundamental elements of democratic citizenship. Seven decades ago, they undertook a bold 
experiment by adopting universal adult suffrage, as enshrined in Article 326 of the 
Constitution of India. Our founding mothers and fathers were clear on this basic principle - 
that voting rights were for all Indian citizens, irrespective of caste, colour, creed, sex, place 
of Birth, educational attainment, or disablity. 


The sustained strength of India’s democracy can be measured from the fact that while 
in l95], at the time of India’s first general election, only 7 per cent of the eligible citizens were 
registered as electors and 45 per cent of them turned out to vote, in 209, during India’s latest 
general election, over 9] per cent of the eligible citizens were registered with 67 per cent of 
them coming out to vote, which is the highest voter turnout in India’s electoral history. 

However, a worrying trend is the disenfranchisement of Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) 
from the electoral process. As per latest data by the Ministry of External Affairs, out of the 
total .33 crore NRIs living in various parts of the globe, a miniscule 0.9 per cent are reg- 
istered to vote, according to figures by the Election Commission of India. Of the |.22 lakh 
registered NRI electors, less than 2] per cent voted in the 209 general elections. 

Indian diaspora has grown manifold since the mid-!9th and early 20th century, when 
Indians first started emigrating overseas for work. According to the World Migration Report, by 
the International Organisation for Migration under the United Nations, India has the largest 
emigrant population in the world, with 6.4 per cent of the total 28 crore international migrants 
tracing their origin to India. The Indian diaspora holds considerable influence over our nation’s 
culture, society, and economy. In its latest Migration and Development Brief, the World Bank 
has stated that for the first time, a single country, India, is on track to receive more than USD L00 
Billion in yearly remittances. Remittances will record a 2 per cent increase from 202. India’s 
remittance flows account for nearly 3 per cent of the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 
2022. Yet, NRIs’ direct involvement in India’s electoral politics has been limited. 

The Representation of the People Act, !950 was amended in 20l0, making way for a 
special provision, allowing for all Indian citizens to be enrolled in the electoral rolls in the 
constituency which is their place of residence in India as mentioned in their passport. While 
an appreciable first step, the dismal NRI voter figures warrant introspection. A key reason 
for low NRI voter turnout could be an onerous requirement — while they can vote, NRIs 
must be physically present in their constituency in India on the day of the election. For a 
large majority, interrupting their lives overseas, to travel to India in order to exercise their 
right to vote, is something they cannot afford. 

As aresult, NRIs’ concerns are completely side-lined from electoral politics. A possible 
solution to bridge this issue is making provisions for all the NRIs’ eligible to vote at the 
nearest Embassy or High Commission or Consulate General of India in order to enhance 
their voter turnouts and political participation. 

As envisioned by our Constitution framers, in a democracy as vibrant as ours, no 
Indian voter should be left behind. This Bill is an attempt to create a legislative framework 
to allow for enhanced expatriate participation in India’s democracy. 

The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 950 witha 
view to make provisions for the persons residing outside India to exercise franchise at the 
nearest Embassy or High Commission or Consulate General of India in order to enhance 
their voter turnouts and political participation. 

Hence, this Bill. 

New DELHI ; KARTI P. CHIDAMBARAM 
January (8, 2023. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed amendment to section 20A provides for the persons 
residing outside India to exercise franchise at the nearest Embassy or High Commission or 
Consulate General of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to estimate the recurring 
and non-recurring expenditure likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


25 of 2009 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


Butt No. 234 or 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. After section 3F of the Central Universities Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“3G. There shall be established a University, which shall be a body corporate, to 
be known as the Darjeeling Central University, having its territorial jurisdiction 
extending to the whole of the Gorkhaland Territorial Administration and the territories 
to the north of River Ganga in West Bengal as specified in the First Schedule to this 
Act.” 


3. In the First Schedule to the principal Act, after serial number |6 and the entries 
relating thereto, the following serial number and entries shall be inserted, namely:— 


“|7, West Bengal Darjeeling Whole of Gorkhaland Territorial 
Central University. Administration and territories to 
the north of River Ganga in the 

State of West Bengal.”. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new section 
3G. 
Establishment 
of Darjeeling 
Central 
University. 


Amendment 
of the First 
Schedule. 


54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Central Universities Act, 2009 was enacted to establish and incorporate 


universities for teaching and research in various States and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


Darjeeling has remained a hub of education not only in India, but also across the 
South and South-East Asian countries. Darjeeling region, is home to some of the best 
schools in India and students from all over Asia come to study in the hills. Establishment of 
an institution of higher and technical learning in the region, has been a long-standing 
aspiration and pertinent demand of the people. Establishing a Central University in Darjeeling 
can help to turn it into one of the hubs for higher education in India and an important 
education center in all of South and South East Asia. 


In 20], an in-principal agreement for the establishment of a Central University in the 
Gorkhaland Territorial Administration (GTA) had been reached between the Central 
Government, West Bengal Government, and the Gorkha representatives. Despite passage 
of new ten years since the agreement, steps towards establishment of the university have 
not been undertaken. 


Moreover, out of 55 Central Universities, there is only one Visva Bharati that is 
located in West Bengal, and it was founded by Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore in !92. Since 
then, no other Central University has been established in West Bengal. The population of 
the State has crossed 0 crores and only one Central University is not enough to cater to 
the needs of the students. 


At present, there is no Central University in the Gorkhaland Territorial Administration 
region and Northern Districts of West Bengal. Therefore, establishing a new Central 
University in the Gorkhaland Territorial Administration will ensure increase in accessibility 
and quality of higher education and to facilitate and promote avenues of higher education 
and research for the people of the Gorkhaland Territorial Administration, North Bengal 
region of West Bengal. This shall also cater to the regional aspirations for years to come. 


The Central Universities (Amendment) Bill, 2022 seeks to amend the Central 
Universities Act, 2009 inter alia to provide for the establishment of a University in the name 
of “Darjeeling Central University” having Territorial jurisdiction in the Gorkhaland Territorial 
Administration and North Bengal region in the State of West Bengal. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 


New Delhi ; RAJU BISTA 
2! November, 2022. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 3G in the Central Universities Act, 
2009 which provides for the establishment of a new University, to be known as the ‘Darjeeling 
Central University’, as a body corporate having territorial jurisdiction extending to the 
whole of the Gorkhaland Territorial Administration and territories of north of River Ganga in 
West Bengal. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give exact estimate of expenditure, both recurring 
and non-recurring, which will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India, if the Bill is 
enacted into a law. However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty 
crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring 
expenditure of about rupees six hundred crores is also likely to be involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY op, 


Butt No. 279 oF 2022 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of an Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board 
to fix the remunerative support price of agricultural produce including fruits and 
vegetables on annual and seasonal basis and for timely intervention by 
the Government at the time of steep fall in prices of such produce in the open market 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
I. (7) This Act may be called the Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board Act, 2022. Short title and 


extent. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:— Defnitions. 


(a) “agricultural produce” includes wheat, paddy, pulses, sugarcane, cotton, 
oil seeds, coarse grains like maize, millet, jowar, bajra, gram, soyabean, fruits and 
vegetables such as potato, onion, tomato, cauliflower, cabbage including such other 
agricultural or horticultural produce which are used for human consumption or for 
any medicinal purposes; 


(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the State Government 
and in the other cases, the Central Government; 


(c) “Board” means the Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board established 
under section 3; 


(d) “Government agency” means and includes any agency of the Government 
by whatever name called or which receives grants from the Government and which is 
engaged in procurement, distribution and canalising agricultural produces; and 


(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. () The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than six months Constitution 
from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute of an 


a Board to be known as Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board. वहा एव 
Produce Price 
(2) The headquarters of the Board shall be at Alappuzha in the State of Kerala. es 
oard. 


(3) The Board shall consist of:— 


(a) a Chairperson and a Deputy Chairperson having relevant educational 
qualifications and experience in field of agriculture, to be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) one member from each zonal office of the Board set up under sub- 
section (5); 


(c) one member each to represent the Union Ministries dealing with Agriculture, 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Food Processing Industries, 
Chemicals and Fertilisers and Finance; 


(d) one member to represent the Indian Council of Agricultural Research; 


(e) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the 
farmers and agricultural labourers, in rotation from different States in such manner as 
may be prescribed; and 


(f) four members of Parliament, of whom two shall be from Lok Sabha and two 
from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses. 


(4) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose off property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 


(5) The Board shall set up one zonal office each in the eastern, western, northern, 
north eastern, central and southern parts of the country comprising of such States and 
Union territories, as may be determined by the Board and each zonal office shall consist of 
such number of members as may be prescribed. 


(6) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and the manner of 
filling vacancies and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 


Functions of 4. (/) The Board shall — 
the Board. . _ . हि हे 
(i) fix and declare minimum remunerative support prices of agricultural produce 


before every sowing season after examining the recommendations of all the zonal 
offices: 

Provided that different prices may be fixed for different produce and for different 
zones; 


(ii) fix the issue prices of foodgrains for retail sale to consumers every year; 


(iii) perform its functions in close liaison with Government agencies, institutions 
including co-operative societies and such other authorities concerned with the 
procurement, supply, distribution, trade of agricultural produce and avoid duplication 
of efforts; and 


(iv) give wide publicity to the remunerative prices fixed for agricultural produce 
through electronic and print media throughout the country. 


Function of 5. (J) It shall be the duty of each zonal office of the Board to recommend to the Board 
zonal the remunerative support prices of agricultural produce in respect of its jurisdiction. 
ottice. 


(2) Every zonal office of the Board, before recommending the minimum support 
remunerative prices of agricultural produce, shall take into account all relevant factors, but 
in particular, the following, namely:— 


(a) average capital investment made by farmers in growing the produce; 
(b) average labour charges; 

(c) interest on loans borrowed for growing the produce; 

(d) premium for crop insurance, if any; 

(e) maintenance cost of the land; 


(f) expenditure on fertilizers, pesticides, seeds and electricity, etc.; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ay | 


(g) any concession, rebate or subsidy provided by Government in relation to 
agricultural produce; 


(h) prevailing open market price of each product; 


(i) climatic conditions and incidence of natural calamities like floods, droughts, 
hailstorms, cyclones and untimely rains; and 


(j) average monthly household expenditure of a farmer. 


6. (/) In case any farmer fails to sell his produce in the open market at the desired 
prices, the Central Government shall purchase his produce at the price fixed by the Board 
through Government agencies. 


(2) If there is a steep fall in the prices of agricultural produce in the open market, it 
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to intervene through its agencies in the 
market to ensure that farmers shall get minimum support price of the produce and take such 
other measures as it may deem necessary to handle the situation and protect the interests 
of the farmers. 


7. (7) If any farmer is not satisfied with the declaration of price fixed for any agricultural 
produce, he may file an appeal to the Authority designated for the purpose by the Central 
Government within thirty days for reviewing of such price. 


(2) The designated Authority specified under sub-section (/), shall give its decision 
within fifteen days from the date of filing of such appeal. 


8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Board for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 


9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. 


0. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of any- thing previously done under that rule. 


Government 
agencies to 
purchase 
agricultural 
produce. 


Appeal to 
Central 
Government 
regarding price 
fixation. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to 
make rules. 


58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The farmers always expect remunerative prices of their agricultural produce in order 
to repay their loans which they borrowed for growing agricultural produce and to meet 
social obligations and household expenditure. But unfortunately, it is an usual phenomenon 
that in the immediate post-harvest period the prices of most of the agricultural produce 
decline very sharply and farmers are left high and dry and at the mercy of unscrupulous 
traders who exploit them to the maximum possible. Data reveals that very often, even the 
cost of production is not recovered by farmers. 


At present, the Commission on Agricultural Costs and Prices under the Union Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare for determining the Minimum Support Price (MSP), 
considers (J) Demand and supply; (2) Cost of Production; (3) Price trends in the market, 
both domestic and international; (4) Inter crop price parity; (5) Terms of trade between 
agriculture and non-agriculture; (6) Likely implication of MSP on consumers of that product. 
Using these various parameters, MSP is often fixed even below the cost of production, 
ignoring the right to life and livelihood of the producer. Therefore, there is a need for price 
determination for farmers to take the sole mandate of securing adequate net returns to a 
farmer, over and above the comprehensive cost of production, rather than considering 
other parameters. In view of the above, to uphold the right to life and livelihood of farmers, 
which are their fundamental rights, it is proposed to constitute a statutory autonomous 
Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board having representation of farmers and agricultural 
labourers to fix the remunerative prices for agricultural produce. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DE Lut; A.M. ARIFF 
July 3, 2022 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Agricultural Produce Price 
Fixation Board. It further provides for setting up of zonal offices. Clause 4 inter alia provides 
that the Board shall give wide publicity through electronic and print media about the prices 
fixed. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall purchase agricultural produce at 
the prices fixed by the Board. Clause 8 provides for payment of adequate funds to the Board 
for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into 
operation, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that 
a sum of rupees two thousand crore may be involved as recurring expenditure per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore may also be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause L0 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


Butt No. 272 oF 2022 


A Bill to provide temporary benefits to the terminated employees including payment of 
unemployment allowance, medical expenses for a certain period after termination 
of service and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (/) This Act may be called the Terminated Employees (Temporary Benefits) 
Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: — 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) “employee” means any person employed on wages by an employer, either 
directly or through a contractor, to do any skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled, manual, 
operational, supervisory, managerial, administrative, technical, clerical or any other 
work, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and also includes a 
person declared to be an employee by the appropriate Government; 


(c) “employer” means the owner or director of any establishment or organisation 
which is not owned, controlled or funded by the appropriate Government or an 
undertaking and who directly or indirectly or through an agent or any other person, 
employs any person on regular, casual, contractual or temporary basis or exercise 
control over the wages, hours of working and other working conditions of his 
employees; 


(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Benefits to be 
provided to 
the 
terminated 
employees. 


Duration of 
payment of 
unemployment 
allowance. 


60 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(e) “primary health care” means essential health care services including family 
planning, immunization, prevention of locally endemic diseases, treatment of common 
diseases or injuries, provision of essential facilities, health education, provision of 
food and nutrition accessible to individuals and provided by the appropriate 
Government; 


(f) “secondary health care” includes second tier of health care system, in which 
patients from primary health care are referred to specialists in higher hospitals for 
treatment; and 


(g) “terminated employee” means an employee whose services have been 
terminated by his employer on any ground other than the following grounds, namely:— 


(i) proven misconduct causing physical or mental harm or both; or 
(ii) fraud; or 

(iii) breach of trust; or 

(iv) cheating; or 

(v) indulging in misappropriation of money with fraudulent means; or 
(vi) having been convicted for an offence by a criminal court; or 


(vii) having been convicted for an offence other than a criminal offence 
punishable by a sentence for a period of more than two years; and 


(A) “tertiary health care” includes third level of health care system, in which 
specialized consultative care including Specialised Intensive Care Units, advanced 
diagnostic support services and specialized medical personnel is provided on referral 
from primary and secondary health care. 


3. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, every employer shall provide to the terminated employee or his dependant family 
members the following benefits, namely:— 


(a) payment of unemployment allowance at the rate not less than seventy 
percent. of the wages which were being paid to such employee prior to his termination 
in such manner as may be prescribed; and 


(b) payment for medical expenses incurred which shall not be less than fifty 
percent. of the total cost in case of expenses under primary health care and not less 
than one lakh rupees in case of expenses under secondary and tertiary healthcare in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The terminated employee shall be eligible for benefits under clauses (a) and (b) 
only if such an employee had been employed for a period of not less than three hundred and 
sixty-five days by the same employer. 


(3) The medical treatment expenses under clause (b) of sub-section (/) shall also be 
provided to the dependant family members of the terminated employee for a period of one 
hundred and twenty days from the month subsequent to the month of termination of the 
employee. 


(4) Any agreement between the employer and employee or the agent of the employee 
that seek to nullify the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be null and void ab initio. 


4. The unemployment allowance under section 3 shall be paid for a period of ninety 
days from the date of termination of service of employee or until the employee whose 
employment has been terminated is employed again, whichever is earlier in time: 


Provided that where the terminated employee is a widow, the unemployment allowance 
shall be paid for a period of one hundred and twenty days. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 6l 


5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
the benefits provided under section 3 shall not be computed for the purpose of payment of 
Income Tax. 


6. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
an Authority to ensure implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The composition of and other terms and conditions of the Authority shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Authority shall, after a period of five years from the date of its constitution, 
review the benefits referred to in section 3. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Authority may, if it deems necessary, 
exempt certain category of employers from the application of this Act. 


7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient 
for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained to 
the contrary in any other law for the time being in force. 


0. (/) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both House agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature. 


Benefits to be 
non-taxable. 


Constitution 
of 
Appropriate 
Authority. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 
Power to 
make rules. 


62 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The globalised free and capitalist market has evolved into a system requiring adequate 
regulation and monitoring of employees welfare on the one hand and defining who qualifies 
as an employer on the other. The tendency to maximize profits at the cost of the welfare of 
the employees and exploitation of the necessity of the workers has resulted in unfavourable 
conditions for employees. The rise of the gig economy, gamification of the employees and 
the economy, and the ever expanding informal sector in India has on one hand brought 
success and wealth while, on the other hand but has also introduced uncertainty in the 
future of the employees. 


Today the Indian economy is more than ever exposed to international eventualities 
and its effect on the daily lives of the people is highly pronounced. In light of this, the 
existing social security net is required to be strengthened and expanded. Such a step will 
serve not only the interests of workers but will also provide adequate financial support to 
them in distressed time. The Government of India must ensure that the Directive Principles 
stated in articles 38, 39(e) and 42 of Part IV of the Constitution are implemented in keeping 
with the responsibilities of a welfare State. 


The need is to put an obligation on the State to secure a social order for the promotion 
of welfare of the people, provide public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, 
sickness, disablement and also ensure that the health and strength of workers is not abused 
due to economic necessity. 


The Bill, therefore, with a view to ensure social security, seeks to provide for payment 
of unemployment allowance and medical expenses to the terminated employees and their 
dependant family members for a certain period of time. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; LAVU SRI KRISHNA DEVARAYALU 
March 7, 2020. 


PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES [7(/) AND 274(/) OF THE 
CONSTITUTION 


[Copies of Letter Nos. DGE-H-02/28/202-SS-I and H-02/28/202-SS-I dated 
2 September and |6 November, 2022 from Shri Bhupender Yadav, Minister of Labour and 
Employment and Environment, Forest and Climate Change to the Secretary General, Lok 
Sabha. ] 


IL The President, having been informed of the subject-matter of the Terminated 
Employees (Temporary Benefits) Bill, 2022 by Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu, 
Member of Parliament, recommends the introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha under 
clause (/) and the consideration of the Bill under clause (3) of article 7 of the 
Constitution. 


I. The President, having been informed of the subject-matter of the Terminated 
Employees (Temporary Benefits) Bill, 2022 by Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu, 
Member of Parliament, recommends the introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha under 
clause (/) of article 274 of the Constitution. 


[*Bill, being printed in 2022, the year in the title of the Bill has been changed from 2020 
to 2022.] 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 63 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an Authority to ensure 
implementation of the provisions of this Bill. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government 
shall provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, 
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated 
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore per annum would involve from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees thirty crore is also likely to be involved. 


64 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 0 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 65 


Bill No. 202 of 2022 


A BILL to provide for the promotion and development of the Chilli industry, constitution 
of a Chilli Board and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:- 


CHAPTER I 

PRELIMINARY 
I. (/) This Act may be called the Chilli (Promotion and Development) Act, 2022. Short title, 
(2)It extends to the whole of India. ee ee 


(3)It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


66 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


9 वि 98: 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "advisories" means non-binding standards and guidance issued by the 
Board for promotion and development of the chilli industry; 


(b) "Board" means the Chilli Board established under section 3 of this Act; 


(c) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under clause 
(a) of sub-section (3) of section 3 of this Act; 


(d) "chilli industry" means the industry engaged in the production, manufacture, 
export, supply, trade and commerce of chilli 


(e) "directions" means binding standards and guidance issued by the Board for 
promotion and development of the chilli industry; 


(f) "export" means taking out of India by sea, land or air; 
(g) "exporter" means any person engaged in the business of export of chilli; 


(h) "Fund" means the Chilli Promotion and Development Fund constituted 
under section |5; 


(i) "grower" means the owner of chilli cultivation, and includes any agent of 
such owner, and mortgagee, lessee or any other person in actual possession of such 
chilli cultivation; 


(j) "import" means bringing into India by sea, land or air; 
(k) "importer" means any person engaged in the business of import of chilli; 


(J) "member" means a member of the Board appointed under sub-section (3) of 
section 3 of this Act and includes the Chairperson; 


(m) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(n) "specified" means specified by regulations made by the Board under this 
Act; 


(0०) "small grower" means a grower the size of whose cultivation does not 
exceed ten hectares; 


(p) "stakeholders" means any person, entity or organisation engaged in the 
production, manufacture, export, supply, trade and commerce of chilli; and 


(q) "worker" means any person who works in chilli cultivation excluding the 


grower. 
CHAPTER II 
THE CHILLI BOARD 
Constitution 3. (J) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, 


and 
incorporation 
of the Board. 


for the purposes of this Act, a Board, to be called the Chilli Board. 


(2)The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name, sue and be sued. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 67 


(3) The Board shall consist of the following members: 


(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed; 


(b) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of 
the People and one by the Council of States; 


(c) three members to represent respectively the Ministries of the Central 
Government dealing with- 


(i) Commerce; 
(ii) Agriculture; and 
(iii) Finance; 


(d) four members to represent major chilli producing States to be appointed by 
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(e) ten members to represent the growers, workers and exporters in the chilli 
industry to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 


(f) five members to represent such institutes or authorities having 
specialisation in research in the chilli industry, agriculture, foreign trade, packaging 
and food safety to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) The qualifications for appointment of the Chairperson and other members of the 
Board and the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the Board shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 


4. (J) The term of office of, salaries, remuneration or other allowance payable to, and 
the other conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 


(2) The office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen 
as or for being a member of either House of Parliament. 


(3) Any officer of the Central Government when deputed by that Government to the 
Board shall have the right to attend meetings of the Board and take part in the proceedings 
thereof but shall not be entitled to vote. 


5. No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of: 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; 


(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or member of the 
Board; or 


(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the 
case. 


6. (/) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Board, and without 
prejudice to any provision of this Act, exercise and discharge such other powers and 
functions of the Board as may be prescribed. 


(2) In the absence of a Chairperson in a meeting, the Board may elect any member who 
is present to preside over such meeting. 


Terms of 
office and 
conditions of 
service of 
Chairpersons 
and other 
members. 


Vacancies, 
etc., not to 
invalidate 
proceedings of 
the Board. 


Chairperson 
to preside 
over meetings. 


Committees, 
officers and 
staff. 


Functions of 
the Board. 


68 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


7. (४) The Board may constitute such advisory or executive committees, appoint 
such officers and staff as it deems necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions 
under this Act. 


(2) The method of recruitment and terms and conditions of service of officers and 
staff employed, as the case may be, shall be such as may be prescribed. 


8. (/) The Board shall be responsible for promotion and development of the chilli 
industry in the country. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (/), the Board shall: 


(a) take such steps as it deems necessary in order to achieve objectives enlisted 
under section 9; 


(b) monitor the export, import and price of chilli and propagate data and other 
information regarding the demand for and marketability of chilli in the country and in 
the foreign market; 


(c) render scientific and technical advice aimed at improving the production, 
manufacture, supply and distribution of chilli; 


(d) undertake, assist and encourage scientific, technological and economic 
research in the area of chilli production; 


(e) collect statistics from stakeholders in the chilli industry; 


(f) plan and implement human resource training and skill development in line 
with the needs of chilli industry; 


(g) take steps either by itself or through accredited agencies to maintain quality 
standards for chilli produced in the country; 


(h) collaborate and cooperate with national and international scientific and 
economic bodies for the benefit of the chilli industry; 


(i) collaborate and cooperate with departments of the Central or State 
Governments on all matters relating to the promotion and development of chilli 
industry; 


() protect the intellectual property rights of the Indigenous varieties of chillies 
in the country and abroad; 


(k) subscribe to the share capital of or entering into any arrangement or other 
arrangements (whether by way of partnership, joint venture or any other manner) 
with any other body corporate for the purpose of promoting the development of chilli 
industry or for promotion and marketing of chilli in the country or elsewhere; 


(J) advise the Central Government on all matters relating to the promotion and 
development of the chilli industry, including but not limited to the import and export 
of chilli; 


(m) advise the Central Government with regard to participation in any 
international conference or scheme relating to the chilli industry; 


(n) provide advisory services on matters including but not limited to research, 
testing and training to such other class of persons upon the payment of such fee or 
other charges as may be specified; 


(o) formulate incentive schemes for the chilli industry; 


(p) conduct seminars, workshops research activities and other programmes for 
development and promotion of chilli industry in the country; and 


(q) any other actions in the interest of chilli industry. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 69 


CHAPTER III 
PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT 


9. The Central Government and the Board, as the case may be, while exercising its 
powers, discharging its functions, or undertaking any other activity under this Act shall be 
guided by the following objectives namely: 


(a) optimising the production, sale and consumption of chilli, which may include: 
(i) promoting the export of chilli; 
(ii) promoting the sale and trade of chilli through e-commerce platforms; 


(iii) improving the quality of chilli cultivated in the country for 
consumption in the country and export; 


(iv) promoting branding, product diversification, value addition, 
packaging and furthering the interests of stakeholders involved in the chilli 
industry; 


(v) promoting sustainable cultivation and increasing production and 
productivity of chilli; 


(vi) providing support and encouragement to small growers for using and 
implementing new technology in chilli cultivation; 


(vii) recommending fair and remunerative prices for chilli growers; 
(viii) safeguarding the interests of chilli workers; and 


(ix) increasing awareness among the general public about the chilli industry 
in the country. 


(b) promoting economic, scientific and technical research into the chilli industry, 
which may include:- 


(i) collecting, analysing, and disseminating economic, scientific and 
technical data, information, statistics, and studies related to the chilli industry 
in the country; 


(ii) encouraging the adoption of best available technologies so as to 
minimize the adverse impact of climate change; 


(iii) promoting an understanding of plant ecology, physiology, and 
pathology among growers; and 


(iv) encouraging the adoption of global best practices by the chilli industry 
in the country. 


0. For the purposes of this Act, the Board may issue directions or advisories to 
stakeholders and such other persons in the chilli industry or any class thereof, as it may 
deem fit: 


Provided that every direction issued shall be complied with by any person engaged in 
the chilli industry to who such direction has been issued. 


CHAPTER IV 
COMPLIANCES 


I. (J) Every stakeholder shall obtain a certificate of registration issued by the Board 
in such form, subject to such conditions and payment of such fee, and with effect from such 
date as may be specified: 


Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
exempt such person or class of persons as may be specified. 


Objectives to 
be followed 
for promotion 
and 
development. 


Issuance of 
direction and 
advisories by 
the Board. 


Registration. 


70 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(2)The certificate of registration shall be issued or rejected after due verification in 
such manner and within such period as may be specified. 


(3) The certificate of registration shall be deemed to have been issued after the expiry 
of the period specified under sub-section (2), if no deficiency has been communicated to 
applicant within that period. 


(4)A certificate of registration issued, or deemed to have been issued under this 
section shall remain valid for a period of fifteen years, or such period beyond fifteen years 
as may be specified by the Board, from the date on which it was issued, or deemed to be 
issued, as the case may be, except when the certificate is cancelled or suspended pursuant 
to an inspection under section [2. 


Submission of 2. Every stakeholder liable to be registered under section l] shall submit to the 
feuurns: Board such returns at such times, in such form, and containing such particulars, as may be 
prescribed: 


Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
exempt such person or class of persons as may be specified. 


Inspection and 3. (/) Where the Board has reason to believe that any stakeholder:- 
penalties. 
(a) has contravened any direction issued to such person under section l0; 


(9) liable to be registered under section | has failed to obtain registration or 
has obtained registration through fraud or misrepresentation; 


(c) liable to submit returns under section |2 has failed to submit returns, or has 
submitted false returns; 


(d) has contravened any other provision of the Act, 


it may authorise such officer, as may be prescribed, by an order in writing in 
such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified, to conduct an 
inspection. 


(2)In the course of inspection under sub-section (/), the authorised officers may, 
subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be prescribed: 


(a) enter any place or premises where any activities related to the chilli industry 
are undertaken; 


(b) require the production of any books, registers, records or other articles or 
papers kept therein; and 


(c) ask for any information relating to the sale or purchase of chilli. 


(3) Upon completion of the inspection, the authorised officer shall submit to the 
Board a report containing: 


(a) recommendations on whether there is a contravention of the provisions of 
this Act; and 


(b) in cases where there is found to be a contravention of the provisions of this 
Act, recommendations on the imposition of a penalty, suspension or cancellation of 
registration or such other particulars as may be prescribed. 


(4) Upon receipt of the report referred to in sub-section (3), after considering the 
recommendations provided therein, the Board shall pass an order as may be deemed fit in 
such form, manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed for: 


(a) closing the matter forthwith; or 
(b) imposing a civil penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees; or 
(c) suspending or cancelling of registration under section |; or 


(d) or for conditions mentioned in clauses (b) and (c): 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


Provided that the amount of any penalty imposed under this section, if not paid, may 
be recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue: 


Provided further that no order of suspension or cancellation of registration shall be 
passed under this sub-section unless the person concerned has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in respect of the grounds of such suspension or cancellation, as 
the case may be. 


4. (J) Any person aggrieved by an order passed under the provisions of sub-section 
(4) of section !3 may, within such period of the passing of the order, prefer an appeal to the 
Central Government, on payment of such fee, in such form and manner, and subject to 
such other conditions as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Central Government may confirm, modify or reverse the order appealed against: 


Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the parties shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 


CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, Accounts AND AUDITS 


5. (/) The Board shall constitute a Fund to be called the Chilli Promotion and 
Development Fund. 


(2) The Chilli Promotion and Development Fund shall be credited: 
(a) all sums transferred to or vested in the Board; 
(b) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government; 


(c) all fees levied and collected in respect of certificates of registration issued 
and any other fees or charges collected under this Act or the rules and regulations 
made thereunder; 


(d) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be decided 
upon by the Central Government; and 


(e) all assets transferred from the Spices Board Fund under the Spices Board 
Act, 986 (Act l0 of 986). 


(3) The Fund shall be applied to: 


(a) meet the salary, pension, remuneration and other allowances of the members, 
officers, and staff of the Board as applicable; 


(b) meet the expenses relating to such measures as the Board may undertake 
under this Act from time to time in order to achieve the objectives enlisted in section 
9, and in exercise of its general powers and functions under section 8; 


(c) meet the other administrative expenses of the Board and any other expenses 
authorised by or under this Act; 


(d) repay loans; and 
(e) settle any liabilities arising out of legal proceedings. 


6. The Board may, from time to time, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government and under such conditions as may be prescribed, borrow any sum required for 
any of the purposes for which it is authorised to expend under this Act, from:— 


(a) any bank or other financial institution by taking loan; or 


(b) the public by issue of bonds or debentures or any such instrument in the 
form and manner approved by the Central Government. 


Appeal. 


Chilli 
Promotion 
and 
Development 
Fund. 


Power to 
borrow. 


Budget. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


Annual report. 


Auditor's 
report and 
annual report 
to be laid 
before 
Parliament. 


Power of the 
Central 
Government 
to supersede 
the Board. 


72 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


7. The Board shall prepare in such form and manner, at such time, and such intervals, 
as may be prescribed, its budget, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Board and forward the same to the Central Government. 


8. The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in such manner as 
may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed and 
the Board shall furnish to the Central Government before such date, as may be prescribed, 
its audited copy of accounts together with the auditors' report thereon. 


9. (J) The Board shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such time each 
financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities 
during the previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government. 


(2)The annual report prepared under sub-section (/) shall contain:— 
(a) a description of all the activities of the Board for the previous year; 
(b) the plan of the Board for the upcoming year; and 


(c) any such other details as may be provided under any law for the time being 
in force. 


20. The Central Government shall cause the auditor's report under section 8 and 
annual report under section l9 to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before 
each House of Parliament. 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
2. (/) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion: 


(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to discharge the 
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or 


(b) that the Board has persistently made default in complying with any direction 
issued by the Central Government under this Act, in achieving the objectives enlisted 
in section 9 or in exercising its general powers and functions under section 8, and as 
aresult of such default the financial position of the Board or the administration of the 
Board has deteriorated; or 


(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so 
to do, 


the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede 
the Board for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the 
notification. 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (/) superseding the 
Board: 


(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices 
as such; 


(b) the general powers and functions which may, by or under the provisions of 
this Act, by exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board, shall until the Board 
is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by such person 
or persons as the Central Government may direct; and 


(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the Board is 
reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government. 


(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued 
under sub-section (/), the Central Government may reconstitute the Board by a fresh 
appointment and in such case any person or persons who vacated their offices under 
clause (a) of sub-section (2), shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment: 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 73 


Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the expiration of the 
period of supersession, take action under this sub-section. 


(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section (/) 
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to 
such action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest. 


22. (7) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Board, in 
discharge of its general powers and functions under this Act, shall be bound by such 
directions as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time: 


Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express 
its views before any direction is given under this sub-section. 


(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not 
shall be final. 


23. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any 
power exercisable and functions performed by it under this Act may be exercised and 
performed in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be prescribed in 
the notification by such officer or authority as may be prescribed therein. 


24. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central 
Government, the Board, or any officer, member, or employee thereof for anything which is 
done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act or the rules or regulations made, 
or standards notified thereunder. 


25. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2)In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the qualification for appointment of the members of the Board and the 
manner of filling of vacancies among the members of the Board under sub-section (4) 
of section 3; 


(b) the procedure to be followed at meetings of the Board and at committees 
thereof for the conduct of business, and the number of members which shall form a 
quorum at any meeting; 


(c) the holding of a minimum number of meetings of the Board every year; 


(d) the term of office of, salaries, remuneration, or other allowances payable to, 
and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other members 
of the Board under sub-section (/) section 4; 


(e) the other powers and functions of the Board which shall be discharged by 
the Chairperson under sub-section (/) of section 6; 


(f) the officers who shall be authorised by the Board to conduct inspection 
under sub-section (/) of section 3; 


(g) the form and the manner of, and the conditions to be met and fee to be paid 
for, preferring an appeal to the Central Government under sub-section (/) of section 
4; 


(h) the conditions to be met for borrowing any sum under section |6; 


(i) the form and the manner of, the time at which and the intervals for the 
preparation of a Budget under section 7; 


(/) the form and the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall be audited 
and the date before which the audited copy of the accounts may be furnished to the 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
to issue 
directions. 


Power to 
delegate. 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 


Power to 
make rules. 


Power to 
make 
regulations. 


Rules and 
regulations to 
be laid before 
Parliament. 


74 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Central Government under section 8; 


(k) the form and the manner and the time at which the annual report shall 
be prepared under section !9; and 


(J) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of 
which provision is to be, or may be, made by rules. 


26. (J) Subject to the provisions of section 9, and with the approval of the Central 
Government, the Board may by notification in the Official Gazette make such regulations 
consistent with this Act and any rules made thereunder to carry out its functions under this 
Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters namely: 


(a) the method of collecting statistics from such stakeholders in the chilli 
industry; 


(b) the method of recruitment and terms and conditions of service of any officers 
appointed, and any staff employed under sub-section (2) of section 7; 


(c) the fee or other charges for providing advisory services under clause (n) of 
sub-section (2) of section 8; and 


(d) the form and the manner of, the conditions to be met and fee to be paid for, 
and the date of effect of certificate of, registration under sub-section (/) of section |; 


(e) the manner of verification of an application to obtain certificate of registration 
and the period within which such certificate shall be issued or rejected under sub- 
section (2) of section |]; 


(f) the period of validity of a certificate of registration under sub- section (4) of 
section l|I; 


(g) the form and the manner of, the particulars to be contained in, and the times 
at which, returns shall be submitted under section 2; 


(A) the conditions subject to which the Board may authorise officers to conduct 
an inspection by an order in writing under sub- section (/) of section I3; 


(i) conditions subject to and manner in which inspection is to be conducted 
under sub-section (2) of section 3; 


(J) the particulars to be contained in the report to be submitted by an executive 
officer upon completion of investigation under sub- section (3) of section 3; 


(k) the form, manner, and conditions subject to which the Board shall pass an 
order under sub-section (4) of section 3; 


(J) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be, or may be, made by regulations. 


27. Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation 
or both Houses gree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 75 


28. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three 
years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


29. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force, on and from the date of commencement of this Act, all matters pertaining to 
chilli under the Spices Board Act, |986 (Act l0 of 986) shall be deemed to be governed by 
the provisions of this Act. 


(2) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, any stakeholder in the chilli 
industry that has a valid registration, certification or licence, by whatever name called, 
under the Spices Board Act, 986 (Act 0 of 986), shall be deemed to be registered under 
section |l, and shall be deemed to remain so registered till the registration or license as the 
case may be, remains valid under the Spices Board Act, 986 (Act 0 of 986). 


30. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


3. In the Spices Board Act, 986 in the Schedule, the entry namely, '3. Chilly’, shall be 
omitted. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Transitional 
provisions. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Amendment 
of Act l0 of 
986 


76 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Spices Board Act, 986 was enacted for the purpose of development of export of 
26 specified spices, including chilli. Among these spices, chilli assumes great significance 
for a variety of reasons. Indiais the largest producer and exporter of chilli in the world. 
It contributes to roughly 37 per cent. of the total global chilli production, with an estimated 
production of 44 million tonnes. It has about 8 million hectare of land under chilli 
production, amounting to 39 per cent. of the total area under chilli production in the world. 


India's export of chilli and chilli products is valued at more than Rs. 6,000 crores, 
with the export quantity having almost doubled in the last decade. Within the basket of 
spices exported from India, chilli contributed to more than 40 per cent. of the volume and 
30 per cent. of the value. One of the primary reasons for the high demand, popularity and 
renown of Indian chilli, especially in lucrative markets of the USA and UK, is its superior 
commercial qualities of colour and pungency. 


These factors make chilli one of the most prominent spices in the country and across 
the world. However, the potential of the chilli industry is immense and remains to be fully 
exploited. Due to the fact that chilli has been clubbed with 25 other spices under the Spices 
Board, it has been difficult to provide concerted attention to and allocate sufficient resources 
for the promotion and development of the chilli industry in the country. A separate Chilli 
Board will help address these problems while also allowing the Spices Board to focus its 
efforts on promoting other spices under its ambit. 


The Bill, therefore, provides for the removal of chilli from the purview of the Spices 
Board Act, 986 and instead facilitate its promotion and development through the 
constitution of a separate Chilli Board. It also provides for allied matters such as registration 
of stakeholders, inspections and penalties, appeals, budget, audits and annual reports. 
Furthermore, it establishes a Chilli Promotion and Development Fund towards payment of 
salaries, allowances, etc. of the members, officers, and staff of the Board and meeting other 
administrative expenses of the Board. The Bill also makes the necessary provisions to 
facilitate the smooth transition of chilli industry from the scope of the Spices Board to the 
new Chilli Board. Through this Bill, the Indian chilli industry can achieve greater heights of 
prosperity and reach its true economic potential whilst also promoting the overall welfare 
of all stakeholders involved. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; LAVU SRI KRISHNA DEVARAYALU 
l July, 2022 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY TW 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Chilli Board. It also provides 
for appointment of the Chairperson and other members of the Board. Clause 4 provides for 
the term of office of, salaries, remuneration or other allowance payable to, and the other 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other members of the Board. Clause 7 provides 
for the constitution of advisory or executive committees, appointment of officers and 
employment of staff of the Board. Clause |5 provides for the constitution of a Fund called 
the Chill Promotion and Development Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure 
of about rupees twenty crore per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty five crore is also likely to be 
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. 


Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the Board, with approval of the Central Government, to 
make regulations for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 


As the matters in respect of which rules, regulations or orders may be made are 
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them 
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 79 


Bit No. 247 oF 2022 


A Bill to provide protection against sexual harassment at workplace to people of all 
genders including women, men and other genders and for the prevention and 
redressal of complaints of sexual harassment and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
CHAPTER I 


PRELIMINARY 
l. (J) This Act may be called the Sexual Harassment at Workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2022. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "aggrieved person" means— 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


80 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(i) in relation to a workplace, a person, of any age whether employed or 
not which includes employees and customer, client, visitor, patient or any such 
person, who allege to have been subjected to any act of sexual harassment by 
the respondent; 


(ii) in relation to dwelling place or house, a person of any age who is 
employed in such a dwelling place or house; 


(b) "appropriate Government" means- 


(i) in relation to a workplace which is established, owned, controlled or 
wholly or substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly- 


(A) by the Central Government or the Union territory administration, 
the Central Government; 


(B) by the State Government, the State Government; 


(ii) in relation to any workplace not covered under sub-clause (i) and 
falling within its territory, the State Government; 


(c) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Local Committee nominated 
under sub-section (/) of section 7; 


(d) "District Officer" means an officer notified under section 5; 


(e) "domestic worker" means a person who is employed to do the household 
work in any household for remuneration whether in cash or kind, either directly or 
through any agency on a temporary, permanent, part time or full time basis, but does 
not include any member of the family of the employer; 


(f) "employee" means a person employed at a workplace for any work on 
regular, temporary, ad hoc or daily wage basis, either directly or through an agent, 
including a contractor and gig workers with or, without the knowledge of the principal 
employer, whether for remuneration or not, or working on a voluntary basis or 
otherwise, whether the terms of employment are express or implied and includes a co- 
worker, a contract worker, probationer, trainee, apprentice or called by any other such 
name; 


(g) "gig worker" means a person who performs work or participates in a work 
arrangement and earns from such activities outside of traditional employer-employee 
relationship; 


(h) "employer" means- 


(4) in relation to any department, organisation, undertaking, establishment, 
enterprise, institution, office, branch or unit of the appropriate Government or 
a local authority, the head of that department, organisation, undertaking, 
establishment, enterprise, institution, office, branch or unit or such other officer 
as the appropriate Government or the local authority, as the case may be, may 
by an order specify in this behalf; 


(ii) in any workplace not covered under sub-clause (7), any person 
responsible for the management, supervision and control of the workplace. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-clause "management" 
includes the person or board or committee responsible for formulation and 
administration of police for such organisation; 


(iii) in relation to workplace covered under sub-clauses (i) and (ii), the 
person discharging contractual obligations with respect to his or her employees; 


(iv) in relation to a dwelling place or house, a person or a household who 
employs or benefits from the employment of domestic worker, irrespective of 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 8l 


the number, time period or type of such worker employed, or the nature of the 
employment or activities performed by the domestic worker; 


(i) "Internal Committee" means an Internal Committee constituted under 
section 4; 


(j) "Local Committee" means the Local Committee constituted under section 6; 


(k) "Member" means a Member of the Internal Committee or the Local 
Committee, as the case may be; 


(J) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(m) "Presiding Officer" means the Presiding Officer of the Internal Complaints 
Committee nominated under sub-section (2) of section 4; 


(n) "respondent' means a person against whom the aggrieved person has made 
a complaint under section 9; 


(०) "sexual harassment" includes any one or more of the following unwelcome 
acts or behavior (whether directly or by implication) namely:- 


(i) physical contact and advances; or 

(ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or 
(iii) making sexually coloured remarks; or 

(iv) showing pornography; or 


(v) any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-verbal conduct of sexual 
nature; 


(p) "workplace" includes— 


(i) any department, organisation, undertaking, establishment, enterprise, 
institution, office, branch or unit which is established, owned, controlled or 
wholly or substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly by the 
appropriate Government or the local authority or a Government company or a 
corporation or a co-operative society; 


(ii) any private sector organisation or a private venture, undertaking, 
enterprise, institution, establishment, society, trust, non-governmental 
organisation, unit or service provider carrying on commercial, professional, 
vocational, educational, entertainmental, industrial, health services or financial 
activities including production, supply, sale, distribution or service; 


(iii) hospitals or nursing homes; 


(iv) any sports institute, stadium, sports complex or competition or games 
venue, whether residential or not used for training, sports or other activities 
relating thereto; 


(v) any place visited by the employee arising out of or during the course 
of employment including transportation by the employer for undertaking such 
journey; 

(vi) a dwelling place or a house; 

(q) "unorganised sector" in relation to a workplace means an enterprise owned 
by individuals or self-employed workers and engaged in the production or sale of 


goods or providing service of any kind whatsoever, and where the enterprise employs 
workers, the number of such workers is less than ten. 


82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


a a of 3. (J) No person shall be subjected to sexual harassment at any workplace. 
SexXu. 
harassment. (2) The following circumstances, among other circumstances, if it occurs, or is present 


in relation to or connected with any act or behavior of sexual harassment may amount to 
sexual harassment:- 


(i) implied or explicit promise of preferential treatment in their employment; or 
(ii) implied or explicit threat of detrimental treatment in their employ- ment; or 


(iii) implied or explicit threat about their present or future employment status; 
or 


(iv) interference with their work or creating an intimidating or offensive or 
hostile work environment for them; or 


(v) humiliating treatment likely to affect their health or safety. 


CHAPTER II 


CONSTITUTION OF INTERNAL COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE 


Constitution 4. (/) Every employer of a workplace shall, by an order in writing, constitute a Committee 
of Internal to be known as the "Internal Committee": 
Committee. 


Provided that where the offices or administrative units of the workplace are located at 
different places or divisional or sub-divisional level, the Internal Committee shall be 
constituted at all administrative units or offices. 


(2) The Internal Committees shall consist of the following members to be nominated 
by the employer, namely:- 
(a) a Presiding Officer who shall be a woman employed at a senior level at 
workplace from amongst the employees: 


Provided that in case a senior level woman employee is not available, the 
Presiding Officer shall be nominated from other offices or administrative units of the 
workplace referred to in sub-section (/): 


Provided further that in case the other offices or administrative units of the 
workplace do not have a senior level woman employee, the Presiding Officer shall be 
nominated from any other workplace of the same employer or other department or 
organisation; 

(b) not less than two Members from amongst employees preferably committed 
to the cause of prevention of sexual harassment or who have had experience in social 
work or have legal knowledge; 


(c) one member from amongst non-governmental organisations or associations 
committed to the cause of prevention of sexual harassment or a person familiar with 
the issues relating to sexual harassment: 

Provided that at least one-half of the total Members so nominated shall be women. 

(3) The Presiding Officer and every Member of the Internal Committee shall hold 
office for such period, not exceeding three years, from the date of their nomination as may 
be specified by the employer. 

(4) The Member appointed from amongst the non-governmental organisations or 
associations shall be paid such fees or allowances for holding the proceedings of the 
Internal Committee, by the employer, as may be prescribed. 


(5) Where the Presiding Officer or any Member of the Internal Committee,— 

(a) contravenes the provisions of section l6; or 

(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under any 
law for the time being in force is pending against him; or 

(c) has been found guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary 
proceeding is pending against them; or 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 83 


(d) has so abused their position as to render their continuance in office prejudicial 
to the public interest, 


such Presiding Officer or Member, as the case may be, shall be removed from 
the Internal Committee and the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall be 
filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the provisions of this section. 


CHAPTER III 
CONSTITUTION OF LOCAL COMMITTEE 
5. (/) The appropriate Government may notify a District Magistrate or Additional 


District Magistrate or the Collector or Deputy Collector as a District Officer for every 
District to exercise powers or discharge functions under this Act. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall publish the notified list of District Officers on 
the portal of the Labour Department of each State. 


6. (/) Every District Officer shall constitute in the district concerned, a committee to 
be known as the Local Committee to receive complaints of sexual harassment from 
establishments where the Internal Committee has not been constituted due to having less 
than ten workers or if the complaint is against the employer himself. 


(2) The District Officer shall designate one nodal officer in every block, taluka and 
tehsil in rural or tribal area and ward or municipality in the urban area, to receive complaints 
and forward the same to the concerned Local Committee within a period of seven days. 


(3) The jurisdiction of the Local Committee shall extend to the areas of the district 
where it is constituted. 


(4) The District Officer shall publish the details of the nodal officer on the portal of the 
Labour Department of each State. 


7. (7) The Local Committee shall consist of the following members to be nominated by 
the District Officer, namely:- 


(a) a Chairperson to be nominated from amongst the eminent women in the field 
of social work and committed to the cause of women; 


(b) one Member to be nominated from amongst the women working in block, 
taluka or tehsil or ward or municipality in the district; 


(c) two Members, of whom at least one shall be a woman, to be nominated from 
amongst such non-governmental organisations or associations committed to the 
cause of women or a person familiar with the issues relating to sexual harassment, 
which may be prescribed: 


Provided that at least one of the nominees should, preferably, have a background 
in law or legal knowledge: 


Provided further that at least one of the nominees shall be a woman 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward 
Classes or minority community notified by the Central Government, from time to time; 


(d) the concerned officer dealing with the social welfare or women and child 
development in the district, shall be a member ex officio. 


(2) The Chairperson and every Member of the Local Committee shall hold office for 
such period, not exceeding five years, from the date of their appointment as may be specified 
by the District Officer. 


(3) Where the Chairperson or any Member of the Local Committee- 
(a) contravenes the provisions of section |6; or 


(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under any 
law for the time being in force is pending against them; or 

(c) has beenfound guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary 
proceeding is pending against them; or 


Notification 
of District 
Officer. 


Constitution 
and 
jurisdiction of 
Local 
Committee. 


Composition, 
tenure and 
other terms 
and condition 
of Local 
Committee. 


Grants and 
audit. 


Complaint of 
sexual 
harassment. 


Conciliation. 


84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(d) has so abused their position as to render their continuance in office prejudicial 
to the public interest, such Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, shall be 
removed from the Committee and the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall 
be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the provisions of this section. 


(4) The Chairperson or Members of the Local Committee other than the Members 
nominated under clauses (b) and (व) of sub-section (/) shall be entitled to such fees or 
allowances for holding the proceedings of the Local Committee as may be prescribed. 


8. (/) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, make to the State Government grants of such sums of money as the 
Central Government may think fit, for being utilised for the payment of fees or allowances 
referred to in sub- section (4) of section 7. 


(2) The State Government may set up an agency and transfer the grants made under 
sub-section (/) to that agency. 


(3) The agency shall pay to the District Officer, such sums as may be required for the 
payment of fees or allowances referred to in sub-section (4) of section 7. 


(4) The accounts of the agency referred to in sub-section (2) shall be maintained and 
audited in such manner as may, in consultation with the Accountant General of the State, be 
prescribed and the person holding the custody of the accounts of the agency shall furnish, 
to the State Government, before such date, as may be prescribed, its audited copy of 
accounts together with auditors' report thereon. 


CHAPTER IV 


CompPLAINT 
9. () Any aggrieved person may make, in writing, a complaint of sexual harassment at 
workplace to the Internal Committee if so constituted, or the Local Committee, in case it is 
not so constituted, within a period of three months from the date of incident and in case of 
a series of incidents, within a period of three months from the date of last incident: 


Provided that where such complaint cannot be made in writing, the Presiding Officer 
or any Member of the Internal Committee or the Chairperson or any Member of the Local 
Committee, as the case may be, shall render all reasonable assistance to the aggrieved 
person for making the complaint in writing: 


Provided further that the Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local Committee 
may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the time limit not exceeding three 
months, if itis satisfied that the circumstances were such which prevented the aggrieved 
person from filing a complaint within the said period. 


(2) Where the aggrieved person is unable to make a complaint on account of their 
physical or mental incapacity or death or otherwise, their legal heir or such other person as 
may be prescribed may make a complaint under this section. 


(3) Where the respondent is not an employee in the workplace at which the incident 
of sexual harassment took place, and if the aggrieved person so desires, the Internal 
Committee if so constituted, or the Local Committee, in case it is not so constituted, shall 
initiate action under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 860) or any other law for the time being 
in force, against the respondent. 


0. (J) The Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local Committee, may, 
before initiating an inquiry under section | and at the request of the aggrieved person take 
steps to settle the matter between the aggrieved person and the respondent through 
conciliation: 


Provided that no monetary settlement shall be made as a basis of conciliation. 


(2) Where settlement has been arrived at under sub-section (/), the Internal Committee 
or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall record the settlement so arrived and 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 85 


forward the same to the employer or the District Officer to take action as specified in the 
recommendation. 


(3) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall provide 
the copies of the settlement as recorded under sub-section (2) to the aggrieved person and 
the respondent. 


(4) Where a settlement is arrived at under sub-section (/), no further inquiry shall be 
conducted by the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be. 


l. () Subject to the provisions of section l0, the Internal Committee or the Local 
Committee, as the case may be, shall, where the respondent is an employee, proceed to 
make inquiry into the complaint in accordance with the provisions of the service rules 
applicable to the respondent and where no such rules exist, in such manner as may be 
prescribed or in case of a domestic worker, the Local Committee shall, if prima facie case 
exist, forward the complaint to the police, within a period of seven days for registering the 
case under section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of l860), and any other relevant 
provisions of the said Code where applicable: 


Provided that where the aggrieved person informs the Internal Committee or the 
Local Committee, as the case may be, that any term or condition of the settlement arrived at 
under sub-section (2) of section l0 has not been complied with by the respondent, the 
Internal Committee or the Local Committee shall proceed to make an inquiry into the complaint 
or, as the case may be, forward the complaint to the police: 


Provided further that where both the parties are employees, the parties shall, during 
the course of inquiry, be given an opportunity of being heard and a copy of the findings 
shall be made available to both the parties enabling them to make representation against the 
findings before the Committee. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 
of 860), the court may, when the respondent is convicted of the offence, 5 order payment 
of such sums as it may consider appropriate, to the aggrieved person by the respondent, 
having regard to the provisions of section I5. 


(3) For the purpose of making an inquiry under sub-section (/), the Internal Committee 
or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall have the same powers as are vested in a 
civil court the Code of Civil Procedure, 908 (5 of 908) when trying a suit in respect of the 
following matters, namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him 
on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; and 
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(4) The inquiry under sub-section (/) shall be completed within a period of ninety 
days. 
CHAPTER V 


Inquiry INTO COMPLAINT 
i2. (J) During the pendency of an inquiry on a written request made 99 the 
aggrieved person, the Internal Committee or the local Committee, as the case may be, may 
recommend to the employer to— 


(a) transfer the aggrieved person or the respondent to any other workplace; or 
(b) grant leave to the aggrieved person up to a period of three months; or 
(c) grant such other relief to the aggrieved person as may be prescribed. 


(2) The leave granted to the aggrieved person under this section shall be in addition 
to the leave they would be otherwise entitled. 


Inquiry into 
complaint. 


Action during 
pendency of 
inquiry. 


Inquiry report. 


Punishment 
for false or 
malicious 
complaint and 
false evidence. 


86 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(3) On the recommendation of the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the 
case may be, under sub-section (/), the employer shall implement the recommendations 
made under sub-section (/) and send the report of such implementation to the Internal 
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be. 


3. (J) On the completion of an inquiry under this Act, the Internal Committee or the 
Local Committee, as the case may be, shall provide a report of its findings to the employer, 
or as the case may be, the District Officer within a period of ten days from the date of 
completion of the inquiry and such report be made available to the concerned parties. 


(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives 
at the conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has not been proved, it shall 
recommend to the employer and the District Officer that no action is required to be taken in 
the matter. 


(3) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives 
at the conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has been proved, it shall 
recommend to the employer or the District Officer, as the case may be— 


(i) to take action for sexual harassment as a misconduct in accordance with the 
provisions of the service rules applicable to the respondent or where no such service 
rules have been made, in such manner as may be prescribed; and 


(ii) to deduct, notwithstanding anything in the service rules applicable to the 
respondent, from the salary or wages of the respondent such sum as it may consider 
appropriate to be paid to the aggrieved person or to their legal heirs, as it may determine, 
in accordance with the provisions of section I5: 


Provided that in case the employer is unable to make such deduction from the 
salary of the respondent due to absence from duty or cessation of employment it may 
direct to the respondent to pay such sum to the aggrieved person: 


Provided further that in case the respondent fails to pay the sum referred to in 
clause (7), the Internal Committee or as, the case may be, the Local Committee may 
forward the order for recovery of the sum as an arrear of land revenue to the concerned 
District Officer. 


(4) The employer or the District Officer shall act upon the recommendation within 
sixty days of its receipt by him. 


4. (7) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, 
arrives at a conclusion that the allegation against the respondent is malicious or the aggrieved 
person or any other person making the complaint has made the complaint knowing it to be 
false or the aggrieved person or any other person making the complaint has produced any 
forged or misleading document, it may recommend to the employer or the District Officer, as 
the case may be, to take action against the said person or the person who has made the 
complaint under sub-section (/) or sub-section (2) of section 9, as the case may be, in 
accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to her or him or where no 
such service rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that a mere inability to substantiate a complaint or provide adequate proof 
need not attract action against the complainant under this section: 


Provided further that the malicious intent on part of the complainant shall be established 
after an inquiry in accordance with the procedure prescribed, before any action is 
recommended. 


(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives 
at a conclusion that during the inquiry any witness has given false evidence or produced 
any forged or misleading document, it may recommend to the employer of the witness or the 
District Officer, as the case may be, to take action in accordance with the provisions of the 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 87 


service rules applicable to the said witness or where no such service rules exist, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


5. For the purpose of determining the sums to be paid to the aggrieved person under 
clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 3, the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, 
as the case may be, shall have regard to- 


(a) the mental trauma, pain, suffering and emotional distress caused to the 
aggrieved person; 


(9) the loss in the career opportunity due to the incident of sexual harassment; 
(c) medical expenses incurred by the victim for physical or psychiatric treatment; 
(d) the income and financial status of the respondent; and 

(e) feasibility of such payment in lump sum or in instalments. 


6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to Information Act, 2005 (22 of 
2005), the contents of the complaint made under section 9, the identity and addresses of 
the aggrieved person, respondent and witnesses, any information relating to conciliation 
and inquiry proceedings, recommendations of the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, 
as the case may be, and the action taken by the employer or the District Officer under the 
provisions of this Act shall not be published, communicated or made known to the public, 
press and media in any manner: 


Provided that information may be disseminated regarding the justice secured to any 
victim of sexual harassment under this Act without disclosing the name, address, identity or 
any other particulars calculated to lead to the identification of the aggrieved person and 
witnesses. 


7. Where any person entrusted with the duty to handle or deal with the complaint, 
inquiry or any recommendations or action to be taken under the provisions of this Act, 
contravenes the provisions of section l6, the person shall be liable for penalty in accordance 
with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said person or where no such 
service rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


8. (/) Any person aggrieved from the recommendations made under sub-section 
(2) of section I3 or under clause (i) or clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section l3 or sub- 
section (J) or sub-section (2) of section 4 or section |7 or non-implementation of such 
recommendations may prefer an appeal to the court or tribunal in accordance with the 
provisions of the service rules applicable to the said person or where no such service rules 
exist then, without prejudice to provisions contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the person aggrieved may prefer an appeal in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall maintain an online repository on each State's 
Labour Department website where details of the appellate authority to whom appeal may be 
preferred under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 946 shall be published. 


(3) The appeal under sub-section (/) shall be preferred within a period of ninety days 
of the recommendations. 


CHAPTER VI 
DUTIES OF EMPLOYER 
9. Every employer shall— 


(a) provide a safe working environment at the workplace which shall include 
safety from the persons coming into contact at the workplace; 


(b) display at any conspicuous place in the workplace, the penal consequences 
of sexual harassments; and the order constituting, the Internal Committee under sub- 


Determination 
of 
compensation. 


Prohibition of 
publication or 
making known 
contents of 
complaint and 
inquiry 
proceedings. 


Penalty for 
publication or 
making 
known 
contents of 
complaint and 
inquiry 
proceedings. 


Appeal. 


Duties of 
employer. 


Duties and 
powers of 
District 
Officer. 


Committee to 
submit annual 
report. 


Employer to 
include 
information in 
annual report. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to monitor 
implementation 
and maintain 
data.. 


88 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


section (/) of section 4; 


(c) organise workshops and awareness programmes at least once every calendar 
year, by a legal professional having experience/practice in the relevant laws or any 
professional/group certified in conducting trainings pertaining to prevention of sexual 
harassment, for sensitising the employees with the provisions of the Act and training 
programmes for the members of the Internal Committee to redress complaints in 
compliance with the provisions of the Act; 


(d) file Annual Compliance Reports along with the details of the training which 
shall include details of the trainer who facilitated, number of employees and Internal 
Committee members who attended the training sessions and_ such other information; 


(e) provide necessary facilities to the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, 
as the case may be, for dealing with the complaint and conducting an inquiry; 


(f) assist in securing the attendance of respondent and witnesses before the 
Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be; 


(g) make available such information to the Internal Committee or the Local 
Committee, as the case be, as it may require having regard to the complaint made 
under sub-section (/) of section 9; 


(A) provide assistance to the person if he/she/they so chooses to file a complaint 
in relation to the offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 860) or any other law for 
the time being in force; 


(i) treat sexual harassment as a misconduct under the service rules and initiate 
action for such misconduct; and 


(j) monitor the timely submission of reports by the Internal Committee. 
CHAPTER VII 
Duties AND Powers OF DistrIcT OFFICER 
20. The District Officer shall,— 


(a) monitor the timely submission of report furnished by the Local Committee; 
and 


(b) take such measures as may be necessary for engaging non-governmental 
organisations for creation of awareness on sexual harassment. 


CHAPTER VIII 


MISCELLANEOUS 
2I. (J) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall in 


each calendar year prepare, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual 
report and submit the same to the employer and the District Officer. 


(2) The District Officer shall forward a brief report on the annual reports received 


under sub-section (/) to the State Government. 


22. The employer shall include in its report the number of cases filed, if any, and their 


disposal under this Act in the annual report of his organisation or where no such report is 
required to be prepared, intimate such number of cases, if any, to the District Officer. 


23. The appropriate Government shall monitor the implementation of this Act and 


maintain date on the number of cases filed and disposed of in respect of all cases of sexual 
harassment at workplace. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 89 


24. The appropriate Government may, subject to the availability of financial and other 
resources,— 


(a) develop relevant information, education, communication and training 
materials, and organise awareness programmes, to advance the understanding of the 
public of the provisions of this Act providing for protection of people against sexual 
harassment at workplace; and 


(b) formulate orientation and training programmes for the members of the Local 
Committee. 


25. (/) The appropriate Government, on being satisfied that it is necessary in the 
public interest or in the interest of employees at a workplace to do so, by order in writing,— 


(a) call upon any employer or District Officer to furnish in writing such 
information relating to sexual harassment as it may require; and 


(b) authorise any officer to make inspection of the records and work- place in 
relation to sexual harassment, who shall submit a report of such inspection to it within 
such period as may be specified in the order. 


(2) Every employer and District Officer shall produce on demand before the officer 
making the inspection all information, records and other documents in his custody having 
a bearing on the subject matter of such inspection. 


26. (/) Where the employer fails to— 
(a) constitute an Internal Committee under sub-section (/) of section 4; 
(b) take action under sections 3, [4 and 22; and 


(c) contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets contravention of other 
provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder, the employer shall be punishable 
with fine which may be equivalent to 2% of the annual global turnover of the entity 
and could go upto 4% of the annual global turnover or fifty thousand rupees, 
whichever is higher. 


(2) If any employer, after having been previously convicted of an offence punishable 
under this Act subsequently commits and is convicted of the same offence, the said employer 
shall be liable to— 


(i) twice the punishment, which might have been imposed on a first 
conviction, subject to the punishment being maximum provided for the same 
offence: 


Provided that in case a higher punishment is prescribed under any other 
law for the time being in force, for the offence for which the accused is being 
prosecuted, the court shall take due cognizance of the same while awarding the 
punishment; 


(it) cancellation, of their licence or withdrawal, or non-renewal, or approval, 
or cancellation of the registration, as the case may be, by the Government or 
local authority required for carrying on their business or activity. 


27. (J) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or 
any rules made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the aggrieved person authorised 
by the Internal Committee or Local Committee in this behalf. 


(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of 
the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. 


(3) Every offence under this Act shall be non-cognizable. 


28. () The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


Appropriate 
Government 
to take 
measures to 
publicise the 
Act. 


Power to call 
for 
information 
and inspection 
of records. 


Penalty for 
non- 
compliance 
with 
provisions of 
Act. 


Cognizance of 
offence by 
courts. 


Power of 
appropriate 
Government 
to make rules. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal and 
Savings. 


90 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(a) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Members under sub- section (4) 
of section 4; 


(b) nomination of members under clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 7; 


(c) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Chairperson, and Members under 
sub-section (4) of section 7; 


(d) the person who may make complaint under sub-section (2) of section 9; 
(e) the manner of inquiry under sub-section (/) of section |; 


(f) the powers for making an inquiry under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of 
section l|; 


(g) the relief to be recommended under clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 2; 


(h) the manner of action to be taken under clause (i) of sub-section (3) of 
section |3; 


(i) the manner of action to be taken under sub-sections (/) and (2) of 
section |4; 


(j) the manner of action to be taken under section 7; 
(k) the manner of appeal under sub-section (/) of section 8; 


(J) the manner of organising workshops, awareness programmes for sensitising 
the employees and orientation programmes for the members of the Internal Committee 
under clause (c) of section 9; and 


(m) the form and time for preparation of annual report by Internal Committee 
and the Local Committee under sub-section (/) of section 2]. 


(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


(4) Any rule made under sub-section (4) of section 8 by the State Government shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 5 the State Legislature where 
it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that 
House. 


29. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


30. (7) The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Act, 203 [Act No. l4 of 203] shall stand repealed on and from the dates the 
notification referred to in sub-section (2) of section | is issued. 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Act so 
repealed under sub-section (l), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Sexual harassment at a workplace is considered to violate a person's fundamental 
right to equality, life and liberty. It creates an insecure and hostile work environment for 


employees, thereby adversely affecting their social and economic empowerment and the 
goal of inclusive growth. 


The Supreme Court of India in the case of Vishaka vs. State of Rajasthan, ((997) 7 SCC 
323, affirmed that sexual harassment at workplace is a form of discrimination against women 
and recognised that it violates the constitutional right to equality and provided guidelines 
to address this issue pending the enactment of a suitable legislation. Based on these 
guidelines, a legislation to provide safe, secure and enabling environment to every woman, 
irrespective of her age or employment status was enacted by way of the Sexual Harassment 
of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 203. 


The Constitution of India embodies the concept of equality under articles l4 and I5 
and prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth or any 
of them. Article l9()(g) gives the fundamental right to all citizens to practise any profession, 
or to carry on any occupation, trade, or business. This right pre-supposes the availability of 
an enabling environment for employees of all genders, which is egalitarian, safe, and secure 
in every aspect. Article 2!, which relates to the right to life and personal liberty, includes the 
right to live with dignity, hence all employees irrespective of their gender must be treated 
with due respect, decency, and dignity at the workplace. 


The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 20l9 has provided formal and 
legal recognition to the transgender community. Hence, it has become imperative to ensure 
legislation on prevention of sexual harassment cuts across genders and is more inclusive. 
According to a study conducted by the National Human Rights Commission in 208, about 
6% of transgenders are employed in private sectors and NGOs. Besides this, a significant 
number of transgenders work in the unorganized sector. 


Hence, to ensure an enabling working environment which safeguards and protects 
every individual in the workplace without any discrimination based on their gender, in both 
organised and unorganised sectors against all kinds of harassment, the proposed legislation 
contains provisions to protect every individual, irrespective of their gender, rank or position 
from any act of sexual harassment in workplace. 


It is thus, proposed to amend this comprehensive legislation to make it more inclusive 
in nature by not limiting the scope of this legislation only to women, and to validate that the 
possibility of such sexual harassment incidents occurs even amongst other genders who 
are not included within the ambit of this legislation and ensure to provide due protection 
and safeguard their fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution of India. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DEL; LAVU SRI KRISHNA DEVARAYALU 
November 2, 2022. 


92 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Sub-clause () of clause 6 of the Bill empower every District Officer to constitute a 
Local Committee in the District concerned and sub-clause (2) provides for additional Local 
Committees at Block, Taluk or Tehsil in rural or tribal areas and ward or municipality in urban 
area, wherever required. Sub-clause (4) of clause 7 provides for payment of fees or allowances 
to the Chairperson and Members of the Local Committee for conducting the proceedings of 
the Committee. 


2. Sub-clause (.) of clause 8 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, 
after due appropriation made by Parliament, by law in this behalf, make to the State 
Government grant of such sum of money as the Central Government may think fit for being 
utilised for the payment of fees and allowances to the Chairperson and Members of the 
Local Committee. 


3. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. However, it is not possible at present to give the estimates of recurring expenditure 
and non-recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India at this stage. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 93 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Sub-clause (/) of clause 28 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed 
legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. 
These matters, inter alia, include - 


(a) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Presiding Officer and Members 
under sub-clause (4) of clause 4; 


(b) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Chairperson, and Members under 
sub-clause (4) of clause 7; 


(c) the person who may make complaint under sub-clause (2) of clause 9; 

(d) the manner of enquiry under sub-clause (/) of clause ]; 

(e) the powers for making enquiry under item (c) of sub-clause (2) of clause ; 
(f) the relief to be recommended under item (c) of sub-clause (/) of clause 2; 

(g) the manner of action to be taken under item (7) of sub-clause (3) of clause 3; 

(h) the manner of action to be taken under sub-clauses (/) and (2) of clause 4; 
(i) the manner of action to be taken under clause I7; 

(j) the manner of appeal under sub-clause (/) of clause 8; and 


(k) the form and time for preparation of annual report by Internal Committee and 
the Local Committee under sub-clause (/) of clause 2. 


2. Sub-clause (3) of clause 28 provides that every rule made by the Central Government 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. Sub-clause 
(4) of that clause provides that any rule made by the State Government shall be laid before 
each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature 
consists of one House, before that House. 


3. The matters in respect of which the Central Government may make rules are matters 
of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill 
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


94 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Butt No. 227 or 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:- 


Short title and . (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Governmentb may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 2. In article 58 of the Constitution, in clause (2), for the words "local or other authority", 
of article 58. the words "local or other authority or institution of self-government" shall be substituted. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 95 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments passed by Parliament in [992 introduced 
local self governance throughout the territory of India. The Acts came into force as the 
Constitution (73rd Amendment) Act, 992 on April 24, 993 and the Constitution (74th 
Amendment) Act, 992 on June 4, 993. 


These amendments added two new parts to the Constitution, namely,- 


e 73rd Amendment added Part IX titled "The Panchayats" adding Articles 243 to 
243 (O) dealing with Panchayats; and 


e 74th Amendment added Part [XA titled "The Municipalities" adding Articles 243(P) 
to 243 (ZG) dealing with Municipality. 


Articles 243(G) and 243(W) prescribe the powers, authorities and responsibilities etc. 
of Panchayats and Municipalities respectively. The XI and XII schedule of the Constitution 
define the matters in respect of which schemes for economic development and social justice 
are to be implemented by Panchayats with regards to Article 243(G) and by Municipalities 
with regards to Article 243(W) respectively. The Constitution, hence, deals with Panchayats 
and Municipalities in great detail. 


The 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments substantially changed the Constitu- 
tion of India and the manner in which representation of the citizens, governance and 
devolution of powers in the nation was to be conducted. 


However, while monumental in themselves, the amendments failed to change the 
qualifications for the election of the President of the Union of India. 


Article 58(2) states the ineligibility for election as President of India by cause of 
holding an Office of Profit and the above two chapters were introduced without reflecting 
within the article the change in the makeup of the State as undertaken by the institution of 
the third level of governance under Panchayats and Municipalities by these amendments. 


The inclusion of Panchayats and Municipalities as separate and distinct bodies in the 
Constitution as established by the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments requires their 
inclusion as a disqualification under Office of Profit for the election to the nation's 
Presidency. This is because the highest holder of office in the nation should not be influenced 
in any manner by any authority in the discharge of his/her duties. 


Now in view of the above mentioned proposed amendment the Panchayats and 
Municipalities will also be enshrined within the executive offices of the State as offices of 
profit for the Presidency of the nation as distinct bodies rather than their present inclusion 
under ‘any local or other authority’. 


Hence it has become expedient to introduce the words "or Institution of self- 
government" within Article 58(2) of the Constitution of India. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; P.P. CHAUDHARY 
23 November, 2022. 


96 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Butt No. 294 or 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 
Short title. l. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 
Amendment 2. In the Seventh Schedule to Constitution,— 
of the Seventh 
Schedule. 6). in List II - State list, entry 7 shall be omitted; and 


(i) in List वा - Concurrent List, after entry 32, the following entry shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


"32A. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage 
and embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of 
entry 56 of list L.". 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 97 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Life is impossible without water. All living beings including human, animals and plants 


need water for their survival. Therefore, it is desirable that requisite amount of water is 
available without any hindrance for drinking and irrigation. 


Around ninety-seven per cent of the water on the Earth is salty water and only three 
per cent is fresh water; slightly over two-thirds of this fresh water is frozen in the form of 
glaciers and polar ice caps. The remaining unfrozen fresh water is found mainly as ground 
water. 


Ground water is a renewable resource, yet the world's supply of ground water is 
steadily decreasing with the depletion of water table, most prominently in Asia and North 
America. It is still not clear that how much natural renewal balance of fresh water is available 
or whether ecosystem will be threatened for want of fresh water in near future. The frame- 
work for allocating water resources to water users where such a framework exists is known as 
water rights. 


At present, water is a State subject and is considered as primary responsibility of the 
State Governments. 


The Bill seeks to amend that Seventh Schedule to the Constitution with a view to 
transfer entry 7 of List II - State List pertaining to 'Water', to List [I-Concurrent List so that 
the Parliament and the Central Government can also play their due role for conservation and 
sustainable use of water to meet the growing needs of the society. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; P.P. CHAUDHARY 
November 23, 2022. 


98 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Butt No. 237 or 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 


Short title. I. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


Amendment 2. In the Seventh Schedule to Constitution,— 


of the Seventh . : : : 
Schedule. (7) in List II - State List, entry 4 shall be omitted; and 


(ii) in List HI - Concurrent List, after entry |7B, the following entry shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
"7९. Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, 
protection against pests and prevention of plant diseases.". 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 99 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Agriculture has got pivotal role in Indian economy. Though the share of agriculture 
in the national income is declining, it has a substantial share in Gross Domestic Production 
of the country. Agriculture is the mainstay of livelihood in rural areas. As nearly as 
65 percent. to 70 per cent. of our total population is engaged in agriculture related activities. 
Agriculture sector can be revitalized by concerted efforts to be made by the State Government 
as well as the Union Govenment. However, the role of the Union Government is negligible in 
the development of agriculture sector for the reason that agriculture has been listed in the 
State List and is considered as primary responsibility of the State Governments. 


The Bill seeks to amend the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution with a view to 
transfer entry |4 of List I-State List pertaining to ‘Agriculture’, to List [-Concurrent List so 
that the Parliament and Central Government can also play their due role for development of 
agriculture. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; P.P. CHAUDHARY 
November 23, 2022. 


400 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Butt No. 27 oF 202] 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:- 


Short title and I. (J)This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 202]. 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in List II- Concurrent List, after entry 
of the Seventh 7B, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:— 
Schedule. 


"I7C. Environmental protection and matters relating to climate change.". 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 0l 


The Constitution of India recognises the importance of environmental protection as a 
Directive Principle of State Policy under article 48A and also under the Twelfth Schedule. The 
Constitution is cognizant of environmental challenges being faced by the world and has 
entries in the Seventh Schedule which deal with certain aspects of environmental protection 
such as forests and protection of animals and birds. However, there is an increase in urgency 
of environmental protection in light of the challenges posed by climate change. There is no 
specific entry expressly for environmental protection and climate change in the Seventh 
Schedule. As a result, in the past, legislative competence for enacting some of the major 
environmental laws had to be derived from extraordinary provision of article 252 of the 
Constitution. Thus, there is a need for, specific entry relating, to environmental protection 
aria climate change. This is also in line with the recommendations of the Tiwari Committee set 
up by the Central Government which gave its report in l980. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution with a 
view to add an entry "Environmental protection and matters relating to climate change" in 
List-HI (Concurrent List) so that Central Government could play its due role in the field of 
environment and climate change. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
March 9, 202. 


402 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Bit No. 9 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, /966. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title and . (7) This Act may be cited as the Motor Vehicles (Amendment), 2022. 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 2. In section 2 of the Motor Vehicle Act, |988 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 59 of 988. 
Act),— 


(a) clause (IB) shall be remembered clause as (IC) and before the clause (IC) as 
so remembered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(IB) "aggressive driving behaviour" means unsafe driving performed 
deliberately with ill intent or disregard for safety including the following driving 
behaviours: 


(i) tailgating; 

(ii) speeding; 

(iii) erratic lane changes; 
(iv) honking; 

(vy) cutting off other drivers; 
(vi) failing to signal; 


(vii) running on red lights; 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 03 


(viii) racing; 

(ix) failure to obey traffic lights; 

(x) shouting, yelling, or taking frustrations out on other drivers; 
(xi) bumping other vehicle on purpose; 

(xii) getting out of the vehicle or confronting other drivers; and 


(xiii) careless, negligent driving, not follow traffic laws, endangering 
other drivers, pedestrians and properties;"; and 


(b) after clause (37), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- 


"(37A) "road rage" means aggressive driving behaviour stemming from a 
driver's uncontrolled anger at the actions of another motorist including hitting 
vehicle running vehicles off the road pulling over, getting out and engaging in a 
physical confrontation; inciting passenger(s) to fight the other driver; using 
any weapon to inflict harm on another driver or vehicle and making a rude hand 
gesture behind the wheel. 


3. After Chapter VIII of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections thereunder 


shall be inserted namely:— 


CHAPTER VIA 
ROAD RAGE 


38A. Whoever, intentionally hits his vehicle with which of any other person or 
runs behind someone off the road or pulls over, gets out and engages in a physical 
confrontation or incites his passenger(s) to fight the other driver or uses any sort of 
weapon to inflict harm on another driver or vehicle, or makes a rude hand gesture 
behind the wheel, would be said to commit an offence of act of road rage. 


38B. Whoever commits the offence of road rage shall be punished with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term of two months, and shall also be liable to a fine which shall not 
be less than rupees five thousand. 


38C. Whoever commits an offence punishable under sections 82, 83, 84, 
85, 86, 90, 92, l92A, 94, 96, 97 and 20] for the first time or drives a motor vehicle 
in a manner which is dangerous to the public including aggressive driving behaviours, 
and thereafter involve in the act of road rage, shall be said to have committed an 
offence of aggravated act of road rage. 


38D. Whoever commits the offence of aggravated act of road rage shall be 
punished for the first offence with the punishment mentioned under sub-section 82, 
83, 84, I85, 86, 90, 92, 92A, 94, 96, 97 and 20][ and for subsequent offences 
with imprisonment for a term of six months, and shall also be liable to a fine which shall 
not be less than rupees ten thousand. 


I38E. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule, regulation 
or notification made thereunder shall, if no penalty is provided for the offence be 
punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to rupees one thousand 
and for any second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to rupees two 
thousand. 


38F. Whoever disobeys any direction lawfully given by any person or authority 
empowered under the Act to give such direction, or obstructs any person or authority 
in the discharge of any functions which such person or authority is required or 
empowered under this Act to discharge, shall, if no other penalty is provided for the 
offence shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than rupees two thousand. 


Insertion of 
new Chapter 
VIIA. 


Offence of 
Road Rage. 


Punishment 
for the 
offence of 
road rage. 


Aggravated 
act of Road 
Rage. 


Punishment 
for the 
aggravated act 
of road rage. 


General 
provision for 
punishment of 
offences. 


Punishment for 
disobedience of 
orders, 
obstruction and 
refusal of 
information. 


Public 
awareness 
about the road 
rage. 


Publication of 
fact of 
conviction. 


Provision of 
Funds by 
Central 
Government. 


Amendment 
of section 
202. 


Amendment 
of section 
207. 


04 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


38G. The Central Government and every State Government shall take all measures to 
ensure that,— 


(J) the provisions of this Chapter are given wide publicity through media including the 
television, radio and the print media at regular intervals to make the general public aware of 
the provisions of this Chapter; and 


(2) the officers of the Central Government and the State Governments and other 
concerned persons (including the police officers) are imparted periodic training on the matters 
relating to the implementation of the provisions of this Chapter. 


38H. Where any person is convicted of any offence punishable under this Act, it shall 
be competent for the Court convicting such offender to cause the name and place of residence 
of such person to be published by the police in the local newspaper where such offence had 
taken place, together with the fact that such offender had been convicted of the offence 
under this Act and such other particulars as the Court may deem fit and appropriate, to be 
allowed to be published. Also, provided that no such publication shall be made until the 
appeal, if any, filed against such order is finally disposed of. 


38I. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Chapter. 


4. In section 202 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words and figures 
"under section 84", the words and figures "under section l38C or section l84" shall be 
substituted. 


5. In section 207 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words and figures 
"section 39", the words and figures "section 39 or section 38A or section !38C or section 
38E" shall be substituted. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 05 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


India is ranked second in the world in terms of road links. At the same time, the number 
of road mishaps, road accidents, and road injury in India is also one of the highest in the 
world. Aggressive and negligent driving has been a big issue on our streets for some time, 
and it appears to just be deteriorating and getting worse. With an increasing number of 
young people getting into the driver's seat, most mishaps and accidents are caused because 
of an ineffective and reckless driving pattern. Sensation chasing, driving in anger, retaliation, 
weariness, and stress are some of the components which contribute to perilous driving and 
people get into circumstances that can be effortlessly and easily avoided. Many lives have 
been lost as a result of growing intolerance among road users, and this unwelcome hatred 
that people carry on the road is unquestionably a dreadful flaw that leads to untimely deaths 
in great numbers. Incidents of shouting, yelling, rude behaviour, and even violence are 
accounted for often on our roads to where it has procured its name: road rage. The instances 
of road rage are on the rise and the numbers are increasing every year. 


Road rage is aggressive or angry behaviour exhibited by motorists. These behaviours 
include rude and verbal insults, physical threats or dangerous driving methods targeted at 
other drivers, pedestrians or cyclists in an effort to intimidate or release frustration. Road 
rage can lead to alterations, damage to property, assaults and collisions that result in serious 
physical injuries or even death. Strategies include longhorn honks, swerving, tailgating, 
brake checking and attempting to fight. These practices incorporate impolite and verbal put- 
downs, actual dangers, or risky driving techniques designated toward another driver or non- 
drivers with an end goal to scare, terrify or release irritation and dissatisfaction. Such behaviour 
patterns can prompt quarrels can cause harm to property and person, whose outcome can 
result in serious physical and mental injuries or even death or demise. In a simple sense, 
when a driver enacts or commits some moving traffic offences to jeopardize the life of 
another person or property or attack with an engine vehicle or other risky weapon by the 
driver of one engine vehicle on the driver of another engine vehicle can be termed as road 
rage. Road rage is characterized as the result of forceful and aggressive driving that emerges 
from conflicts with different drivers. Road rage is a criminal accusation in which the driver is 
at the fault. Road rage is an extraordinary sight and it normally brings about a great deal of 
enmity and sometimes results in mishaps and wounds. 


Acts of Road rage has increased in general. It is time that we should come up and 
together find the solution for this uncontrolled behaviour. As road rage is not defined under 
Motor Vehicles Act, there are no explicit provisions making road range a punishable offence. 
In conclusion, India needs this legislation to criminalise the act of road rage. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 988 with a view to include 
‘road rage’ as an offence punishable under the parent Act. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
9 February, 2022. 


406 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed section |38G provides for the Central Government 
and State Government to give wide publicity to the provision regarding road rage. It also 
vide proposed section |38I provides for the Central Government to provide adequate funds 
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees 
fifty crore would be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred. 


22 of 2005. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 07 


Butt No. 4 or 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2)It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 2 of the Right to Information Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in clause (f), for the words "papers", the words "papers, photos" shall be 
substituted. 


3. In section 6 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2) , the following sub-section shall 
be substituted, namely:— 


"(2) An applicant making request for obtaining information shall give reason for 
requesting the information including those details that may be necessary for contacting 
him.". 

4. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely: 


"Provided that if the Central Public Information Officers or State Public Information 
Officers, as the case may be, provide the information after the period of thirty 0395 of 
the receipt of the request, the Central Public Information Officers or State Public 
Information Officers, as the case may be, shall furnish the reasons in writing for such 
delay.". 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Amendment 
of section 6. 


Amendment 
of section 7. 


4086 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Right to Information Act, 2005 was enacted to provide transparency in the 
functioning of public authority. One of the major objective of the act was also ensuring 
accountability of the people working in those public institutions. The act seeks to provide 
access to information, contain corruption and strengthen ethos of democracy. To achieve all 
these objectives, a regular upgradation of the rules and regulations become necessary. 
There has been instances where information seekers have harassed people and enjoyed 
advantage through undue influence. Hon'ble Justice S.H. Kapadia, Former Chief Justice of 
India has also pointed once that "The Right to Information Act is a good law, but it is being 
abused". Hence, it becomes important to ensure that whether the applicants who are seeking 
information are using for rightful purpose or not. 


The Principal Act provides for the time period to give information. But it does not have 
any provision in case of non-compliance by the public information commission. As per the 
data, a total of 3.4 lakh complaints or appeals are pending with 26 information commission 
across India in October 2022. This can be solved by compelling the information commission 
to dispose those complaints. To make commission more accountable, it is important to put 
some burden on them. Thus, to fill this gap in the principal act, the present amendment is 
being proposed. 


With the advancement of new technology, photos have become one of the major 
sources of information. A lot of information can be gathered through photo itself. Therefore, 
it becomes important to include photos in the meaning of "information". To fulfil all these 
objectives, it has become important to bring amendment in the Right to Information Act, 
2005. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
November 22, 2022. 


45 of 860. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 09 


But No. 39 oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Indian Penal Code, /6609 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
4973. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
l.(/) This Act may be called the Criminal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS To THE INDIAN PENAL Cope, |860 


2. In Chapter II of the Indian Penal Code, l860 (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as 
the Penal Code), after section 52A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 


"52 B. The words "Social boycott" refer to any action or gesture, oral or written, 
by a member of a community or a caste panchayat, such as those mentioned, but not 
restricted to, in the descriptions hereinafter following, namely: 


First——The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or obstruct any 
person from partaking or observing any social, religious or traditional custom or usage 
or ceremony or from taking part in any social, religious or community functions, 
procession, assembly or meeting; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new section 


52B. 


Social boycott. 


Insertion of 
new sections 
298A and B. 


Imposing 
social boycott 
on a person or 
group of 
persons. 


Deliberating 
on the issue of 
imposing 
social boycott. 


Amendment of 
First Schedule. 


l0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Second.—tThe refusal or denial or attempt to refuse or deny any person the right 
to perform marriage, funeral or any other religious or customary rites and ceremonies 
as the persons of his community ordinarily perform; 


Third.—The act or attempt to commit or cause social ostracism on any grounds; 


Fourth.—tThe refusal or purposeful exclusion of any person from engagingin 
the society by hampering social or commercial ties of such person with his community, 
thereby affecting his right to life and personal liberty; 


Fifth —tThe prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or obstruct any 
person from accessing any place ordinarily used or intended to be used for any religious, 
charitable or public purpose that is either established or maintained wholly or partly by 
the person's own community, for and on behalf of the community using the funds 
contributed by such community and is normally available for use to or by any other 
person of his community; 


Sixth_—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or obstruct any 
person from accessing any school, educational institution, medical institution, cemetery, 
burial ground or any other place used by, or intended to be used by, or for the benefit 
of his community; 


Seventh.—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or obstruct any 
person from enjoying any benefit under a charitable trust or waqf created for the 
benefit of his community; 


Eighth.—The act of inciting or provoking or encouraging any person, directly 
or indirectly to sever social, religious, professional or business relations with other 
persons of his community; 


Ninth.—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or obstruct any 
person of belonging to his community from enjoying human rights; 


Tenth.—The discrimination or act of discriminating against a person by his 
community on the basis of morality, political inclination, sexuality, gender expression 
or any other basis; 


Eleventh.—The expulsion, directly or indirectly, of any person from his 
community; 


Twelfth—Any other similar acts." 
3. After section 298 of the Penal Code, the following Chapter, shall be inserted, namely:— 
CHAPTER XVA 
OFFENCES RELATING To SociAL Boycotr 


298A. Whoever imposes, or causes to impose any kind of social boycott on a person, 
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years, but which 
may extend to seven years, or with fine which may extend to five lakhs rupees, or with both. 


298B. Whoever gatheres, congregates, assembles, or participates in a meeting of a 
caste panchayat, at any time and at any place, with the view or intent to deliberate on the 
issue of imposing social boycott on any person, shall, on conviction be punished with 
imprisonment for not less than three years, but which may extend to seven years or with fine 
which may extend to five lakhs rupees, or with both. 


CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENT To THE CopE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, |973 


4. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, under the heading 
"|. OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE", after entries related to section 298, the 


2 of 974. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY lll 


following entries shall be inserted, namely:— 


| 2 3 4 बे 6 


CHAPTER XVA.— OFFENCES RELATING TO SOCIAL BOYCOTT 


Imposing Imprisonment Magistrate 
social for not less of the first 
boycott on than three years, class 
a person or — but which may 
group of extend to seven 
persons. years, or with 
fine which may 
extend to five 
lakhs rupees, or 
with both. 
Deliberating Imprisonment Ditto 
on the issue for not less 
ofimposing _ than three years, 
social but which may 
boycott. extend to seven 


years, or with 
fine which may 
extend to five 
lakhs rupees, 
or with both. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Article 2! of the Constitution guarantees the life and personal liberty to all persons. 
It also guarantees the right to such persons to live a dignified life. The bare text of the article 
reads as, "No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to a 
procedure established by law". Despite a constitutional obligation on the state to protect the 
fundamental rights of its citizens, India witnesses a parallel system; one that imposes harsh 
socio-economic extra judicial punishments on persons and communities that in their orthodox 
and conservative views, transgress certain social mores or diktats. 


Social boycotts imposed by "caste panchayats" result in deprivation of basic human 
rights and ostracisation of those who are boycotted. This is done through planned and 
systematic social exclusion from not just religious ceremonies and gatherings, but also by 
placing restrictions on physical and social mobility, imposition of physical and social 
segregation and isolation, denial of employment, and even goes to the extent of halting sale 
of necessities of life, such as food and water. In a free and fair society, there must be no space 
or opportunity given for such extrajudicial actions that hamper an individual, or acommunity's 
right to life and personal liberty. The existence of social boycotts to this very day, has led to 
psychological, physiological and economic impact and trauma on marginalised communities. 
It is necessary to criminalize such actions that go against the spirit of our Constitution. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY 
January 6, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


But No. 26 07 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Epidemic Diseases Act, /69/7. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


३ of 897. 2. In section lA of the Epidemic Diseases Act, |897 (hereinafter referred to as the Amendment 
principal Act):— of section LA. 


(i) after sub-section (a), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


(aa) "epidemic" means the occurrence in a community or region of cases of 
a dangerous illness, specific health-related behaviour, or human disease that is 
caused by an infectious agent or, any genetically engineered organism or a 
biological toxin that poses a risk of significant harm to public health, immediate 


l4 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Insertion of 
new sections 
2C;. 20, 20, 
27 and 20. 


Supply of 
essential drugs 
and 
therapeutics. 


Responsibilities 
of the 
Government 
while taking 
measures 
during the 
epidemic. 


Rights of 
citizens during 
the epidemic. 


Responsibility 
of citizens. 


Health 
facilities to 
prison inmates 
during the 
epidemic. 


or gradual spread to regions beyond the affected community-national or 
international, or other health-related events clearly in excess of normal expectancy. 


(ii) after sub-section (b) the following sub-section shall be inserted namely:— 


(bb) "patient" means any person who contracts any dangerous epidemic 
disease as determined by scientific testing or a medical diagnosis. 


3. After section 2B of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely:— 


"2C. The Central Government shall ensure supply of essential drugs and 
therapeutics to citizens during the epidemic through public health facilities as well as 
through outreach measures, whenever required, with priority to lower-income sections 
and those covered by Government healthcare schemes for free care. 


2D. The Central Government and the State Governments shall, ensure that— 


(i) during the epidemic, measures taken to limit the rights of an individual 
are such as are strictly necessary to resolve the crisis, and are time-bound, 
proportionate, and non-discriminatory; and 


(ii) guidelines for surveillance to address the pressing social need are 
adopted in accordance with the law and are proportionate and the limitations on 
the right to privacy are least intensive to achieve the desired result. 


"2E. Every, citizen, during the epidemic, shall have the following rights, but not 
limited to— 


(i) right to equal treatment regardless of race, color, sex, language, religion, 
birth or other status; 


(ii) right to free flow of information with only reasonable restrictions on 
freedom of expression; 


(iii) right to receive an independent medical assessment from a medical 
practitioner of his choice; 


(iv) right to emergency medical care in any Government or private hospital 
without compromise on quality or safety and without having to pay full or an 
advance fee to the hospital; 


(v) right to have a written and transparent account of the costs incurred 
for the treatment; 


(vi) right to be compensated for loss, if any, caused by any isolation and 
medical treatment; and 


(vii) right to know information on the situation of the outbreak of the 
disease, the prevention and control thereof and measures to cope therewith. 


2F. Each citizen shall actively cooperate with the agencies of the Central and the 
State Governments that perform activities for the prevention and control of the 
epidemic, such as treatment and isolation measures. 


2G. (॥7) The Central and the State Government shall provide health services to 
prison inmates during the epidemic at the same standard as are provided to communities 
outside of prison. 


(2) In prisons, medical personnel shall, in emergency situations, make an independent 


assessment of each patient's condition and shall refer suitable cases to specialized treatment 
in or outside the prison facility." 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY I5 


The advent of the Corona virus exposed lacunas in existing legislation to effectively 
tackle public health emergencies in India. Currently, it does not have a single consolidated 
law to deal with public health emergencies. Two major laws, the epidemic Diseases Act, |897 
and the Disaster Management Act, 2005 were invoked to deal with COVID-9 preparedness 
and response. However, the centurial old Epidemic Diseases Act, 897 lacks comprehensive 
guidelines for governance and responsible authorities, accountability, and a rights-based 
approach. Further, the Disaster Management Act is more suited to deal with disasters rather 
than epidemics. 


Even the recent amendment in the Epidemic Diseases Act , !897 in 2020 only listed 
punitive actions for offences against the healthcare service personnel, but included no 
rights of the individuals. The definition clause in the Act defines various offences but 
excludes the most essential terms of "epidemic" and "patient". The Act in the current form lays 
down no mechanism for the dissemination of drugs, availability of medical facilities or 
quarantine period. While providing itself powers to take special measures and prescribe 
regulations during an epidemic, the State establishes no responsibilities to undertake for 
itself. 


During the Corona virus pandemic, the country witnessed a surge in deaths owing to 
the lack of emergency medical healthcare. It intensified the pressure across a wide range of 
fundamental rights, a key pillar of the rule of law. The Supreme Court of India in the case of 
Bandhua Mukti Morcha vs. Union of India & Ors. (984) interpreted the right to health under 
Article 2] of the Constitution of India which guarantees the right to life. 


The significance of clear and consistent public health emergency law cannot be denied. 
However, the current legal ecosystem falls short in ensuring a modern legal framework to 
ensure stability in an epidemic. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY 
January 6, 2023. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill inter alia provides that the Central Government shall ensure 
supply of essential drugs and therapeutics to citizens during the epidemic. It also provides 
that the Central Government shall ensure for every citizen, emergency medical care in any 
Government or private hospital without having to pay full or an advanced fee to the hospital 
and citizen who is isolated and medically treated due to an infectious disease shall be 
compensated for any damage caused by such isolation and medical treatment. 


The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, it is not possible to access the actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at 
this stage. 


5 of 2007. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY I7 


But No. 27 07 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) 
Act, 2006. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in 
Admission) Amendment Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
inthe Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 2 of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 
2006 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),— 


(i) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ca) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in other cases, the Central Government." 


(ii) after clause (०), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ea) "government school" means any recognised school managed by the 
appropriate Government, imparting elementary or higher secondary education 
or both and includes— 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


I8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate 
Government or a local authority; 


(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of 
its expenses from the appropriate Government or the local authority; and 


(iii) corporation schools, municipal schools, tribal welfare schools, 
forest department schools and other schools managed by the Government 
departments." 


Amendment 3. In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause 
of section 3... shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(iv) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty, ten 
per cent. seats shall be reserved horizontally for the students of Government schools 
in so far as by doing so the total reservation does not exceed fifty per cent. in any case: 


Provided that where reservation exceeds fifty per cent. by the reservation of ten 
per cent. seats for students of Government schools, reservation of seats shall be 
provided up to the maximum extent possible without breaching the ceiling of total 
reservation of fifty per cent." 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


India is the world's 2nd largest populated country and hosts pluralism in culture, 
religion, ethnicity, language and multilayered caste system which often imposes challenges 
on the Indian Government to structure and manage a harmonious society. The challenges 
include creating equal employment opportunities, providing and allocating equal distribution 
of resources and funds of the Government and making education available to all citizens of 
India without discrimination on the grounds of their religion, caste, race, sex, socio-economic 
background etc. In order to overcome such challenges, the Government uses reservation as 
a tool for the smooth administration of the country. 


The term reservation can be described as 'certain policy measures or the techniques 
adopted by the Indian Governance in order to empower, promote and uplift those social 
segments or members of community which have remained backward, or discriminated, or 
historically oppressed, by reserving their access to seats or quota for admission into 
educational institutes, in Governmental jobs, and legislatures. 


Students from Government schools and those studying in private schools hail from 
different socio-economic backgrounds. Considering these disparities, it would be unfair to 
weigh them on an equal footing. Students from Government schools must get access to 
quality education and a chance to fulfil their dreams. Those who are brilliant must not be 
stopped because of social or economic boundaries. Professional courses are the stepping 
stone towards a bright future of young talents in the country. Providing reservation to 
students from Government schools in Central Educational Institutions would be a step in the 
right direction considering the principles of equality under article 4 and non-discrimination 
under article [5 as enshrined under the Constitution of India. If implemented across the 
country, this reservation policy may also help in increasing the enrolments in Government 
schools. 


Affirmative action by the Government is the need of the hour to place students from all 
walks of life at an equal footing to secure their future and thereby ensure that students from 
weaker socio-economic backgrounds do not suffer in the long run. Suitable amendment is, 
therefore, required in the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) 
Act, 2006. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY 
January 6, 2023. 


Short title and 


commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 23. 


Amendment 
of section 
35A. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bit No. 289 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, /9096., 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. () This Act may be called the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 23 of the Code of Civil Procedure, !908 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 


3. In section 35A of the principal Act,— 


(J) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"Additional and exemplary costs in respect of false or vexatious claims or defences". 


(2) in sub-section (/), for the words "of cost by way of compensation", the words "of 
additional and exemplary costs" shall be substituted. 


(3) after sub-section (/), following provisos shall be inserted, namely:— 


"Provided that the court shall, while determining the additional and exemplary 
cost, take into consideration the party's adverse socio-economic condition and the 
hardship that may be caused by imposing such costs: 


5 of 908. 


26 of 996. 


26 of 996. 


26 of 996. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2] 


Provided further that out of the costs so awarded, part of the costs shall be 
ordered to be paid to the party against whom the claim or defence of false or vexatious 
nature has been set up and part of it shall be ordered to be deposited in the Judicial 
Infrastructure Fund set up under section !49A." 


4. For section 89 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"89.(l) Where it appears to the court, having regard to the nature of the dispute 
involved in the suit or other proceeding that the dispute is fit to be settled by one of 
the non-adjudicatory alternative dispute resolution processes, namely, conciliation, 
judicial settlement, settlement through Lok Adalat or mediation the court shall, preferably 
before framing the issues, record its opinion and direct the parties to attempt the 
resolution of dispute through one of the said processes which the parties prefer or the 
court determines: 


Provided that where the parties prefer conciliation, they shall furnish to the 
court the name or names of the conciliators and on obtaining his or their consent, the 
court may specify a time limit for the completion of conciliation and thereupon, the 
provisions of sections 65 to 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 996, as far as 
may be, shall apply mutatis mutandis and to this effect, the court shall inform the 
parties and a copy of the settlement agreement reached between the parties shall be 
sent to the court concerned: 


Provided further that in the absence of the settlement, the conciliator shall send 
a brief report on the process of conciliation and the outcome thereof to the court. 


(3) Where the dispute has been referred:— 


(a) for judicial settlement, the court shall endeavour to effect a compromise 
between the parties and shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed; 


(b) to Lok Adalat, the provisions of sub-section (3) to (7) of section 20, sections 
2] and 22 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, !987 shall apply in respect of the 
dispute so referred and the Lok Adalat shall send a copy of the award to the court 
concerned and in case no award is passed, send a brief report on the proceedings held 
and the outcome thereof; 


(c) for mediation, the Court shall refer the dispute to a suitable institution or 
person or persons with appropriate directions such as time-limit for completion of 
mediation and reporting to the Court. 


(4) The court shall on receipt of copy of the settlement agreement or the award of Lok 
Adalat, if it finds any inadvertent mistakes or obvious errors, it shall draw the attention of the 
conciliator or the Lok Adalat who shall take necessary steps to rectify the agreement or 
award suitably with the consent of parties. 


(5) Without prejudice to section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, [996 and 
other provisions, the court may also refer the parties to arbitration if both parties enter into 
an arbitration agreement or file applications seeking reference to arbitration during the 
pendency of a suit or other civil proceeding and in such an event, the arbitration shall be 
governed, as far as may be, by the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, !996 
and the suit or other proceeding shall be deemed to have been disposed off accordingly.". 


5. In section 95 of the principal act, in sub-section (/), for the word "not exceeding fifty 
thousand rupees", the word "not exceeding one lakh rupees" shall be substituted. 


6. After section 49 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely: — 


"l49A. The High Court shall set up and administer Judicial Infrastructure Fund 
for the purposes of development of infrastructure in subordinate courts under its 
jurisdiction." 


Amendment 
of section 89. 


Settlement of 
disputes 
outside the 
court. 


Amendment 
of section 95. 


Amendment of 
section l49, 


Amendment 
of Order VII. 


Amendment 
of Order VIII. 


Amendment 
of Order X. 


Direction of 
the court to 
opt for any 
one mode of 
alternative 
dispute 
resolution. 


Appearance 
before the 
court 
consequent 
upon the 
failure of 
efforts of 
conciliation. 


Amendment 


of Order XVII. 


Amendment 
of Order XX. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


7. In Order VII of the principle Act, in rule 4, sub-rule (4), for the word "plaintiff's 
witness" the word "defendant's witness" shall be substituted. 


8. In Order VIII of the principle Act, in rule lA, in sub-rule (4), in clause (a), for the word 
"plaintiff's witness" the word "defendant's witness" shall be substituted. 


9. In Order X of the principal Act,— 
(a) for rule LA, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:— 


"(IA). At the stage of framing issues or the first hearing of the suit, the 
Court shall direct the parties to opt either mode of the settlement outside the 
court as specified in sub-section (/) of section 89 and for this purpose may 
require the parties to be personally present and in case of non-attendance without 
substantial cause, follow the procedure for compelling the attendance of witness. 
The court shall fix the date of appearance before such forum or authority or 
persons as may be opted by the parties or chosen by the court."; 


(2) rule IB shall be omitted; and 
(3) for rule LC, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:— 


" (7८). Where a suit is referred under rule |A and the presiding officer of 
conciliation forum or authority or the person to whom the matter has been 
referred is satisfied that it would not be proper in the interest of justice to 
proceed with the matter further, in view of the stand taken by the respective.". 


0. In Order XVII of the principal Act, in rule , the proviso shall be omitted. 


Il. In Order XX of the principal Act, in rule 6A, for the words, "fifteen days" the words, 
"thirty days" shall be substituted. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Supreme Court in the case of Durgesh Shamra vs. Jayshree held that if two courts 
are subordinate to different High Courts, one High Court has no power, jurisdiction or 
authority to transfer a case pending in any court subordinate to that High Court to a Court 


subordinate to another High Court. It is only the Supreme Court (this Court) which may order 
the transfer. Thus, makes section 23(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure, l908. 


Section 89 of the Code which provides for settlement of disputes outside the court is 
inappropriately worded, as pointed out by the Supreme Court in the case of Afcons 
Infrastructure Ltd. vs. Cherian Varkey Construction Co. (P) LTD. The language adopted has 
created difficulty in giving effect to the provision. Section 89 should be recast as indicated 
above. Secondly, the allied provisions, namely, Order X, rules lA to IC had been recast in 
accordance with the provision of section 89. With an aim to make the conciliation scheme 
effective, it is proposed to make it obligatory for the court to refer the dispute after the issues 
are framed for settlement either by way of arbitration, conciliation, mediation, judicial 
settlement or through Lok Adalat. However, the procedure of section 89 is defeating the 
purpose of its enactment. Thus, firstly, the Supreme Court in the Afcon Infrastructure case 
and l9th Law Commission in its report no. 238 titled as "Amendment of Section 89 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 908 and Allied Provisions" recommended certain changes which 
has been incorporated in this act. 


In addition to it, various Judgments of the Supreme Court and High Courts had time 
and again emphasized that the lack of appropriate provisions relating to costs has resulted in 
a steady increase in malicious, vexatious, false, frivolous and speculative suits. Any attempt 
to reduce the pendency or encourage alternative dispute resolution processes or to streamline 
the civil justice system will fail in the absence of appropriate provisions relating to costs. The 
Supreme Court in the case of Sanjeev Kumar Jain vs. Raghubir Saran Charitable Trust 
addressed the issues relating to costs. Thus, in order to deal with the matter in depth the Law 
Commission in its report no. 240 titled as "costs in civil litigation" addressed this issue 
keeping in view the triple goals of (7) ensuring realistic and reasonable costs to the successful 
party, (ii) curbing false and frivolous litigation, and (iii) discouraging unnecessary 
adjournments. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE 
23 November, 2022 


424 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bit No. 263 oF 2022 
A Bill to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2047. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
Short title and I. (7) This Act may be called the Mental Healthcare (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 2. In section |7 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 20l7 (hereinafter referred to as the 0 of 207. 
of section 7. principal Act), in clause (a), for the words "best interests", the words "will and preference" 
shall be substituted. 


Amendment 3. In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), the following explanation shall 
of section 2I. be inserted, namely: — 


"Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section (4), "medical insurance" 
includes the indemnification of the insurer or the hospital in the cases requiring but 
not limited to:— 


(i) hospitalization; 


(ii) psychotherapy; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


(iii) medication; 
(iv) cognitive behavioral therapy; 
(vy) counseling; or 


(vi) any other form of treatment deemed fit for the patient by a medical 
practitioner or a clinical psychologist.". 


4. In section 65 of the principal Act, for the first proviso of sub-section (3), the following 
proviso shall be substituted, namely:— 


"Provided that till the period the Authority specifies the minimum standards for 
different categories of mental health establishments, after due inspection of such 
mental health establishments by authorities, it shall issue a provisional certificate of 
registration to the mental health establishment.". 


Amendment of 
section 65. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Mental Healthcare Act, 207 has been lauded as the legislation of the people but 
there are several lacunas in the Act which neglect the agency of the mentally ill person under 
the Act and overlooks the responsibility of the State to provide for a safe space for the 
treatment of the patient. From addiction to dementia to schizophrenia, almost | billion people 
worldwide suffer from a mental disorder. Lost productivity as a result of two of the most 
common mental disorders, anxiety and depression, costs the global economy US$I trillion 
each year. Poor mental health amongst employees costs Indian companies a combined $4 
billion a year due to absenteeism, attrition and other reasons. India unfortunately lags behind 
in mental health when compared to other countries. To give an example, the rest of the world 
spends about 5 to l8 per cent. of their GDP on mental health whereas India spends only 
0.05 per cent. Whereas the problem is huge, according to the latest WHO statistics, there are 
an estimated forty-five million Indians who suffer from depression and another 45 million 
who suffer from anxiety. 


Section |7(a) of the principal Act casts a duty on the nominated representative to 
consider the "best interests" of the mentally ill person, while discharging their duty under 
the act. However, the use of the term ‘best interests", makes the Act a reluctant acceptance to 
India's obligation to Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities which asserts 
that the will of the person with disability shall not be undermined, therefore the amendment. 


The COVID-9 pandemic laid bare the huge gaps in the healthcare system, especially 
in access to affordable mental healthcare. According to a scientific brief released by the 
World Health Organization in March, 2022, the global prevalence of mental illness like 
depression and anxiety increased by 25 per cent. since the pandemic. Access to affordable 
mental healthcare, especially after the pandemic has become a basic need for all individuals. 
The Act instructs insurers to make provisions for medical insurance for treatment of mental 
illness. In the year 208, the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (hereinafter 
IRDAJ) of India had also directed the India Insurance companies to cover mental disorders 
as per the Act. 


However, a Public Interest Litigation filed in the Supreme Court revealed that the 
insurance companies are in violation of Sec. 2[(4) of the Act. Following which the IRDAT had 
instructed the insurance companies to introduce policies for mental illness by October 2020. 
Following the IRDAI directive, insurance companies began to offer insurance for mental 
illness but only in case of hospitalization. 


Treatment of mental illness is not limited to medication or hospitalization. It also 
includes rehabilitation, counseling and psychotherapy. Some mental illnesses like depression, 
anxiety, Bipolar Disorder and other behavioral disorders which are chronic in nature may not 
necessitate hospitalization but require other aids for treatment like psychotherapy and 
medication. Such treatment can be very hard on the pockets thereby causing economic 
burden on the family of the patient. An amendment to the Act, extending insurance benefits 
for mental illness which do not necessarily require hospitalization with a goal to reduce 
financial burden on the families of people suffering from mental illness is necessary, therefore 
the amendment is proposed. 


Section 65 of the Act provides for registration of the Mental Healthcare Establishments, 
but the first proviso to Section 65(3) of the Act allows for issuance a provisional certificate of 
registration to the mental health establishment without any inspection of the same. Since 
mental healthcare establishments are a place of primary care for the mentally ill patients, it 
can be detrimental to the safety of the patients to allow for even temporary registration of the 
establishment without due diligence from the end of the State. Therefore it is imperative that 
even the provisional certificate be issued only after due inspection of the establishment, 
therefore the amendment. 


Hence this bill. 


New DELHI; SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE 
22 November, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


Bit No. 233 oF 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets 
and Enforcement of Security Interest (Amendment) Act 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section ३3] of the Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, after clause (7), the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


"(k) principal debtors who was unemployed for the last three months; 


(J) families that have lost their primary bread earner due to COVID or other 
disease; 


(m) debtors who have an amount due of less than thirty per cent of the principal 
amount and interest thereon.". 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of clause 3]. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The repeated instances of provision of Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial 
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, which has been excessively used to 
attach properties of defaulter, often through unfair procedures leading to helpless debtors 
or even their children committing suicide due to harassment and humiliation ingrained in the 
execution of archaic practices. The harsh provisions warrants legislative intervention by 
amending provisions that are rendering the act inhuman. 


The need for factoring unemployment due to matter beyond ones control such as 
Covid and recession - led termination of employment causing defaulting of repayment of 
loan from a humane perspective is required so that the right to live and right to dignity and 
other provisions enshrining the rights of citizens are upheld and are not seen from the prism 
of shylockian perspective. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; KODIKUNNIL SURESH 
November 22, 2022. 


6 of 20I4. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


Bit No. 20 oF 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 20/4. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (J) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment) Act, 
2023. 


(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect. 


2. In the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 204, after Part X, the following new 
Part and sections thereunder shall be inserted, namely:— 


"PART XA 
SPECIAL CATEGORY STATUS TO THE SUCCESSOR STATE OF 
ANDHRA PRADESH 


94A. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the successor State of Andhra Pradesh shall be deemed to have been conferred the 
status of special category State for a period of ten years from the date of commencement of 
this Act. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new Part XA. 


Special 
Category 
Status to the 
State of 
Andhra 
Pradesh. 


430 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(2) The successor State of Andhra Pradesh shall by virtue of being conferred a special 
category State under sub-section(), be provided the following incentives and benefits:— 


(i) ninety per cent. of the State expenditure on all centrally-sponsored schemes 
and external aid to be borne by the Central Government and the remaining ten per cent. 
to be given to the successor State of Andhra Pradesh as interest free loan; 


(ii) preferential treatment in the distribution of funds by the Central Government; 
(iii) benefits of debt-swapping and debt-relief schemes; 


(iv) concession in the customs duty, corporate tax, income tax, Central Goods 
and Services Tax (CGST) and Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST) to attract 
industries and investment in the State; and 


(v) provision that the unutilised money of the State in any financial year shall not 
lapse and be carried forward to the next financial year.". 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The bifurcation of the erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh resulted in an uneven 
distribution of metropolitan cities and resource rich regions. Hyderabad being forfeited from 
the residuary State of Andhra Pradesh put the State in a disadvantaged position in terms of 
distribution of assets and liabilities of common institutions which are mostly located in the 
city. There are l07 institutions listed under Schedule X of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation 


Act, 204, of which 97 are located in Telangana proving the impediment in progress of the 
Andhra Pradesh. 


Secondly, repeated assurances have been given on the part of the Central Government 
that a special development package for the residuary state of Andhra Pradesh would be 
provided with adequate incentives, particularly for Rayalaseema and north coastal regions. 
The region has been identified for grant of special development package, similar to 
Bundelkhand region and KBK districts of Odisha. Statistics have indicated the plight of 
these regions and an incessant delay in conducting the decadal Census is proving to be 
tough with Andhra Pradesh. The state is losing out on a number of benefits, as population 
remains an important criteria for grants by the Centre. 


While the buffer time of ten years for completion of bifurcation is just two years away 
from now, there are several benefits pending to be granted for the state. Despite being a 
welcome move, a development package often results in delay in release funds, lack of finances 
to clear the pending bills and delays in payments for the ongoing works. The presence of 
such constraints, resulting from an unjust and inequitable bifurcation of the erstwhile State 
of Andhra Pradesh, Special Category Status being granted to the state proves to be a viable 
solution. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI ; MARGANI BHARAT 
March 4, 2022. 


PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ArTICLES |7 (), !7(3) AND 274(L) OF THE 
CONSTITUTION 
[Copy of Letter No. 607/0/2022-S.R dated I January, 2023 from Shri Nityanand Rai, 
Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha]. 


The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Andhra Pradesh 
Reorganisation (Amendment) Bill, 2022* (Insertion of new Part XA) by Shri Margani Bharat, 
M.P., recommended the introduction under articles !7(/) and 274(/) and the consideration 
under article |7(3) of the Constitution of the Bill in Lok Sabha. 


[*The Bill being printed in 2023, the year in the title of Bill has been changed from 2022 to 2023.] 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 94A seeks to provide Special Category 
Status to the successor State of Andhra Pradesh by providing certain concessions, subsidies 
and other assistance to the successor State of Andhra Pradesh. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, 
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for conferring special status to 
the successor State of Andhra Pradesh. As the sums of money which will be given to the 
successor State of Andhra Pradesh as concessions and subsidy by appropriation, by law, 
made by Parliament, cannot be stated now it is not possible to give the estimate of recurring 
expenditure which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


But No. 49 or 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. () This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2l of 2000. 2. In section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in sub-section (/),— 
(a) after clause (J), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(la) "content" refers to the words, video, audio or any means of 
communication created by the users of a social media;"; 


(b) existing clause (za) shall be renumbered as clause (zb) and before the clause 
(zb) so as renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


(za) "online account" refers to the space allotted to a website user where 
the content generated by them are displayed and database stored by the 
intermediary; and 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Insertion of 
new 
section 660. 


Punishment 
for spreading 
hateful 
communal 
propaganda 
undermining 
the fraternity 
of India 
through social 
media, etc. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(c) existing clauses (zg) and (zh) shall be renumbered as (zh) and (zi) and before 
the clause (zh) so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(zg) "social media" means any website that is publicly accessible with or 
without creating an online account on it and the content generated by the user 
is displayed publicly on this website including webpages where users can interact 
with each other in any manner.". 


3. After Section 66F of the principal Act, following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"66G. Any person who creates content on any social media site in the nature 
of,— 


(a) any information that is grossly offensive or has menacing character; or 


(b) any information which he knows to be false, but for the purpose of 
causing annoyance, inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult, injury, criminal 
intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will, known to cause communal distrust and 
even violence, persistently by making use of such computer resource or a 
communication device; 


(c) any social media content for the purpose of causing annoyance or 
inconvenience or to deceive or to mislead the addressee or recipient about the 
origin of such messages; and 


(d) any social media content for the purpose of spreading hateful content 
that create resentment against any particular group of people based on caste, 
religion, sex, place of birth, 


shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years and with fine.". 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Social Media has grown to be a dominant actor in the social and political lives of our 
people in the last decade. From just a pastime of sorts, social media have grown to capture 
the imagination of the people. Today, it acts as the primary means of socialisation, 
communication and interaction with the larger society. However, unregulated behaviour in 
the social media is shown to have large scale impact in the way people perceive and interact 
with the world. If the online behaviour is not regulated in such a manner to uphold the 
decency, morality and other values as enshrined in the constitution, it can easily endanger 
the hard earned liberty in the society. We have seen examples in this decade itself, when 
social media was used to fan communal passion. This has led to real life violence and even 
loss_ of life. The cases of lynching and many instances of communal violence that our nation 
saw in the last decade could be attributed to hateful propaganda being spread through social 
media platforms. Moreover, organised entities could be seen to spread stereotypes, creating 
rift between communities and foment internecine feud between the people of India. To curb 
all those activities, those who spread the poison of communal hatred through social media 
should be punished appropriately. Also, the Information Technology Act of our nation 
curiously doesn't include the definition of "Social Media" or new age technologies that 
constitute social media. This bill makes an humble attempt to define these entities and also 
nudge the Government to amend the bill in such a manner that all the challenges of our times 
are addressed through a revised Information Technology Bill that is in tune with the spirit of 
our times. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; DEAN KURIAKOSE 
January 6, 2023. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Butt No. 29 oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 
2005. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and I. () This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
commencement. (Amendment) Act, 2023 ५ 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Amendment of 2. In section 22 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 
section 22. (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),— 


(a) in sub-section (/), the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:— 


Provided that the Central Government shall provide the funds to States in advance 
to meet the estimated cost under sub-section (/), to ensure that payment of wages to 
every unskilled, skilled and semi-skilled worker is made within five days of completion 
of work: 


42 of 2005. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


Provided further that if the Central Government fails to release funds for three 
months due to any reason, the State Government shall be eligible for a penalty of three 
per cent of amount outstanding per month: 


Provided also that the funds allocated by the Central Government to the scheme 
shall be calculated keeping in view the prevailing inflation rates, aspirations of the 
people and projected demand for work. 


3. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— Insertion of 
new section 
22A. 

"22A. The State Government shall ensure that,— State 


‘ oo ५ ‘ ‘ Government 
(a) it has sufficient funds for payment of wages to skilled and semi-skilled and (७ ensure 


cost of unemployment allowances for at least one month based on projected number payment of 
of workers for ensuing month; wages. 


(b) the payment of wages to skilled and semi-skilled are made within five days of 
the completion of the work; 


(c) if any worker files a complaint regarding non-payment of wages with the 
Programme Officer, the complaint shall be settled and wages paid, if any, within a 
period of fifteen days: 


Provided that if the Programme Officer fails to settle the complaint, the District 
Programme Coordinator shall settle the case and wages shall be paid within a period of 
ten days from the expiry of fifteen days allotted to the Programme Officer.". 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Mahatma Gandhi Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (MGNREGA) is a seminal 
legislation that has been designed to improve the situation of rural poor. Not only it acts as 
a poverty alleviation measure, but it also improves the spending capacity of the rural 
population. Various studies have shown that it has contributed to a healthy demand pull 
inflation rate, which has improved the economic health of the country. The transfer of cash 
in lieu of self-selected work is correlated with improvement in social indicators while boosting 
the dignity of the rural worker. 


There has been many international studies that prove the efficacy of the programme. It 
has been a corner stone that improved the lives of rural poor as the country navigated many 
challenges. During those times, for instance during the COVID induced slowdown, the rural 
poor depended upon the work guaranteed through MGNREGA to sustain themselves. 
However, there has been no proportionate increase in funds allocated in tune with the 
demand of work. Also, many States have been complaining about the centre not releasing 
funds due to them on time. Such a situation has arisen because there if no legal compulsion 
forced upon the Central Government to do so. If the act is amended to ensure that such 
provisions are added, it leads to a situation where the issue is depoliticised and the centre 
will have no option but release the amount due in time so that the ordinary worker is not 
denied timely payment of his hard labour. 


The bill also seeks to address this moral issue of the State reneging on its duty of 
paying the wages on time to the citizen who take up work under MGNREGA. It is necessary 
to alleviate rural poverty and also keep up the trust that a prestigious Central Government 
scheme like MGNREGA enjoys. This has to be legally ensured by the Parliament. 


New DELHI; DEAN KURIAKOSE 
January 6, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


Butt No. 42 07 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, /9/2. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


53 of 972. 2. In section 2 of the Wild Life Protection Act, 972 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act),— 


(a) existing clause (/) shall be renumbered as clause (/B) and before clause (B) 
as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(Z) "agriculture" with all its grammatical variations and cognate 
expressions includes floriculture, horticulture, sericulture, the raising of crops, 
grass or garden produce, dairy farming, poultry farming, cutting of wood or 
grass, gathering of fruit, raising of man-made forest or rearing of seedlings or 
plants;"; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


440 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Amendment 


(IA) "agricultural produce" includes paddy, wheat, sugarcane, millet, barley, 
ragi, madwa, cotton, maize, soyabean, rapeseed, mustard, peanut, coconut, sunflower, 
groundnut, safflower, sesamum, niger seed, gram, tur, urad, moong, masoor (lentil), 
peas, jute, cashew nut, pepper, turmeric, tobacco, potato, tomato, onion, mango, apple, 
orange, kinnoo, mousambi and other such foodgrains or commodity as may be 
prescribed: 


(b) after clause (/0), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(I0A) "cultivating farm" means a piece of land used for agriculture or livestock 
rearing; and 


(c) after clause (258), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


(25C) "residential property" means a building or habitation used for dwelling by 
any person.". 


3. In Section llof the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section 


of section I]. shall be inserted, namely: — 


"(2A) The killing or wounding of any wild animal by a person inside his cultivating 


farm or residential property where the wild animal has entered and has caused damage to 
agricultural produce or livestock shall not be an offence.". 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 44| 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Wild Life (Protection) Act, !972 is a seminal piece of legislation that has helped in 
the preservation of wild life in India. Over the years, it has led to the protection of many 
species that are indeed a pride to our nation and are a treasure to entire mankind. Protection 
extended to majestic animals like the Royal Bengal Tiger and the greater-one horned Rhino 
has helped in improving their numbers and saving the species from extinction. However, 
there is also widespread criticism to the act that it has led to excessive bureaucratization and 
has also taken away the rights of common people. Especially affected are the farmers who 
inhabit areas bordering forest lands. Here, they brave the inclement weather and constant 
threat of wild animals to create farm goods that is consumed by the whole nation. Many a 
times, they are helpless when an animal ravages their land. Especially is the case of wild boar- 
an animal that preys upon the helpless farmers. Many national and international studies 
have proven that there is no threat to the wild boar populations in terms of dwindling 
numbers. In fact, their numbers have increased in the forests due to ready availability of 
food from the farms and farmers being unable to control them by killing them when they enter 
farmlands. If the farmer is given the right to kill wild boars and other animals that enter their 
farm and cause destruction, it will help the control the wild board Attack. It will also be a 
seminal step in managing the human-wild life conflict. 


The resolution of that conflict lies in adopting locally appropriate steps that include 
killing of animals that cause extensive damage to the farms. Instead of taking a one size fits 
all approach that mandates that the Central Government declare vermin for any area in the 
country, more scientific and practical choice is to allow the farmers kill animals that enter their 
fields and create destruction to farms and human life. Also, the people living near forests 
need to be liberated from unnecessary legal hassles due to cases registered against them for 
killing animals in self-defence or to save a human life. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; DEAN KURIAKOSE 
January 6, 2023. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Establishment 
of a 
permanent 
Bench of the 
Supreme Court 
at Hyderabad. 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bit No. | oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court of 
India at Hyderabad in the State of Telangana. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Supreme Court of India (Establishment of a Permanent 
Bench at Hyderabad) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court of India at 
Hyderabad and such number of Judges of the Supreme Court of India being not less than 
five, as the Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of President, from time to time 
nominate, shall sit at Hyderabad in order to exercise the jurisdiction and powerfor the time 
being vested in the Supreme Courtof India in respect of cases 5 arising in the States of 
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala, Odisha, Chhattisgarh and the 
Union territories of Puducherry, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands and in such other territories, as may be notified by the Central Government 
with the approval of the Chief Justice of India. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


The framers of the Constitution envisaged the need for additional Benches of 
the Supreme Court and, accordingly, inserted article !30 which talks about the Seat of the 
Supreme Court and the Chief Justice of India has been given the responsibility to take a final 
call, with the approval of the President, on this. Article 30 reads as— 


‘The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places as the 
Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.’. 


There are nearly 70,000 cases pending, be it matters relating to regular hearing or 
admission, in the Supreme Court. The present strength of Supreme Court is 33 which means 
each Supreme Court Judge has to handle nearly 6,000 cases and if one looks at the overall 
Judge-Population ratio in the country, it is !9 judges per l0 lakh population. This clearly 
indicates that there is avalanche of litigations, including in the apex court, and hence there is 
a need to implement the spirit of article 30 and set up Seats of Supreme Court in various 
regions of the country. 


The l0th Law Commission, in its 95th Report, in 984, recommended for constitutional 
division with the Supreme Court by splitting the Supreme Court into two, nearly (7) 
Constitutional Court at Delhi; and (ii) Court of Appeal sitting in Northern, Southern, Eastern 
and Western parts of the country. 


The |lth Law Commission in its !25th Report titled, "The Supreme Court-A Fresh 
Look", submitted in 988, reiterated the recommendations made by the |0th Law Commission 
in its 95th Report. The Law Commission felt that it will help to reduce the distance to be 
travelled by litigants and the cost to be borne by them. 


The [8th Law Commission, in its 229th Report submitted in 2009, also recommended 
for setting up of Constitution Bench—exclusively deal with Constitutional matters - at Delhi 
and four Cassation Benches be set up in four regions of the country. The Northern Bench at 
Delhi; the Southern Bench at Hyderabad or Chennai; the Eastern Bench at Kolkata; and the 
Western Bench at Mumbai. 


This clearly indicates that there is a constitutional provision and plethora of 
recommendations by Law Commission and other bodies and Committees for setting up of 
Cassation Benches of Supreme Court at different regions of the country. 


The objective of the proposed Bill emanates from the recommendations of the Law 
Commission, Committees and various genuine demands that Supreme Court at Delhi be 
made as a Constitutional Court rather than remaining largely a Court of Appeal which is the 
case now. Secondly, if one looks at Supreme Court docket, the number of cases coming to 
Supreme Court from various High Court varies. For example, nearly 20% of appeal coming 
from Punjab and Haryana High Court; nearly [[% are coming from Delhi High Court when 
compared to other High Courts, such as Bombay, Uttar Pradesh or Hyderabad which hear far 
more cases. It is because of the distance from Hyderabad or Kerala or Tamil Nadu or Karnataka 
and the costs involved to reach Supreme Court in Delhi, people are giving up idea of knocking 
the doors of Supreme Court. This clearly tantamount to denial of justice and fundamental 
right since the apex court is not geographically accessible to all. So, the proposed regional 
Benches would work as appellate courts and deal with cases emanated from various 
High Courts in that region. 

Hyderabad, being one of the largest cities in the country, is very well connected by 
road, rail and air to different parts of South India. It has all necessary infrastructure and, 
being the software hub of the country, it would be all the more justified and prudent to set up 
a Bench of the Supreme Court at Hyderabad. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; GADDAM RANJITH REDDY 
July 7,202 


444 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES [707) AND 7(3) OF 
THE CONSTITUTION 
[Copies of Letter Nos. K-507/0/202-US.I/I dated l4 March, 2022 and K-l507/ L0/ 
202I-US.I/II dated 3 December, 2022 from Shri Kiren Rijiju, Minister of Law and Justice to 
the Secretary General, Lok Sabha]. 


I. The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Supreme Court 
of India (Establishment of a Permanent Bench at Hyderabad) Bill, 202I* by 
Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy, Member of Parliament, recommends the consideration 
of the Bill under article |7(3) of the Constitution in Lok Sabha. 


II. The President having been informed of the subject matter of the Supreme Court of 
India (Establishment of a Permanent Bench at Hyderabad) Bill, 202* by Dr. Gaddam 
Ranjith Reddy, Member of Parliament, recommends the introduction of the Bill 
under article |l7(/) of the Constitution in Lok Sabha. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of a permanent Bench of the 
Supreme Court at Hyderabad in the State of Telangana. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about rupess two crore per annum would involve from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


446 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Butt No. 253 or 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and I. (7) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development 
commencement. (Amendment) Act, 2022 . 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
otification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 2. In section 2 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, 27 of 2006. 
of section 2. (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act). 


(i) after clause (I), the following clause shall be inserted namely:— 


"(la) 'self-help group' means a small informal group owned, controlled or 
managed by women consisting of ten or more individuals, who are homogenous 
with respect to social and economic background and come together voluntarily 
for promoting savings habits among members and for a common cause to raise 
and manage resources for the benefit of group members. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 447 


Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause, the term "controlled" 
includes the right to appoint majority of the directors or to control the management 
or policy decisions exercisable by a person or persons acting individually or in 
concert, directly or indirectly, including by virtue of their shareholding or 
management rights or shareholders agreements or voting agreements or in any 
other manner."; and 


(ii) after clause (p), the following clause shall be inserted namely: 


"(q) "women led enterprise" means an industrial undertaking or a business 
concern or any other establishment, by whatever name called, engaged in the 
manufacture or production of goods, in any manner, pertaining to any industry 
specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 95! (65 of I95) or engaged in providing or rendering of any service or 
services, which is owned, managed or controlled by a woman or a group of 
women. 


Explanation.—or the purpose of this clause, 


(a), "controlled" include the right to appoint majority of the directors 
or to control the management or policy decisions exercisable by a person 
or persons acting individually or in concert, directly or indirectly, including 
by virtue of their shareholding or management rights or shareholders 
agreements or voting agreements or in any other manner; and 


(b) "managed" includes the decision making power, ownership and 
capacity to hold profit, as the case may be.". 


3. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/) after the words "co-operative 
society", the words "self-help groups, women led enterprises" shall be inserted. 


4. After clause (/) of section 4 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely: 


"Provided that the Central Government shall reserve twenty-five percent of the 
Fund or Funds for the welfare and development of self-help groups.". 


5. In Chapter V of the principal Act, in the heading, for the words, "MICRO AND 
SMALL ENTERPRISES", the words, "MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES" 
shall be substituted. 


6. In section I5 of the principal Act, after the existing proviso, the following proviso 
shall be inserted namely: 


"Provided further that the supplier shall upload invoices for an amount notified 
by the Central Government, on information utilities set up under the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 206 (3] of 20I6).". 


7. In section 8 of the principal Act, for the words, "Micro and Small Enterprises", the 
words "Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises" shall be substituted. 


8. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words, "Micro and Small Enterprise", the 
words, "Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises", shall be substituted. 


9. In section 2] of the principal Act, 


(a) for the words, "Micro and Small", wherever they occur, the words, "Micro, 
Small and Medium" shall be substituted; and 


(b) in sub-section (/), in clause (ii), for the words, "micro or small", the words, 
"micro, small or medium" shall be substituted. 


Amendment 
of section 7. 


Amendment 
of section 4. 


Amendment 
of Heading. 


Amendment 
of section 5. 


Amendment 
of section 8. 


Amendment 
of section 20. 


Amendment 
of section 2]. 


446 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

India's economic and financial has suffered due to a critical missing piece: women. 
Women across all segments, be it entrepreneurs or retail customers, face multiple barriers 
such as legal, socio-cultural and infrastructural barriers in accessing finance in an equitable 
manner. These are spread across such as restricted mobility, lack of traditional collateral, 
lower ownership of mobile phones and access to the internet, lower financial literacy levels. 
The unmet credit gap for women-owned enterprises is 70.37 per cent which translates to a 
financing gap of rupees |.37 lakh crore and presents a huge market opportunity for financial 
institutions. 


The need is to include women led enterprises under the Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises Act, 2006 in order to enable better targeting of women centric schemes, initiatives 
and products; collection of gender disaggregated data; anda consolidated digital platform 
for such enterprises - all of which contribute towards creating an enabling ecosystem for 
women entrepreneurs. The need is to empower women led enterprises by giving them 
preferential for procurement of goods and services. 


It is also necessary to introduce Self Help Groups (SHGs) under the MSME Act, 2006 
in order to economically empower these groups and promote entrepreneurship. A duty on 
the State is also to be made for setting set up funds for self help groups in order to promote 
entrepreneurship. 


Furthersome, it is also required to include Medium enterprises in order to provide for 
the safeguards, recourse and complaint mechanisms under the Act to be extended to medium 
enterprises as well. A complaint mechanism requiring the MSMEs to upload invoices on 
Information Utilities, to act as a safeguard against delayed payments is also required. 


It is noteworthy that the MSME sector is responsible for around one-third of India's 
GDP and has tremendous room for expansion. The importance of the sector in India's economic 
growth cannot be over-emphasized. With the presence of over 63 million MSMEs employing 
over !0 million people staggered across services, the manufacturing sector contributes 
nearly 30 per cent to the GDP. Therefore, it is imperative that a legislative backing is rendered 
to MSME to ensure their overall empowerment. 


Hence, this Bill. 


New DELHI; HEENA VIJAYKUMAR GAVIT 
23 November, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


Bit No. 238 or 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect. 


2. In article 3!2 of the Constitution, in clause (/), for the words "all-India Judicial 
service", the words "all-India Judicial Service and an all-India Education Service" shall be 
substituted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of article 32. 


450 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


In the wake of the pandemic that has hit the education systems of the entire world 
hard, it becomes very necessary for a country like India to have a stable, standard, reliable 
and controlled system of educating its population. Unlike countries like the United Kingdom 
or any other developed country for that matter, has a limited population to deal with that is 
supported by a declining and aging population for which brilliant brains from other countries 
specially India are taken out to keep up their standards high. 


The bill proposes to add Indian Education Service to the list to enhance the standards 
of education in the country by bringing in more consistence and quality in terms of teachers 
and education. India has come a long way after its liberalisation or independence from the 
ugly British Raj which makes it among the top destination for investment, outsourcing, and 
manufacturing, primarily in the service sector. India now being a major economy still lacks in 
aspects of vocational education, as almost no emphasis has been laid upon such areas of 
education, skill development and on field training, which should be added in order to give 
the future of the nation a brief over-view of the industries helping then in making an informed 
decision in terms of the career that they might want to choose. 


The success of any country largely depends on its educated citizens and this can be 
realised only if the education system functions well. This must be the reason why the 
National Policy on Education, 986, revised in !992, stressed the need for strengthening the 
education system in the country. The government should have complete faith in the teaching 
community and the teachers’ associations should play a significant role in improving 
education, upholding professional integrity to enhance the dignity and status of the teacher. 
Keeping this in mind, on behalf of teacher's federations representing teachers at all levels, 
from nursery to university level in India, a memorandum was presented to the Centre some 
time back requesting urgent attention to establish the Indian Education Service. 


The entire teaching community of India will appreciate the commitments which the 
policy has made to the nation, to the people, to the education, and the management system. 
The management system is a high priority item in education and it should receive urgent 
attention and support. Along with a number of dynamic steps in the economic and 
development fields, the educational management should also get top priority. 


The following needs to be kept in mind for improving the education scenario in our 
country. Teaching should be regarded as a profession. Itis a form of public service, which 
requires teachers expert knowledge and specialised skills, acquired and maintained through 
rigorous and continued research and study. It also calls for a sense of personal and corporate 
responsibility for the development and welfare of the pupils they are in-charge of. 


The Ministry of Education has come out with this proposal as part of National Education 
Policy-206 and invited views from stakeholders until end of this month. The idea of an 
Indian Education Service (IES) was first floated in the late !980s by the then Human Resource 
Development Minister. By creating IES, specialists in education will occupy top administrative 
posts and motivate their subordinates to work with dedication and commitment. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DEL; HEENA VIJAYKUMAR GAVIT 
23 November, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5] 


Burtt No. 24] oF 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 
2007. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows,— 


l. (7) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 2] of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 
2007 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (iii), the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely,— 


"(iv) every senior citizen with an annual income of less than rupees twelve 
lakhs shall be entitled to a fixed pension amount not exceeding rupees thirty-five 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 2]. 


Amendment 
of section 22. 


Amendment 
of section 32. 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


thousand per month from the Senior Citizen Welfare Fund, established under the 
Finance Act, 205, in such manner as may be prescribed.". 


3.In section 22 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely,— 


"(3) The State Government shall prescribe a comprehensive action plan with 
regard to digital and financial protection and wellbeing of senior citizen with respect to 
cyber frauds, identity theft, online banking frauds and take fast track action in that 
behalf.". 


4. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (f), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely,— 


"(fa) a comprehensive action plan for providing protection against offenses like 
identity theft, financial fraud and cybercrime with regards to senior citizens under sub- 
section (3) of section 22.". 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 was enacted on 
29th December, 2007 to ensure need-based maintenance for parents and senior citizens and 
their welfare. It's been more than a decade now that the Act is in place, serving the needy 
parents and senior citizens, with the active co-operation of the State Governments and 
Union Territory Administrations. 


With the gradual breakdown of joint family system in the society, number of cases of 
neglect, crime, exploitation and abandonment of parents and senior citizens are in the rise. 
Various High Courts have also issued orders directing the Government to review provisions 
of the Act. 


Pensions are an assurance of continuation of consumption levels required for dignified 
living in the face of reduction in income due to physiological atrophy and comparatively 
restricted income-generating opportunities. Amendment to section 2! seeks to provide 
universal pension for the elderly with an income of less than twelve lakhs. Currently the 
Union Government contributes Rs. 200 per month, which is less than (or less than US$3). 
Over the next 33 years, by 2050, 324 million Indians, or 20 percent of the population, will be 
above 60 years of age. If pension continues to cover only 35 percent of senior citizens as it 
does today, 200 million, or 6.7 percent of India's elderly population, will be without any 
income security by 2050. Given this fact, it is imperative that the Government active measures 
to ensure universal pension for the elderly. Therefore, the amendment. 


To ensure online safety of senior citizens amendment to section 22 of the act places 
responsibility on the State Governments to spread awareness and improve standards of 
digital literacy among the elderly in order to protect them from high cases of cybercrime, 
identity theft, financial fraud and money laundering. Through amendment to section 32, the 
State Government has been empowered to create rules for a comprehensive action plan for 
providing protection against offences like, cybercrime, identity theft, financial fraud and 
money laundering. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; HEENA VIJAYKUMAR GAVIT 
23 November, 2022. 


454 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for payment of fix pension amount not exceeding rupees 
thirty-five thousand to every senior citizen with an annual income of less than rupees twelve 
lakhs from the Senior Citizen Welfare Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure 
of about rupees five hundred crore per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 55 


But No. 9] oF 2020 


A Bill to ensure speedy removal of social and economic disparity through targeted 
expendiiure on special schemes for the welfare and development of the persons 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republie of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes Sub Plans 
(Budgetary Allocation and Special Schemes) Act, 2020. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a)"prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act; 


(b) "Scheduled Castes Sub Plan" means the process of funds allocation, 
identification and preparation of exclusive schemes, the expenditure on such schemes 
and the analysis of its final outcome, for the Scheduled Castes; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Budgetary 
allocation for 
Scheduled 
Castes and the 
Scheduled 
Tribes. 


Penalties. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(c) "special schemes" means schemes which focus on individual beneficiary 
schemes, family oriented cum income generating schemes for development of persons 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes families and schemes for improving the physical and social 
infrastructure of localities and community infrastructure like special schools for girls 
lo and boys, coaching centers, working womens' hostel, special libraries, health and 
employment; and 


(d) "Tribal Sub Plan" means the process of funds allocation, identification and 
preparation of exclusive schemes, the expenditure on such schemes and the analysis 
of its final outcome, for the Scheduled Tribes. 


3. (7) The Central Govemment shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf, make separate budgetary allocation for the welfare and development of persons 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, in proportion to their 
population. 


(2) The budgetary allocations so earmarked under sub-section (7) shall be spent only 
on special schemes in such manner, as may be prescribed. 


(3) The budgetary allocations under the Scheduled Castes Sub Plan and Tribal Sub 
Plan shall not be diverted for any other purposes or allowed to lapse. 


(4) For the purposes of this Act, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
Government ofIndia shall be the nodal Ministty for the Scheduled Castes Sub Plan and the 
Ministry of the Tribal Affairs shall be the nodal Ministry for Tribal Sub Plan. 


(5) The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
shall present separate Annual Budgets and Performance Budgets for the Scheduled Castes 
Sub Plan and Tribal Sub respectively. 


4. Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-sections (2) or (3) of section 3 shall be 
guilty of wilful and deliberate act of dereliction of duty and shall be punished under 
section 4 of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) 
Act, |989 after fixing the individual responsibility. 


5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions contained in this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for the removal of the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act. * 


7. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


33 of 989. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 57 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The legislative efforts undertaken to close the development gap between Dalits and 
Adivasis and other date back to 950, when the Constitution provided opportunities for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the areas of education, employment in public 
services and electoral seats through the policy of reservation. From economic point of view, 
the most important policies approved so far are the Tribal Sub Plan (STP) and the Special 
Component Plan (SCP), now called Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP), executive budget 
policies, according to which funds and resources are to be reserved across Central Ministries 
and Departments in the State Governments in pwportion to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled 
Tribes population at the national, as per the current census date. 


However, close scrutiny of the current situation reveals that these two policies have 
not been implemented effoctively. The money eannarked under these policies is diverted for 
general scheme and does not go for funding of the schemes, exclusively for the benefit of the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. It is not surprising that Dalits and Adivasis stili 
remain far away from mainstream development in the country. The literacy gap is still quite 
high and die dropout rate is still high. The rate of infant mortality and child mortality under 
five is higher among the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes than among other 
social group; the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are still less equipped with the 
basic requirements for human survival like water and power supply facilities, latrines, sewarage, 
houses, etc. and poverty is stiil very rampant among them. 


In fact, positive and substantial changes require making appropriate allocation of 
funds compulsory, their distribution timely and focused and effective management of the 
funds for the welfare of the Scheduied Castes/Scheduled Tribes. Hence, there is a need to 
introduce a new piece of legislation with the objective of achieving the holistic and speedy 
economic development of these communities. In order to ensure speedy economic 
development of the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, it 
is proposed to give statutory back up to the SCSP and STSP and a strict monitoring on their 
implementation, without diversion of funds earmarked for welfare of the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; LOCKET CHATTERJEE 
6 November, 209. 


PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES ]] 70) ANDI7(3) OF 
THE CONSTITUTION 
[Copy of Letter No. 604/0/20l9-SCD-II/DAPSC dated 4 March, 2020 from 


Shri Thaawarchand Gehlot, Minister of Social Justice and Empowennent to the Secretary 
General, Lok Sabha}. 


The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes Sub Plans (Budgetary Allocation and Special Scheme) Bill, 2020 by 
Shrimati Locket Chatterjee, M.P., recommends the introduction and consideration of the Bill 
in Lok Sabha under articles l!7(/) and 7(3), respectively, of the Constitution. 


4586 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for a separate budgetary allocation by the Central 
Government for the Welfare and development of the persons belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to estimate the expenditure 
likely to be incurred. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 


the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


Bit No. 35 oF 209 


A Bill to provide for incentives to State Governments and Municipal Corporations to take 
effective steps towards reduction of vehicular pollution in urban areas. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows,— 
I. (/) This Act may be called the Vehicular Pollution Reduction Act, 209. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "Authority" means the Vehicular Pollution Regulation and Assessment 
Authority constituted under section 6; 


(b) "Carpool-only lane" means a lane of a road that is exclusively reserved for 
the use of powered vehicles carrying a minimum of four passengers including the 
driver, or, in the case of motorcycles, a minimum of two passengers including the 
driver; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


460 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(c) "eligible vehicle" refers to a powered vehicle intended to be used on roads 
and which meets any of the following descriptions,— 


(i) an electric vehicle, that is, a vehicle that is powered entirely by electric 
power stored in a battery which is recharged through an electrical outlet; 


(ii) a hybrid vehicle, that is, a vehicle that is a partly powered through 
battery power and partly through an internal combustion engine; 


(iii) a plug-in hybrid vehicle, that is, a vehicle that can be powered in the 
same way as a hybrid vehicle, and through electric power stored in a battery 
which is recharged through an electrical outlet; 


(iv) a fuel cell vehicle, that is, a vehicle powered by an engine where the 
only byproduct that is produced is water; 


(v) a natural gas vehicle, that is, a vehicle that is powered by compressed 
natural gas or liquefied natural gas; 


(vi) a biofuel vehicle, that is, a vehicle that is powered by biofuels: 


Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
lay down requirements, including technical specifications, minimum or maximum engine 
capacity, engine efficiency or composition of fuel emissions, for any of the above 
description, fulfillment of which shall be necessary for a vehicle to fall within the 
meaning of eligible vehicle; and 


(d) "traffic signal synchronization" means the traffic engineering technique 
where traffic signals are designed, monitored and operated in order to coordinate the 
times taken for signals to change for a series of roads and junctions, so as to minimise 
stops and delays for vehicles. 


Conditions for 3. Every Municipal Corporation shall be entitled to receive from the Central Government 
is Municipal a grant of one hundred crore rupees or of such higher amount, as the Central Government 
ait may, by notification in the Official Gazette specify, if it satisfies any five of the following eight 
grant. conditions,— 


(a) implement a system for collecting a fixed daily fee as congestion fee from 
vehicles that enter congested areas within the municipality; 


(b) introduce carpool-only lanes on major roads in the municipal area; 


(c) provide rebates to residents of the municipal area for purchase of eligible 
vehicles; 


(d) provide free electric recharging facilities for cars to residents of the municipal 
area; 


(e) implement a system which bars entry into the municipality area of vehicles 
older than ten years; 


(f) implemente a system of traffic signal synchronization within the municipal 
area; 


(g) provides the following benefits to eligible vehicles— 


(i) permit eligible vehicles to use carpool-only lanes irrespective of the 
number of occupants of the vehicle; and 


(ii) exempt eligible vehicles from parking fee at public parking facilities in 
the municipal area; and 


(A) provides the following benefits to owners of eligible vehicles,— 


(i) full or partial waiver of Taxes/fees, charges or other types of dues taken 
by the municipal corporation from the user of vehicles; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l6l 


(ii) full or partial waiver of toll fee at toll fee collection points under the 
administrative control of the municipal corporation; and 


(iii) credits for expenses on the fuel for eligible vehicles that can be set- off 
against fees, charges or other types of dues taken by municipal corporation. 


4. The State Government shall be entitled to receive from the Central Government a 
grant of three hundred crore rupees or of such higher amount, as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette specify, if that State Government satisfies any two 
of the following conditions,— 


(a) impose an additional Tax on all vehicles which do not fall within the category 
of eligible vehicles. 


(b) exempt eligible vehicles from the requirement of registration in the State after 
relocation in that State if such eligible vehicles have previously been registered in any 
other State; 


(c) adopt policies which require persons working in private or Government offices, 
organizations, agencies or businesses in the State to work from home for atleast one 
working day every week. 


5. The State Government shall be entitled to receive from the Central Government a 
grant of five hundred crore rupees or of such higher amount, as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette specifies, if— 


(a) the State has five or less Municipal Corporations and all Municipal 
Corporations within the State are eligible to receive grant under section 3; or 


(b) the State has more than five but not more than twenty Municipal Corporations 
and not less than three-fourths of all the Municipal Corporation within the State are 
eligible to receive grant under section 3; or 


(c) the State has more than twenty Municipal Corporations and not less than 
one-half of all Municipal Corporations within the State are eligible to receive grant 
under section 3. 


6. (/) The Central Government shall, within one month of the coming into force of this 
Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Authority to be known as the 
Vehicular Pollution Regulation and Assessment Authority. 


(2) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and representatives from the Union 
Ministries of Finance, Road Transport and Highways and the Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change, to be appointed by Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of services of Chairperson 
and other members of the Authority shall be such as may prescribed. 


7. (7) The Authority shall determine whether a Municipal Corporation or a State 
Government satisfies the conditions laid down under sections 3, 4 and 5. 


(2) The decision of the Authority under sub-section (/) shall be final. 


(3) While making a determination under sub-section (/), the Authority shall take into 
consideration the steps taken by a Municipal Corporation or a State Government towards 
achieving the intended objectives behind each of the conditions mentioned in sections 3, 4 
and 5. 


8. (/) The Authority may, from time to time, issue specifications, for each of the conditions 
mentioned in sections 3, 4, and 5. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Authority shall 
have the power to— 


Conditions for 
a State 
Government 
to receive 
grant. 


Grant for 
State 
Government 
achieving 
state-wide 
compliance 
with 
conditions. 


The Vehicular 
Pollution 
Regulation and 
Assessment 
Authority. 


Authority to 
determine 
satisfaction of 
conditions. 


Power of the 
Authority to 
issue 
specifications. 


Advance 
determination 
of proposal. 


Protection of 
action taken 


in good faith. 


Power to 
make rules. 


62 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(a) prescribe parameters for identifying congested areas in a municipal corporation; 


(b) prescribe parameters for fixing congestion fee to be levied by a municipal 
corporation; 


(c) demarcate roads for carpool-only lanes; 


(d) prescribed the minimum rate of rebate to be given to the owners for purchasing 
eligible vehicles; 


(e) prescribe performance parameters for traffic signal synchronization; 


(f) prescribe the minimum rate of waiver in fees, charges or other types of dues to the 
municipal corporation to be given to the owners of eligible vehicles; and 


(g) prescribe the minimum additional cost to be realised by way of the imposition 
of any additional penalty on all vehicles other than eligible vehicles. 


(3) A specification issued under sub-section (2) shall not be modified or revoked till 
the completion of a period of one year from the date of issue of specification: 


Provided that the Authority shall have no restrictions on issuing specifications on 
other aspects during such time. 


9. (॥) Every State Government and Municipal Corporation shall have the right to 
submit their proposal of steps to be taken to the Authority for an advance determination of 
whether such steps, if implemented, would satisfy the conditions laid down in sections 3, 4 
or 5. 


(2) The Authority shall provide such an advance determination within three months of 
receiving the proposal from the State Government or the Municipal Corporation. 


(3) For the purpose of becoming eligible for the grants specified in sections 3,4 or 5, 
obtaining of an advance determination shall not affect the requirement of obtaining a 
determination under section 7. 


0. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person in respect of anything 
which is in good faith done, or intended to be done, under or in pursuance of the provisions 
of this Act. 


Il. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 63 


Vehicular pollution is one of the biggest crisis that is unfolding in our country today. 
Rapid urbanisation and the lack of adequate city planning for a long time have together 
contributed to a situation where large numbers of pollution-spewing cars clog our roads, 
putting the health of our citizens under siege. Further complicating the situation is the fact 
that many laws and regulations that apply to the use of vehicles are made at the State and 
local Government levels, thus providing for a diverse array of disparate interests. The situation 
calls for drastic but co-ordinated action. 


This Bill seeks to streamline the interests of municipal corporations, State Governments 
and the Central Government when it comes to taking steps towards reducing vehicular 
pollution. It provides a mechanism where the Municipal Corporation and State Government 
can become eligible for financial grants if they undertake efforts towards curbing vehicular 
pollution within their jurisdiction. While incidental benefits such as a reduction in road 
congestion may also result on enactment of this Bill. The need is to take concerted effort to 
act against the menace of pollution caused by vehicles. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; LOCKET CHATTERJEE 
6 November, 209. 


464 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for providing grants to municipal corporations by the 
Central Government on fulfillment of certain conditions regarding reduction of vehicular 
pollution. Clause 4 provides for grants to the State Governments by the Central Government 
on fulfillment of certain conditions regarding reduction of vehicular pollution. Clause 5 
provides for grants to the State Governments by the Central Government for achieving State- 
wide compliance with conditions. Clause 6 provides for constitution of the Vehicular Pollution 
Reduction Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about 
rupees one thousand crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crores is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause | of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 65 


Bit No. 259 oF 209 


A Bill to provide for payment of unemployment allowance till gainful employment is 
provided to eligible citizens and ensuring the right to gainful employment and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows,— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Unemployment Allowance Act, 209. Short title, 
extent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commencement. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "Fund" means the National Youth Unemployment Assistance Fund 
constituted under section 4; 


(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act; 


Right to 
gainful 
employment. 


Unemployed 
citizen. 


Constitution 
of corpus fund 
for 
unemployment 
allowance. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
adequate fund. 


66 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(d) "self-employment" means to work independently for one's clients or customers 
by setting up of own production or selling unit or establishment and not for any 
employer; and 


(e) "unemployed citizen" means a citizen of India who has attained the age of 
eighteen years having no source of livelihood. 


3. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force 
every unemployed citizen shall have the right to gainful employment. 


(2) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide gainful employment 
opportunity to every unemployed citizen within its territorial jurisdiction. 


(3) The gainful employment referred to in sub-section (/) shall be provided according 
to the age, educational qualifications and physical status of the unemployed citizen. 


(4) For carrying out the purposes of this Act, it shall be the duty of the appropriate 
Government to generate adequate employment opportunities in the public sector, private 
sector, small scale industries, cottage and village industries, khadi and other weaving 
industries, food processing sector, self-employment opportunities, agriculture and other 
sectors. 


(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it 
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to fill up all the vacant posts in the inistries, 
Departments, Public Sector Enterprises and other Government agencies and organisations 
in a time bound manner. 


4. Till such time gainful employment is provided to unemployed citizens or provision 
is made for self employment under any Government scheme or by providing loan through a 
Bank or Financial Institution, every such citizen shall be paid by the appropriate Government 
an unemployment allowance, not being less than rupees twenty thousand per month in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the unemployment allowance shall not be paid under this Act to an 
unemployed citizen who,— 


(a) has an income from any source not being less than the amount of 
unemployment allowance fixed under this Act, or 


(b) is covered under any existing scheme of unemployment allowance prevalent 
in a State or Union territory, as the case may be: 


Provided further that in case an unemployed citizen has an earning from any other 
source which is less than the amount of unemployment allowance fixed under this Act, his 
unemployment allowance shall be reduced by the amount of his earning. 


5. (7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
a Fund for unemployment allowance with initial corpus of rupees sixty thousand crore and 
thereafter shall contribute to the fund, from time to time, along with the State Governments in 
such ratio as may be prescribed. 


(2) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received by 
way of donation, contribution, assistance or otherwise from individuals, body corporate, 
financial institution, firms and partnership. 


(3) The Fund shall be managed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 67 


7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


8. The provisions of this Act and rules made there-under shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. 


9. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Acto to have 
overriding 
effects. 


Power to 
make rules. 


4686 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


India is projected to grow at eight per cent. per annum [Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP)] in the next two years and is the fastest growing major economy in the world. Jobless 
growth is an economic phenomenon in which an economy experiences growth while 
maintaining or decreasing its level of employment. The International Labour Organisation 
predicted that joblessness will increase from |7.7 million in 20I6 to I8 million by 208, even 
though the country's unemployment rate is expected to go down from 3.5 per cent. to 3.4 per 
cent. The trend of significant gap between the pace of GDP growth and that of employment 
growth has given rise to the phenomenon of "jobless growth" in India. 


As per the survey by Labour Bureau, country's unemployment rate has shot up to a 
five year high of five per cent. in 205-6. This figure is significantly higher, at 8.7 per cent, for 
women as compared to 4.3 per cent. for men. Equally tragic is the mounting unemployment 
among educated youth. The growing unemployment among educated youth (age group [5 
to 29 years) in recent years is an outcome of such slow growth rate of jobs. At the all-India 
level, the unemployment rate among youth with secondary education unemployment rate 
increased from 2.6 per cent. to 3.2 per cent. and for those with higher secondary education 
unemployment rate increased from 3.3 per cent. to 4.4 per cent. In case of youth with a 
graduate degree unemployment rate increased from 5.8 per cent. to 8.4 per cent. and with a 
postgraduate degree it rose from 5.7 per cent. to 8.5 per cent. 


About seventy-seven per cent. of Indian households do not have a regular wage/ 
salaried person. India has no dearth of quality human resources at its disposal. As a long 
term measure, there is a need to boost entrepreneurial instincts within the demographic base 
by substantially investing in human capital via education. 


Another vital area needing policy intervention is the increasing gender-gap in the 
labour force participation. The shortage of jobs is compounded by depressed wages, with 
82 per cent. of men and 92 per cent. of women earning less than rupees ten thousand per 
month. The advantages of economic growth are futile if it is not able to create sufficient jobs 
in the economy. India has an advantage due to its demographic dividend. There is an urgent 
need to effectively implement policy measures to exploit the demographic dividend and 
ensure inclusive and sustainable growth which is not jobless. 


The Bill, therefore, proposes to grant unemployment allowance through creation of a 
fund for unemployment allowance having a corpus of sixty thousand crore. The grant of 
unemployment allowance will help in curbing the increasing unemployment. The Bill also 
seeks to make right to work compulsory by imposing an obligation on the Government to 
provide gainful employment. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SU. THIRUNAVUKKARASAR 
6 November, 209. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 69 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for right to gainful employment to every unemployed 
citizen. Clause 4 provides for unemployment allowance to be paid to every unemployed 
citizen. Clause 5 provides for the constitution of the corpus Fund for payment of unemployment 
allowance. Clause 6 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide requisite 
funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage it is not possible to estimate 
the expenditure. However, it is estimated that a sum of rupees sixty thousand crore in addition 
to rupees sixty thousand crore as initial corpus, will involve a recurring expenditure per 
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved. 


70 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [7] 


Bit No. 26 oF 209 


A BILL to establish an Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund for the welfare and 
development of agricultural workers and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows,— 
I. (7) This Act may be called the Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund Act, 209. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such a date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "agriculture" with all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, 
includes floriculture, horticulture, sericulture, the raising of crops, grass or garden 
produce, dairy farming, poultry farming, stock breeding, cutting of wood or grass, 
gathering of fruit, raising of man-made forest or rearing of seedlings or plants; 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


72 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) "Fund" means the Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund constituted under 
section 3; 


(c) "prescribed" means as prescribed by the rules made under this Act; and 


(d) "workers" mean workers engaged in any activity connected with agriculture. 


Constitution 3. (7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette constitute a 
es oe Fund to be known as theAgricultural Workers Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of 
orkKers 


Welfare Fund. this Act. 


(2) The Central Government and State Government shall contribute to the Fund in 
such ratios as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Committee consisting of:— 


(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having experience 
of at least ten years in the field of farmers welfare, agriculture or rural development; 


(b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having 
such qualification as may be prescribed; 


(c) seven members of Parliament of whom four shall be from the House of the 
People and three from the Council of States to be nominated by the respective Presiding 
officers of the Houses and having a background in agriculture related activities; 


(d) four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the 
Union Ministries of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Labour and Employment, Finance 
and Rural Development, respectively; 


(e) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the 
agricultural workers covered under this Act; and 


(f) four members to be nominated by the Governments of the States to be rotated 
amongst the States in alphabetical order. 


(4) The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes, namely,— 


(i) payment of unemployment or sustenance allowance to agricultural workers 
during off season period; 


(ii) free health facilities for the agricultural workers and their families in the 
hospitals to be set up for the purpose; 


(iii) free educational facilities to the children of agricultural workers; 

(iv) payment of compensation of workers who sustain injuries during work; 
(v) payment of compensation to families of workers who die in harness; 
(vi) payment of premium group life insurance cover of workers; 


(vii) payment of disability allowance in case of accident at the workplace and are 
not able to work further; 


(viii) payment of old age pension to those workers who have attained sixty 
years of age and are not gainfully employed; 


(ix) provision of suitable facilities like canteen, health, recreation, water etc. at 40 
work places; 


(x) payment of bonus to workers; and 


(xi) payment of maternity benefit and establishment of creche facilities for the 
children of female agricultural workers covered under this Act. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ॥73 


(5) The Salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service 
of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other member of the Committee shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 


4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Committee constituted under sub-section (3) of 
section 3, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


6. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
adequate 
Funds. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
other law. 


Power to 
make rules. 


474 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The agricultural sector of the economy in India is the largest sector in terms of 
employment of the workforce. It consists of crop cultivation and other agricultural activities 
such as forestry, livestock and fishing. The workers in this sector may be broadly divided 
into wage workers, and farmers. Almost the entire agricultural sector (except the Plantation 
Sector) is unorganized i.e. it has neither any formal system of social security nor regulation 
of conditions of work. 


According to estimates of the 20I Census, there are close to 230 million people who 
are employed as agricultural workers in India. More and more firm workers are moving away 
from agriculture and this has been negatively affecting the country's productivity especially 
in crops which are labour intensive like Paddy, Wheat, Cotton, Sugarcane and Groundnut. 
Currently, the profession of agricultural labour is of ‘all pain and no gain’. Across the country, 
monthly earnings have been found to be as low as one thousand rupees. This poor economic 
state is further worsened when coupled with the pitiable other hazardous conditions of these 
workers. Excessive working hours lead to poor health and low life expectancy across the 
profession. Accessibility towards basic healthcare and education as well as essential social 
security schemes is virtually inexistent. The seasonal nature of this profession further adds 
to the woes of these citizens, who constitute the poorest thirty per cent. of the country who 
are left to fend for their lives during off-season without any money. 


The agricultural workers in the Unorganised Sector face problems that arise out of 
deficiency or capability deprivation in terms of inadequate employment, low earnings, low 
health, etc., as well as of adversity in the absence of fall back mechanisms (safety net). These 
workers have limited or no formal social security cover which increases their vulnerability 
during times of illness, old age, unemployment and untimely death. The absence of social 
security mechanisms is a critical factor in downturns in the conditions of these households, 
many of whom are already very poor. It destroys the workers ability to contribute meaningfully, 
and to increasing production and productivity. It leads to disaffection increasing social 
costs, widespread crimes, and persistent ill health. 


The changing nature of agricultural production—including the increased use of 
chemicals and machinery—is aggravating risks. This is particularly true in a number of 
developing countries where education, training and occupational safety and health services 
are largely inadequate. While there is a very long way to go in terms of establishing a 
satisfactory life for these workers, it is sad to say that even the bare minimum has not been 
done towards realising this very important goal. 


The present Bill strives to constitute a Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund to establish 
through basic policy measures the rights that these workers deserve. It intend to cover 
agricultural workers, who are all agricultural wage workers not protected under the Plantations 
Labour Act, l95! and marginal and small farmers. It also intends to provide a measure of 
social security to agricultural wage workers and marginal and small farmers in the unorganised 
sector. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SU. THIRUNAVUKKARASAR 
6 November, 209. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 75 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund 
and for the benefit of agricultural workers. It also provides for a Committee consisting of a 
Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other member for administration of the Fund. Clause 
4 provides for the Central Government to provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore 
will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


76 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative powers is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ॥88॥ 


Britt No. 5 oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, |973. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment of 
Section 2. 


Insertion of 
new Chapter 
XXVIL. 


Application 
for 
compensation. 


78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973 (hereinafter referred to as the Code), in 
section 2— 


(a) after clause (c), the following clause (ca) shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(ca) "compensation" shall include, but not limited to, monetary and non- 
monetary counselling, health services, re-integration in society through skill 
training, relief of the harm or injury, including body, mind or reputation, suffered 
by malicious prosecution;'; and 


(b) after clause (j), the following clause (ja) shall be inserted, namely: — 


‘Ga) "malicious prosecution" means instituting prosecution without any 
existing reasonable or probable cause, with malice or wrongful prosecution 
instituted without good faith and includes any of the following but not limited 
to, namely:— 


(i) making or fabricating a false or incorrect record or document for 
submission; 


(ii) making a false declaration or statement before an officer authorised 
by law to receive as evidence when legally bound to state the truth that is 
to say by an oath or by a provision of law; 


(iii) otherwise giving false evidence when legally bound to state the 
truth that is to say by an oath or by a provision of law; 


(iv) fabricating false evidence for submission; 


(v) suppression or destruction of an evidence to prevent its 
production; 


(vi) bringing a false charge, or instituting or cause to be instituted 
false proceedings against a person; 


(vii) committing a person to confinement or trial acting contrary to 
law; 

(vill) restraining or confining a person, without application of mind, 
while instituting a complaint after receiving information under section 
54; 


(ix) acting in violation of any law in any other manner not specifically 
covered under (i) to (viii) above.'. 


3. After Chapter XX VII of the Code, the following Chapter and sections thereunder 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


CHAPTER XXVITA 
Compensation to Person Maliciously Prosecuted 


365A. (/) An application seeking compensation for a wrongful prosecution may be 
made:— 


(a) by the accused person who has been maliciously prosecuted and has suffered 
injury; or 

(b) where the accused person died either before or after the termination of wrongful 
prosecution, by all or any of the heirs or the legal representatives of the deceased: 


Provided that where all the heirs or the legal representatives of the deceased 
have not joined in any such application for compensation, the application shall be 
deemed to have been made on behalf of and for the benefit of all the heirs and legal 
representatives of the deceased. 


2 of 974. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 79 


(2)Every application under sub-section () shall be filed preferred in the court where 
trial has been concluded or where the applicant resides. 


(3) In case of incarceration for more than three months, in lieu of malicious prosecution 
the court may after hearing the applicant, award interim compensation to the applicant, for 
the injury suffered, which shall not be less than rupees one lakh. 


(4)Every application for compensation under sub-section () shall be made within a 
period of one year from the date of acquittal or discharge or closure report filed by the officer, 
as the case may be: 


Provided that the applicant may file application, after the expiry of the said period of 
one year if the court is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
making the application within the prescribed time. 


Explanation.—For the purpose of this section "injury" means monetary and non- 
monetary harm, of mind, body or reputation or any other kind connected therewith or incidental 
thereto, suffered during the prosecution, maliciously or wrongfully initiated. 


365B. Where the court allows the application for compensation, it may direct that an 
interest at the rate of nine per cent in addition to the compensation, shall also be paid from 
the date of such application: 


Provided, in case the investigating officer or a Government agency has instituted a 
case, which concluded in favour of the applicant or accused, due to malicious prosecution, 
the court shall direct the State Government or Central Government, as the case may be, to pay 
the compensation, awarded by the court to the applicant herein after hearing the applicant 
and also initiate a judicial inquiry on such investigating officer or the investigating agency. 


365C. While adjudicating the quantum of compensation under section 365A the court 
may, but not limited to, take into account the following factors, namely:— 


(i) gravity of offence and punishment therein; 

(ii) loss of health; 

(iii) loss of income; 

(iv) loss of livelihood; 

(v) loss of reputation; 

(vi) loss of property; 

(vii) loss of opportunities; 

(viii) psychological and physiological harm or injury; 

(ix) disqualification suffered due to malicious prosecution; 
(x) loss to lead a dignified life in the family; and 


(xi) such other factor as the court may deem fit for the ends of justice or to 
prevent miscarriage of justice. 


365D. (/) Every State Government shall, in co-ordination with the Central Government, 
prepare a scheme for providing funds for the purpose of compensation to the person 
maliciously prosecuted or his dependents heirs who have suffered loss or injury as a result 
of the malicious prosecution and who require rehabilitation. 


(2) Whenever a recommendation or direction, as the case may be, is made by the Court 
for compensation, the District Legal Service Authority or the State Legal Service Authority, 
as the case may be, shall be the nodal authority to dispense or release of the fund so directed 
to be awarded by the court. 


Award of 
interest on 
compensation. 


Factors to be 
taken into 
account by 
the court 
awarding 
compensation. 


Compensation 
scheme for 
the person 
maliciously 
prosecuted. 


Appeals. 


Power to 
make rules. 


80 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(3) The State or the District Legal Services Authority, as the case may be, to alleviate 
the suffering of the person maliciously prosecuted, may be directed, but not limited to, for 
immediate first-aid facility or medical benefits or mental health counselling or health services 
or vocational or skill development training forre-integration into the society, to be made 
available free of cost on such direction of the court awarding compensation in terms of either 
monetary or non-monetary, or any other interim relief as the appropriate court may deems fit. 


365E. (/) Any person aggrieved of the interim compensation awarded by the court of 
the first instance under sub-section (3) of section 365A, may prefer an appeal within the 
period of ninety days from the date of the award to the High Court. 


(2) No appeal shall lie against the interim award of the court of first instance. 


365F. (/) The Central Government or State Government, as the case may be, by 
notification, make rules for the purpose of carrying out the purposes of this Chapter. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the form of making application for claims for compensation and the particulars 
it may contain, to be paid in respect of such applications under sub-section (2) of 
365A; 


(b) the procedure to be followed by a Court in holding an inquiry and the powers 
vested in a Civil Court which may be exercised by a Court; 


(c) the form and the manner of the payment of amount for preferring an appeal 
against an award of the Court under sub-section (l) of section 365D; and 


(d) any other matter which is considered necessary. 


(3) Every rule made by a State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 8] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Restraining or confining the liberty of the human being must be in exceptional 
circumstances rather than a normal routine through powers vested in law. Article 2] of the 
Constitution says, 'no person shall be deprived of his life and personal liberty except in 
accordance with procedure established by law' and Article 22 provides for protection against 
arbitrary arrests and illegal detention. The administration of justice would be defied if the law 
of the land is moulded in a way that does not prohibit an individual from maliciously or 
wrongfully prosecuting the person in question. Malicious prosecution adds to the already 
burdened criminal justice system. Depriving a person of their liberty because of malicious 
prosecution is a direct violation of their fundamental right. Further, confinement leads to the 
loss of productive years, which a free person could have used for leading a dignified life, the 
loss of education , the loss of health, the loss of income, loss of livelihood, loss to lead a 
family with dignity, and loss to reputation etc. The international covenants, to which India 
is a signatory, protect a person from wrongful prosecution , but the implementation of the 
same has not been done. Article !4(6) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights, [966 (ICCPR) delineates the obligation of States in cases of miscarriage of justice 
resulting from wrongful prosecutions. It states that "when a person has by a final decision 
been convicted of a criminal offence and when subsequently his conviction has been 
reversed or he has been pardoned on the ground that a new and newly-discovered fact 
shows conclusively that there has been a miscarriage of justice, the person who has suffered 
punishment as a result of such conviction shall be compensated according to law unless it is 
proved that the non-disclosure of the unknown fact in time is wholly or partly attributable to 
him". 


Article 9(5) of the ICCPR further underscores this right by declaring that "anyone who 
has been the victim of unlawful arrest or detention shall have an enforceable right to 
compensation". 


The United Nations Human Rights Committee explained the obligations contained in 
Article 4 of ICCPR: "It is necessary that States parties enact legislation ensuring that 
compensation as required by this provision, can in fact be paid and that payment is made 
within a reasonable period of time". Not all countries party to this have substantiated it with 
their domestic amendments or laws. 


The National Crime Records Bureau's (NCRB) annual statistical report called the 'Prison 
Statistics India (PSD' contains information with respect to prisons, prisoners, and prison 
infrastructure. According to PSI 2053, there were 4,!9,623 prisoners across the country; 
out of which, 67.2% i.e. 2,82,076 were undertrials substantially higher than the convict 
population i.e. ,34,68 (32.0%). With respect to the issue of miscarriage of justice under 
consideration here, the period of incarceration of the undertrials also needs to be taken into 
consideration. The data shows that 25.% (70,66) of the total undertrials spent more than a 
year in prison; 7.8% (50,l76) spend up to | year in prison as undertrials, 2.9% (6,886) of 
the undertrials were in prison for 3 to 6 months, and 35.2% (99,398) undertrials spent up to 3 
months in prison. Also to be noted is the data of release, which shows that during the year 
205, 82,585 prisoners were released by acquittal, and 23,442 prisoners were released in 
appeal. As per International report released, India, has one of the highest undertrial prisoners 
in the world. 


The apex court considering state of affairs expressed anguish over person languishing 
in jails such as in Thana Singh ० Central Bureau of Narcotics 2(2073) 2 SCC 590. See also: 
Hussainara Khatoon & Ors. v. Home Secretary, State of Bihar, Patna, AIR 79/9 SC I369; 
Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee Representing Undertrial Prisoners v. Union of India 
and Ors. (/994) 6 SCC 737, observing: "The laxity with which we throw citizens into prison 
reflects our lack of appreciation for the tribulations of incarceration; the callousness with 
which we leave them there reflects our lack of deference for humanity. 


It also reflects our imprudence when our prisons are bursting at their seams. For the 
prisoner himself, imprisonment for the purposes of trial is as ignoble as imprisonment on 


82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


conviction for an offence since the damning finger and opprobrious eyes of society draw no 
difference between the two..". After the Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 7978 SC 
597, Hon'ble Supreme Court of India gave a much needed interpretation of Article 2 of the 
Constitution of India, the courts started to consider awarding compensation in cases of 
undue detention and bodily harm. Khatri & Ors. v. State of Bihar & Ors., AIR /96/ SC 928 
(the Bhagalpur Blinding case) was one of the earliest case wherein the question was considered 
as to whether a person deprived of his life and liberty in violation of Article 2] be awarded 
relief by the court or not and the court further ordered the State to meet the expenses of 
housing the blinded victims in a blind home in Delhi. 


The court in Rudal Sah v. State of Bihar AIR /963 SC 70866, where the Supreme Court, 
passed an order of compensation for the violation of Articles 2] and 22 of the Constitution. 
In this case the petitioner was unlawfully detained in prison for |4 years after the order of 
acquittal. The court observed thus: "One of the telling ways in which the violation of that 
right can reasonably be prevented and due compliance with the mandate of Article 2] secured, 
is to mulct its violators in the payment of monetary compensation. Administrative sclerosis 
leading to flagrant infringements of fundamental rights cannot be corrected by any other 
method open to the judiciary to adopt". 


Afterwards, the Boma Chara Oraon case, where the Supreme Court declared that 
anyone deprived illegally of his life or personal liberty can approach the Supreme Court and 
seek compensation for violation of his fundamental right under Article 2!.The need to 
compensate the victims of wrongful arrests, incarceration etc. by awarding "suitable monetary 
compensation", the Supreme Court in the case of Bhim Singh, MLA vy. State of J & K 
<075.(7/9655) 4 SCC 677 opined that the mischief, malice or invasion of an illegal arrest and 
imprisonment cannot just be "washed away or wished away" by setting free the person so 
arrested or imprisoned. 


The Court awarded a sum of Rs. 50,000/- as compensation for illegal detention but, it is 
noteworthy that it did not delve into the reasoning or mechanism of how this "suitable 
monetary compensation" was determined or should be determined in similar cases. 
Furthermore, getting into the question of " who will pay the compensation" the Supreme 
Court in the case of SAHELI, A women's resource center v. Commissioner of Police, Delhi AIR 
990 SC 5I3, held the vicarious liability of the State i.e. the State to responsible for the 
tortious acts of its employees; and, ordered the Delhi Administration to pay the compensation 
for police atrocities which lead to the death of a 9 year old child; further noting that the Delhi 
Administration has the option to recover the amount paid from the officers found responsible. 
Further, plethora of judgements of the court such as in Nilabatibehera and D.K. Basu talked 
about police atrocities and awarding compensation. Therefore, plethora of judgements of 
Supreme Court talked about compensation to person wrongfully prosecuted or unduly 
incarcerated, which is barred by law in common parlance. Even the Delhi High Court in the 
case of Babloo Chauhan @ Dabloo vs. State Government of NCT of Delhi 247 (2075, 937 
expressed its concerns about wrongful implication of innocent persons who are acquitted 
but after long years of incarceration, and the lack of a legislative framework to provide relief 
to those who are wrongfully prosecuted. The Court, vide its order dated 30 November 207, 
specifically called for the Law Commission of India to undertake a comprehensive examination 
of issue of relief and rehabilitation to victims of wrongful prosecution, and incarceration and 
held "There is at present in our country no statutory or legal scheme for compensating those 
who are wrongfully incarcerated. The instances of those being acquitted by the High Court 
or the Supreme Court after many years of imprisonment are not infrequent. They are left to 
their devices without any hope of reintegration into society or rehabilitation since the best 
years of their life have been spent behind bars, invisible behind the high prison walls. 


The possibility of invoking civil remedies can by no stretch of imagination be 
considered efficacious, affordable or timely... ... The decisions in Khatri vs. State of Bihar 
(/98॥) l SCC 627; Veena Sethi vs. State of Bihar AIR 79653 SC 339; RudulSah vs. State of 
Bihar AIR 963 SC ॥066, Bhim Singh vs. State of Jammu and Kashmir (/965) 4 SCC 677 
and Sant Bir vs. State of Bihar AIR /9862 SC 7479, are instances where the Supreme Court 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 83 


has held that compensation can be awarded by constitutional courts for violation of 
fundamental right under Article 2! of the Constitution of India. These have included instances 
of compensation being awarded to those wrongly incarcerated as well. But these are episodic 
and are not easily available to all similarly situated persons. There is an urgent need, therefore, 
for a legal (preferably legislative) framework for providing relief and rehabilitation to victims 
of wrongful prosecution and incarceration... Specific to the question of compensating those 
wrongfully incarcerated, the questions as regards the situations and conditions upon which 
such relief would be available, in what form and at what stage are also matters requiring 
deliberation..." after which the 277th Law Commission report in furtherance of the order of 
the Hon'ble Delhi High Court recommended for the formation of a legislative framework in 
lieu of compensation to person maliciously prosecuted. 


In the prevalent time wherein registration of FIR has become a norm than a need, when 
a crime has taken place, so as to subvert the due process of law and falsely, maliciously or 
wrongfully incarcerate the person lead to abuse of law or manipulation of law according to 
whims and fancies of the sovereign. Thereby, there is indeed a need of legislative framework 
so to compensate the sufferings of the wrongfully or maliciously incarcerated and his/her 
family. 


Therefore, this bill is produced herein below. 


Hence this Bill. 


New पापा; MOHAMMAD JAWED 
20 July, 2022. 


PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 7(.) AND I7(3) OF 
THE CONSTITUTION 
[Copy of letter No. 23.08.2022-Judl.Cell-I dated 2 January, 2023 from Shri Ajay Kumar 


Mishra, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs to the Secretary General, 
Lok Sabha]. 


The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2022* (Amendment of section 2, etc.) by Dr. Mohammad Jawed, 
Member of Parliament, recommends under articles |7() and 7(3) of the Constitution for 
introduction and consideration of the Bill in Lok Sabha, respectively. 


[*Bill, being perinted in 2023, the year in the title of Bill has been changed from 2022 to 2023.] 


84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed section 365A provides for award of interim 
compensation to persons convicted of wrongful prosecution. Further the proposed section 
365B provides for award of interest on compensation. Also the same clause vide proposed 
section 365D provides for giving medical facilities, mental health counselling vocational and 
skill training to maliciously prosecuted persons in order to ensure their reintegration in the 
society. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one hundred crore may involve as recurring 
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees forty crore may also be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed section 365F empowers the Central Government and 
the State Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will 
relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 85 


Britt No. 26] oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Indian Penal Code, |860. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2022. Short title and 


. snp : commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


86 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Insertion of 2. After section 440 of the Indian Penal Code, |860, the following section shall be 
section 440A. inserted, namely:— 

Mischief by "440A. Whoever commits 'mischief of stone pelting on any person or property 
stone pelting. (public or private) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 


less than one year but which may extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be 
less than rupees fifty thousand but which may extend upto rupees one lakh: 


Provided that in case of public property owned by or in the possession of ,— 
(a) the Central Government; or 

(b) any State Government; or 

(c) any local authority; or 

(d) any corporation established by, or under, a Central, Provincial or State Act; or 


(e) a company as defined in section 2(20) of the Companies Act, 20i3 
(8 of 203), 


the person committing mischief by stone pelting shall be punished with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend upto 
ten years and with fine: 


Provided further that a person committing mischief of stone pelting on security 
personnel, police force, healthcare workers, rallies and religious functions shall be punished 
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may 
extend to ten years and with fine: 


Provided also that if the person fails to pay the fine imposed for the damage done the 
same shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue. 


Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,— 


(a) "public property" means any property, whether immovable or movable 
(including any machinery) which is owned by, or in the possession of, or under the 
control of the State or Central Government; 


(b) "private property" refers to the ownership of property by private parties 
essentially anyone or anything other than the Government. Private property may 
consist of real estate, buildings, movable property, objects; and 


(c) "stone pelting" — refers to criminal assault in the form of stone throwing by 
individuals or mob who pelt, bombard or throw stones at security personnel, police 
forces, healthcare workers, rallies and religious functions/procession or any property.". 


45 of 860. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 87 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Although India does not have any law directly dealing with stone-pelting, there are 
other provisions of the Indian Penal Code that tackle this crime. These are Section l20B, |2], 
4], 42, 43, 32] to 336, 350 and 427. Section l20B talks about punishment for criminal 
conspiracy, which may extend to six months and a fine. Section 2] talks about waging war 
against the Government of India, which can be punishable by life. Section 4I and 42 talk 
about unlawful assembly and Section 43 about its punishment, which may extend up to six 
months or a fine or both. Section ३2] to Section 326 deal with voluntarily causing hurt and 
grievous hurt, which may attract a punishment of up to seven years along with a fine 
depending on the gravity of the injury. Section 350 talks about criminal force, which is 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months or a fine or both. Section 
427 talks about mischief causing damage to the amount of Rs. 50 or upwards shall be 
punishable for a term which may extend to two years. However, Section 326 was inserted with 
an amendment and two provisions relating to acid attacks were inserted, but stone-pelting is 
still to be taken care of. While the Indian Penal Code mentions action against rioting and 
violent activities, it does not include stone pelting or compensation for damages for stone 
pelting. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; RAHUL SHEWALE 
2 November, 2022. 


88 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


But No. 285 oF 2022 
A Bill to abolish the practice of child marriages in the country. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title, I. () This Act may be called the Child Marriage Abolition Act, 2022. 


extent and . 
commencement. (2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: — 


(a) "child" means a person either male or female who has not completed twenty- 
one years of age; 


(b) "child marriage" means a marriage to which either of the contracting parties 
is achild; 


(c) "contracting party", in relation to a marriage, means either of the parties 
whose marriage is or is about to be thereby solemnised; 


(d) "Child Marriage Annulment Officer" includes the Child Marriage Annulment 
Officer appointed under sub-section (l) of section 6; and 


(e) "district court" means, in any area for which a Family Court established 
under section 3 of the Family Courts Act, 984 exists, such Family Court, and in any 
area for which there is no Family Court but a city civil court exists, that court and in 
any other area, the principal civil court of original jurisdiction and includes any other 
civil court which may be specified by the State Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, as having jurisdiction in respect of the matters dealt with in this Act. 


Child marriages 3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law at the time being in force, every 
to be void. child marriage solemnized on or after the date of coming into force of the Child Marriage 
Abolition Act, 2022 shall be "void ab initio". 


66 of 984. 


2 of 974. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 89 


4. (7) Where a child marriage is solemnised, any person having charge of the child, 
whether as parent or guardian or any other person or in any other capacity, lawful or unlawful, 
including any member of an organisation or association of persons who does any act to 
promote the marriage or permits it to be solemnised, or negligently fails to prevent it from 
being solemnised, including attending or participating in a child marriage, shall be punishable 
with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine 
which may extend up to five lakh rupees or both. 


(2) For the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed, unless and until the contrary 
is proved, that where a child marriage was solemnised, the person having charge of such 
child has negligently failed to prevent the marriage from being solemnised. 


5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, an 
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable. 


6. (J) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for 
the whole State, or such part thereof as may be specified in that notification, an officer or 
officers to be known as the Child Marriage Annulment Officer having jurisdiction over the 
area or areas specified in the notification. 


(2) The State Government may also request a respectable member of the locality with a 
record of social service or an officer of the Gram Panchayat or Municipality or an officer of 
the Government or any public sector undertaking or an office bearer of any non-governmental 
organisation to assist the Child Marriage Annulment Officer and such member, officer or 
office bearer, as the case may be, shall be bound to act accordingly. 


(3) It shall be the duty of the Child Marriage Annulment Officer,— 


(a) to prevent solemnisation of child marriages by taking such action as he may 
deem fit; 


(b) to collect evidence for the effective prosecution of persons contravening the 
provisions of this Act; 


(c) to advise either individual cases or counsel the residents of the locality 
generally not to indulge in promoting, helping, aiding or allowing the solemnisation of 
child marriages; 


(d) to create awareness of the evil which results from child marriages; 
(e) to sensitize the community on the issue of child marriages; 


(f) to furnish such periodical returns and statistics as the State Government may 
direct; and 


(g) to discharge such other functions and duties as may be assigned to him by 
the State Government. 


(4) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, subject to such 
conditions and limitations, divest the Child Marriage Annulment Officer with such powers of 
a police officer as may be specified in the notification and the Child Marriage Annulment 
Officer shall exercise such powers subject to such conditions and limitations, as may be 
specified in the notification. 


7. (7) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, if, on an 
application of the Child Marriage Annulment Officer or on receipt of information through a 
complaint or otherwise from any person, a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a 
Metropolitan Magistrate is satisfied that a child marriage in contravention of this Act has 
been arranged or is about to be solemnised, such Magistrate shall issue an injunction 
against any person including a member of an organisation or an association of persons 
voiding such marriage. 


Punishment 
for promoting 
or permitting 
solemnisation 
of child 
marriages. 


Offences to be 
cognizable and 
non-bailable. 
Child Marriage 
Amulment 
Officers. 


Power of 
court to issue 
annulment 
prohibiting 
child 
marriages. 


Child Marriage 
Amulment 
Officers to be 
public servants. 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
and State 
Governments 
to make rules. 


Repeal. 


90 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(2)A complaint may be made by any person having personal knowledge or having 
reason to believe, and a non-governmental organisation having reasonable information, 
relating to the likelihood of taking place of solemnisation of a child marriage or child marriages. 


(3)The Court of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan Magis- 
trate may also take Suo motu cognizance on the basis of any reliable report or information. 


(4) For the purposes of preventing solemnisation of mass child marriages on certain 
days such as Akshaya Trutiya, the District Magistrate shall be deemed to be the Child 
Marriage Annul Officer with all powers as are conferred on a Child Marriage Annul Officer by 
or under this Act. 


(5)The District Magistrate shall also have additional powers and he may take all 
appropriate measures and use the minimum force required to stop or prevent solemnisation 
of mass child marriages. 


(6)No injunction shall be issued against any person or member of any organisation or 
association of persons unless the Court has previously given notice to such person, members 
of the organisation or association of persons, as the case may be, and has offered him or 
them an opportunity to show cause against the issue of the injunction: 


Provided that in the case of any urgency, the Court shall have the power to issue an 
interim injunction without giving any notice under this section. 


(7) An injunction issued may be confirmed or vacated after giving notice and hearing 
the party against whom the injunction was issued. 


(8) The Court may either on its own motion or on the application of any person 
aggrieved, rescind or alter an injunction issued. 


(9) Where an application is received the Court shall afford the applicant an early 
opportunity of appearing before it either in person or by an advocate and if the Court, after 
hearing the applicant rejects the application, wholly or in part, it shall record in writing its 
reasons for so doing. 


(0) Whoever knowing that an injunction has been issued against him disobeys such 
injunction shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both. 


8. The Child Marriage Annulment Officers shall be deemed to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 2! of the Indian Penal Code, l860. 


9. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Child Marriage 
Annulment Officer in respect of anything in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 


0. (/) The Central Government or the State Governments may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in the making any modification in the rule 
or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


Il. (/) The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 is hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all cases and other proceedings pending or continued 
under the said Act at the commencement of this Act shall be continued and disposed of in 
accordance with the provisions of the repealed Act, as if this Act has not been passed. 


45 of 860. 


6 of 2002. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The problem of child marriage in India is a complex one because of religious traditions, 
social practices, economic factors and blind beliefs. 


The legal age of marriage for women being |8 years, child marriages continue in India 
and a decrease in such marriages has been not because of the existing law, but an increase in 
girls' education and employment opportunities. 


The Prohibition of Child Marriage Amendment Act, 202, (PCMAA) has no provisions 
to make child marriage void. 


The PCMAA outlines conditions under which a marriage is void. When a minor child 
is enticed out of the keeping of the lawful guardian to marry, is forced or compelled or by 
deceitful means is induced to go from any place or is sold for marriage. 


However, marriage itself with a minor is not void under the PCMAA. It makes child 
marriage voidable at the option of any contracting party, who was a 'child' at the time of the 
marriage. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; RAHUL SHEWALE 
November 2, 2022 


92 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause l0 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and the State Governments to 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 93 


Bit No. 53 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the protection from exploitation and welfare measures for the salt 
workers in the country by setting up a welfare fund, for payment of old age pension, 
healthcare, educational facilities for their children and for payment of 
minimum wages and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. () This Act may be called the Salt Workers Welfare Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 


2. (a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in other cases the Central Government; 


(b) "employer" means any person who employs, whether directly or through 
any other person, or contractor, whether on behalf of himself or on behalf of any other 
person, one or more labourer or workers for work connected with salt making from sea 
or Salt lake, as the case may be, including handling of salt; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Formulation 
of National 
Policy for Salt 
and Salt 
Workers. 


Constitution 
of Salt 
Workers 
Welfare Fund. 


Utilisation of 
Fund. 


Responsibility 
of the 
appropriate 
Government. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Overriding 
effect of the 
Act. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


94 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(c) "welfare fund" means the Salt Workers Welfare Fund constituted under 
section 4; 


(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(e) "salt worker" means any person engaged in making salt from sea or lake water 
on land by digging shallow wells and pumping out brine or in a chemical factory or any 
related occupation as a wage earner, whether in cash or kind, for his livelihood and 
includes a person engaged through a contractor or engaged as a self employed person. 


3. (7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, formulate a 
National Policy of Salt and Salt Workers. 


(2) The National Policy formulated under sub-section () shall include,— 
(a) acommon salt policy for the entire country; 
(b) declaration of salt as an agricultural product; and 
(c) welfare measures and social security for the salt workers. 


4. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a 
Fund to be known as the Salt Workers Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. 

5. The Fund shall be utilised for,— 


(a) providing healthcare facilities for the salt workers; 


(b) conducting of medical check-up camps at least once in a year for the salt 
workers; 


(c) payment of compensation to the next kin in case of death of salt workers; 
(d) housing facility at subsidised rate; 

(e) payment of old age pension; 

(f) providing water supply for drinking and other purposes; 

(g) providing educational facility to the children of salt workers; and 


(A) undertaking such other welfare measures which the appropriate Government 
deems fit. 


6. It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government to,— 
(a) undertake welfare measures for the salt workers; 
(b) ensure payment of minimum wages to the salt workers; and 
(c) ensure job security to the salt workers. 


7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation by Parliament, provide funds 
to Governments of concerned States for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act. 


9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government, may make such order to give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty and 
any such order shall be final. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 95 


0. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Power to 
make rules. 


96 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Salt is a Central subject and land is a State subject. Abody need to be constituted to set 
up common rules and regulations for the salt farmers. Salt workers are seasonal workers with 
marginal source of income. There is lack of social and health securities for salt workers. They 
are exposed to hazardous work-environmental factors and work in extreme climatic conditions. 
Workers also suffer from different occupational health condition as well as due to lack of 
education and awareness they pay no attention to the occupational health hazardous 
conditions. There is lack of motivation towards use of personal protective equipment. All the 
workers have oral abusive habits and poor personal hygiene. The salt workers settlements 
lack basic amenities like potable drinking water, toilets and waste management systems. 
Government should pay attention towards the salt workers health and socio-economic status. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; RAHUL SHEWALE 
6 January, 2023. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 97 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of Salt Workers Welfare Fund. Clause 7 
provides for funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It 
is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore will be involved per 
annum. 


No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


98 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause L0 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 


the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 99 


Bit No. 2 oF 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Chit Funds Act, |982. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 
. This Act may be called the Chit Funds (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title. 
49 of 982. 2. In section 2 of the Chit Funds Act, |982 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), Amendment 
in clause (b), after the words "fraternity fund", the words "Money Growing Scheme" shall be of section 2. 
inserted. 
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (), in the proviso,— Amendment 


of section 4. 
(i) for the words "within twelve months", the words "within three months" shall 


be substituted; and 


(ii) for the words "six months", the words "three months" shall be substituted. 


200 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


The Chit Funds Act, 982 was enacted to provide for the regulation of chit funds which 
are indigenous business in India and have conventionally satisfied the financial needs of the 
low-income households. The chit is a mechanism which combines credit and savings in a 
scheme, in which a group of individuals come together for a pre-determined duration and 
subscribe a certain sum of money by way of periodical installments and each such subscriber, 
in his term as determined by lot or by auction or by tender or any other specified manner, gets 
the collected sum. In this way, people who are in need of funds and those who want to save 
are able to meet their requirements simultaneously. 


Chit Funds frauds have become day to day affair. There is an immediate need to check 
the increasing number of chit funds frauds in order to save the hard earned money invested 
in such chit funds by the common man. 


At present chit funds can be floated without prior approval of the State Government 
concerned. A chit fund is required to get registered within a period of twelve months from the 
date of its sanction or within such further period or periods not exceeding six months in the 
aggregate as the State Government may allow as specified in the section 4 of the Chit Funds 
Act, |982. In order to facilitate orderly growth of the chit fund sector, to remove bottlenecks 
being faced by the chit fund industry and to enable greater financial access to people, the 
Chit Funds (Amendment) Bill, 2023, inter alia, proposes the following, namely: — 


(a) insertion of the words "Money Growing Scheme", in clause (b) of section 2 which 
defines "chit"; 


(b)to cut short the registration period to three months from the date of sanction, so 
that the persons responsible for the conduct of a chit fund do not prolong the registration of 
chit to commit fraud with the public. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SUKANTA MAJUMDAR 
December 20, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 20l 


But No. 4] or 2023 


A Bill to provide for compulsory yoga practice from primary to senior secondary level in 
all the schools and other education institutions throughout the country in order 
to prepare talent of sports from school level and thereby ensuring good and sound 
health of students and for making it obligatory for the Central and State 
Governments to provide requisite infrastructure for the purpose and for matters 
connected therewith and incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (7) This Act may be called the Compulsory Yoga Practice in Schools and other 
Education Institutions Act, 2023. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


National 
policy for 
Yoga Practice 
and 
infrastructure. 


Implementation 
of National 
policy. 


202 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
the State, and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "education institution" means an university or college imparting education 
to student, by whatever name such institution is called; 


(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(d) "school" means any Government school or a Government aided school or a 
private school, which imparts education from primary to senior secondary school 
level; 


(e) "sports infrastructure" means requisite resources required for playing 
game such as playground with necessary facilities, articles of sports, sports instructors 
and requisite environment as are required for sports in the school; and 


(f) "yoga" means teaching of yoga postures or asanas and such other yoga 
exercises as would promote the control of the body by bringing in flexibility, strength 
and endurance and of the mind by enhancing alertness and meditation. 


3. (J) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than one year 


after the commencement of this Act, formulate a National Policy for providing yoga practice 
and ensuring requisite infrastructure and other facilities required for yoga practice in all 
schools of the country. 


(2) The national policy referred to in sub-section () shall provide for,— 


(a) imparting free yoga practice to all the students as per their ability and physical 
condition in the schools and other education institutions; 


(b) encouraging yoga practice and creating awareness of the importance of 
yoga among the school students; 


(c) ensuring the availability of yoga teacher in all the schools and other education 
institutions; 

(d) providing adequate funds for infrastructure development for yoga practice 
in all the schools and other education institutions; 


(e) incorporating yoga as compulsory subjects in all the schools and other 
education institutions; 


(f) preparing standard and qualitative syllabus for yoga practice as per the age 
and physical capacity of the students under the guidance of experts and universalisation 
thereof; 


(g) providing scholarship and stipend to those students whose performance in 
yoga has been outstanding; 


(A) providing weightage to marks obtained in yoga for admission in colleges, 
universities, and institutions of national importance; 


(i) according preference to the outstanding sports persons in direct recruitment 
under the Central and State Government services; and 


(7) such other provisions, as the Central Government may deem fit and necessary 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


4. (/) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the National 


Policy formulated under section 3. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall review the progress and quality of yoga practice 


being imparted by the schools and other education institutions from time to time, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 203 


5. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall 
apply to minority institutions only if the management of such institutions convey to the 
appropriate Government their willingness to include the yoga practice in their school 
curriculum. 


6. Any school which violates the provisions of this Act shall be liable for punitive 
action by the appropriate Government, including withdrawal of recognition of the school in 
such manner and with such conditions, as may be prescribed. 


7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. 


8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act. 


9. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of the Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
the rule. 


Act to apply 
to minority 
educational 
institutions in 
certain 
situation. 


Penalty. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 


Power to 
make rules. 


204 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Yoga is being practiced in our country since the time immemorial for good health and 
longevity. It keeps the body and mind healthy and sound and its various asanas cure even 


serious diseases. Now, yoga is not confined to India only but has become international and 
International Yoga Day is held every year on 2Ist June throughout the world. 


It is, therefore, felt that yoga should be introduced right from childhood to make it a 
part and parcel of everyone's life so that we can foster confidence and self-esteem in the 
minds of our upcoming generations in schools and other Education Institutions. 


Similarly, various sports activities make us healthy, fit and fine. They are essential for 
the overall development of people and in particular, the children and youth. Some sports are 
even very rewarding and outstanding sportspersons of these sports earn enormous wealth 
in their career. Many international sports events such as Olympics, Commonwealth Games, 
Asian Games etc. are held from time-to-time and winning in these events brings laurels for 
the country. Thus, the process of learning sports shall start from the school itself to prepare 
talents for national and international events. 


Our country currently has the largest youth population and majority of them are sports 
lovers. In fact, there is no dearth of talent in various sports in the country. The only 
shortcomings are that they seldom get proper resources, training and well equipped 
infrastructure to sharpen their talent to become international sportspersons. 


It is felt that compulsory yoga and sports education in schools and other education 
institutions will definitely identify talent and make our nation excel in the global sports and 
competitions, apart from building a fit and healthy nation. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for making sports and yoga education compulsory 
in all educational institutions right from primary school level to senior secondary level in 
order to make it a part of school curriculum. 


Hence, this Bill. 


New DELHI; SUKANTA MAJUMDAR 
January \\, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 205 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the formulation of a national policy for providing yoga 
practice and infrastructure development in schools and other education institutions. It also 
provides for creating awareness of yoga among students, financial assistance for 
infrastructure development, scholarship and stipends for outstanding students in yoga in 
schools and other education institutions. Clause 7 makes it obligatory for the Central 
Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, 
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this 
stage, it is difficult to give an exact estimate of the actual expenditure to be incurred on it. 
However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one lakh crore per annum 
would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore may also be 
involved for creating various assets throughout the country from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


206 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of normal character. 


49 of 20I6. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 207 


Bit No. 87 6 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 206. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (7) This Act may becalled the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) 
Act, 2023. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 2 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 206 (hereinafter referred 
to as principal Act),— 


(i) after sub-clause (e), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ea) "clinical psychologist" means a mental health professional with full 
time Masters Degree in clinical psychology with M.Phil from a recognized 
university highly specialized training in the diagnosis and psychological treatment 
of mental, behavioural and emotional illness;". 


(ii) after sub-clause (k), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ka) "guardian" means guardian, parent or caretaker of a person with a 
disability;". 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


208 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(iii) after sub-clause (q), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(qa) "occupational therapist" means a person trained in a branch of 
modern medicine which includes the application of purposeful, goal-oriented 
activity through latest technology for evaluation, diagnosis, and or treatment of 
persons whose function is impaired by physical illness, injury, emotional disorder, 
congenital or development disability, or due to aging process, in order to achieve 
optimum functioning to prevent disability and to maintain health;". 


(iv) after sub-clause (v), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(va) "physiotherapist" means a person trained in a branch of modern 
medical science which includes examination, assessment, interpretation, physical 
diagnosis, planning and execution of treatment and advice to any person for 
the purpose of preventing, correcting, alleviating and limiting dysfunction, 
acute and chronic bodily malfunction, curing physical disorders or disability, 
promoting physical fitness, facilitating healing and pain relief and; treatment of 
physical and psychosomatic disorder through modulating psychological and 
physical response using exercises, physical agents, activities and devices 
including mechanical, electrical and thermal agents;". 


(v) after sub-clause (za), the following sub-clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(zaa) "school nurse" means a professional nurse that practices advancing 
the well-being, academic success, and life-long achievements of students with 
minimum qualification of nursing (GNM) or B.Sc Nursing with registration in 
Nursing Council; 


(zab) "Special education teacher" means teacher of concerned speciality, 
with a minimum educational qualification of diploma or B.Ed in ID (MR) for 
intellectual disabilities with registration on Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI), 
Diploma or B.Ed in LD for learning disabilities with registration on (RCI), Diploma 
or B.Ed in MD for multiple disabilities with registration on (RCI), Diploma or B.Ed 
in ASD for autism spectrum disorder with registration on (RCI) and Diploma or 
B.Ed in CP for cerebral palsy with registration on (RC]);". 


(vi) after sub-clause (zc), the following sub-clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(zca) "speech-language therapist" means a professional of speciality 
Audiology in speech and language with a minimum educational qualification of 
BASLP; 

(zcb) "social worker" means a person whose job is social work with a 
minimum qualification of Masters in Social Work;". 


Insertion of new 3. After section 27 of the parent Act, the following new section shall be inserted, 
section 27A namely:— 

Establishment "27A. (J) The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall within their 
of Block economic capacity and development, undertake or cause to be undertaken services and 
Resource 


programmes in the areas of clinical psychology, special education, speech and audio language 
therapy, social work, nursing therapy, physiotherapy in consultation with guardians of the 
persons with disabilities. 


Centre. 


(2) The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall, for the aforesaid 
purpose, establish a Block Resource Centre in every block of every district of the country. 


(3) For the purpose of Rehabilitation of persons with disabilities the Block Resource 
Centre shall be authorised to avail the services from the following: — 


(a) Clinical Psychologist; 

(b) Special Education teacher; 
(c) Speech-language therapist; 
(d) Social worker; 

(e) School Nurse; 

(f) Occupational therapist; 

(g) Physiotherapist. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 209 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 20l6 was enacted to give effect to the 


United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) to which 
India is a signatory. 


It was enacted with a view to make provisions for our children who are differently- 
abled so that they can get the rights for dual benefits of preventive/ educational aspect and 
diagnostic/medical aspect. 


In view of the constant endeavour to facilitate greater ease of living to such differently- 
abled persons, it has become necessary to amend certain provisions of the Act. Hence the 
Bill, namely, the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) Bill, 2023 is proposed to be 
enacted. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 20l6 
with view to provide that 


(7) the appropriate Government and the local authorities shall establish a Block 
Resource Centre in every block of every district of the country; 


(ii) the appropriate Government and the local authorities shall within their 
economic capacity and development, undertake or cause to be undertaken services 
and programmes in the areas of clinical psychology, special education, speech and 
audio language therapy, social work, nursing therapy, physiotherapy in consultation 
with guardians of the persons with disabilities; and 


(iii) the Block Resource Centre shall be authorised to avail the services from 
Clinical Psychologist, Special Education teacher, Speech-language therapist, Social 
worker, School Nurse, Occupational therapist and Physiotherapist. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; THOMAS CHAZHIKADAN 
March 6, 2023. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government and the local authorities 
shall establish a Block Resource Centre in every block of every district of the country. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. A recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore would be involved per annum 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore would also be involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2il 


Butt No. 23 or 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. () This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In article 32 of the Constitution, in clause (.), for the words "an all India judicial 
service" the words "all India Judicial service and all India medical service" shall be substituted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of article 32. 


2]2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


In 206, the WHO Global Strategy on "Human Resources for Health : workforce 2030" 
determined that all countries need about 4.45 healthcare personnel (minimum of | doctor 
and 3 nurses) per !,000 population, to reach the UN's Sustainable Development Goal 3 
(Ensure Healthy Lives and Well-being for all at all Ages). Presently there are 3.08 allopathy 
doctors, 7.8 lakh AYUSH doctors, 34.33 lakh nurses and [3 lakh allied healthcare professionals 
for l4.33 crore population. 


Despite having good number of doctors and nurses, health indicators of India are far 
below the world averages. In this context, creation of an All India Medical Services along the 
lines of Indian Administrative Services and Indian Police Services, is essential for effective 
administration and policy making in healthcare. Administrative staff with medical background 
can effectively handle health issues and epidemic out breaks, in a scientific way. Government 
of India's endeavour to increase medical educational institutions is going on at a rapid 
phase, and at the same time we need to ensure that healthcare administrators are more 
effective for equitable distribution of healthcare services. 


India had an Indian Medical Service’ in British-ruled India, a military medical service, 
which was abolished in !947. Ever since, multiple committees, commissions and reports such 
as Mudaliar Committee ((959), Kartar Singh Committee (973), the Administrative Staff 
College Report (995) and National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health Report 
(2005) have recommended the re-introduction of Indian Medical Service. The |5th Finance 
Commission has also recommended for the establishment of an All India Medical and Health 
Service. The development of such a service for public health administration was discussed 
by the parliamentary committee on health, in March 202. The All India Service Act of 95 
mentions "The Indian Medical and Health Service’ as an All India Service. However, it was 
never implemented. 


Currently, there is no dedicated centralised healthcare body, which can develop 
infrastructure, monitor healthcare services and take policy decisions. This often leads to 
improper policy response during health emergencies, as was felt during the COVID-9 
pandemic. Given the inter-State disparity in the availability of health resources, the existence 
of many overlapping healthcare schemes and the need for uniformity in implementation of 
schemes across, it is essential to constitute an All India Medical Services. With a severe 
shortage of health administrators in the country, the Indian Medical Service will be able to 
close the long-standing gap between public health information and decision-making. 


Presently, the services of bureaucrats without medical background nor the services of 
Government doctors without administrative skills, are able to understand the nuances and 
complexities of healthcare system administration. Creating good administrative officers with 
medical background, can help the nation to resolve the existing healthcare issues and also be 
ready to tackle any future pandemics. 


To achieve these objective, this Bill seeks to incorporate a new All India Services, 
namely "Indian Medical Services" along the lines of Indian Administrative Services and 
Indian Police Services. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SANJEEV KUMAR SINGARI 
December 9, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


Butt No. 2 67 2023 
A Bill to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 206. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called as the Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title, 
and 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification commencement. 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 2 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 20l6 (hereinafter referred Amendment 
to as the principal Act), for clause (za), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— of section 2. 


"(za) "rehabilitation" refers to a process aimed at enabling and empowering 
persons with disabilities to attain and maintain an optimal level of physical, sensory, 
intellectual, psychological, environmental and social function levels, according to 
World Health Organisation standards and in alignment with the right to an adequate 
standard of living as enshrined in the Constitution of India.". 


244 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Amendment 3. In section 7 of the principal Act,— 
of section 7. 
(a) in sub-section (/), after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


"(aa) establish District Disability Rehabilitation Centres for rehabilitation 
persons with disabilities who have been subjected to abuse, violence and 
exploitation;"; 


(b) in sub-section (4), for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"(b) the particulars of the nearest District Disability Rehabilitation Centre 
established under clause (aa) of sub-section (/) working for the rehabilitation of 
persons with disabilities.". 


Amendment 4. In sub-section (2) of section 27 of the principal Act, for the words "non-Governmental 
of section 27. Organisations" the words "District Disabilities Rehabilitation Centre and non-Governmental 
Organisations" shall be substituted. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


To safeguard the rights and well-being of people with disabilities, the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities Act, 20l6, was passed. The Act was a significant piece of legislation in 
India's history in safeguarding the rights of those who were specially abled. 


According to the 20I census, 2.68 crore, i.e., over 2.2 per cent. of the Indian population 
live with certain mental or physical disabilities. However, the objective of guaranteeing a 
holistic growth through social and educational advancement, welfare, protection and 
empowerment for specially abled persons has yet not been achieved comprehensively across 
the country. 


The principal act gives responsibility to the appropriate government and local authorities 
for implementing services and programmes of rehabilitation, particularly in the areas of 
health, education and employment for all persons with disabilities. However, the act does not 
mandate responsibility to the appropriate Governments for establishing District Disability 
Rehabilitation Centers. Thus, the amendment proposes to establish these centres based on 
the recommendations of the parliamentary standing committee on the "Assessment of 
Scheme for Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 20l6 (SIPDA)". 
Thus, through this amendment we propose mandating establishment of District Disability 
Rehabilitation Centres (DDRC) in every district for physical and mental disabilities. 


Along the same lines it is only valid to make the definition of Rehabilitation, in the Act, 
more holistic and in accordance with World Health Organisation (WHO) standards, which is 
defined as "a set of interventions designed to optimize functioning and reduce disability in 
individuals with health condition sin in teraction with their environment", based on 
international standards. 


Hence, this Bill. 


New DELHI; SANJEEV KUMAR SINGARI 
December 9, 2022 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of District Disability Rehabilitation 
Centre by the appropriate Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of 
rupees Ten Crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


Anon-recurring expenditure of about rupees Twenty Crores is also likely to be involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2i7 


Bit No. 58 oF 2023 


A Bill to ensure protection and welfare mechanisms for the handloom weavers and workers 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Handloom Weavers and Workers (Welfare) Authority Short title, 
Act, 2023. extent and 


commencement. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
inthe Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Constitution 
of the 
National 
Handloom 
Weavers and 
Workers 
Welfare 
Authority. 


Term of 
Office and 
conditions of 
Members. 


28 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "Authority" means the National Handloom Weavers and Workers Welfare 
Authority constituted under section 3; 


(b) "Committee" means Local Committee for Handloom Weavers constituted by 
the Authority at local levels under section 5; 


(८) " Fund" means National Handloom Weavers and Workers Welfare Fund 
constituted by the Authority under section 6; 


(d) "handloom" means any loom used for the production of cloth that is operated 
fully or partly manually as defined in clause (g) of section 2 of the Factories Act, !948; 


(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act; 


(f) "weaver" means a person engaged in the production of cloth on a handloom 
and includes a person who owns, works or operates on handloom for the production 
of cloth; and 


(g) "worker" means a worker engaged in a handloom by a weaver and who earns 
wages on a regular or any other basis by working in a handloom. 


3. (/) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 


an Authority to be known as the National Handloom Weavers and Workers Welfare Authority 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The headquarters of this Authority shall be at Hyderabad which is the common 


capital of States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. 


(3) The Authority shall consist of— 


(a) a Chairperson, committed to the causes of weavers or has adequate 
knowledge and professional experience in the handloom sector; 


(b) a Deputy Chairperson with such qualification, as may be prescribed; 


(c) five members to represent the Union Ministry of Finance, Labour and 
Employment, Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Social Justice and Empowerment 
and Textiles; 

(d) three members from the Parliament, of whom two shall be from Lok Sabha and 


one shall be from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officer of the 
respective Houses; 


(e) five members to be nominated by the Central Government who represent the 
handloom weavers, provided that at least one Member shall be each from amongst 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and women, 
respectively. 


4. (J) The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office for such period, not 


exceeding five years, as may be specified by the Central Government in this regard; 


(2) The Chairperson or Member may, by writing and addressed to the Central 


Government, resign from the office of Chairperson or, as the case may be, of the Member at 
any time; 


(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of Chairperson or a 


Member if that person— 


(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent; 


(b) gets convicted or sentenced to imprisonment for an offense which in the 
opinion of the Authority involves moral turpitude; 


(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; 


63 of 948. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


(d) in the opinion of the Authority has so abused the position of Chairperson or 
Member as to render that person's continuance in office detrimental to the public 
interest. 


(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the 
service of the Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 


5. (J) The Authority shall, in consideration and coordination with the State 
Governments, as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act, appoint 
committee at the local level as may be prescribed, to be known as the Local Committee for 
Handloom Weavers. 


(2) The Authority shall in coordination with Local Committees and State Governments 
take, steps for the overall welfare of weavers and handloom workers including, raising their 
standard of living, removal of poverty and indebtedness, ensuring their social security, 
making easy availability of raw materials at an affordable price and encouraging market for 
the handloom sector. 


(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority 
shall,— 


(a) formulate and implement welfare policy for the handloom weavers and workers; 


(b) formulate and implement grievance redressal mechanisms for the handloom 
weavers and workers; 


(c) maintain a district-wise register of handlooms, handloom weavers and workers 
with such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) regulate the service conditions of workers including fixing of minimum wages 
in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(e) ensure modernization of old handlooms; 


(f) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to handloom weavers 
cooperatives; 


(g) organize exhibitions, meals, and such other activities to promote handloom 
sector in different parts of the country; 


(h) develop and regulate four dedicated markets in each State for hand-loom 
articles, in consultation with the State Government of the respective States; 


(i) make suitable arrangements for the purchase of handloom cloth by Government 
agencies on a cash and carry basis; 


(/) encourage export of handloom cloth and handloom garments; and 


(k) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central 
Government from time to time. 


6. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
a Fund to be known as the Handloom Weavers and Workers Welfare Fund. 


(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in 
such a ratio as may be prescribed. 


(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received by 
way of donations, contributions, assistance, or otherwise from individuals and organizations. 


7. The Funds shall be utilized for the following purposes,— 


(a) providing minimum unemployment allowance to handloom workers from time 
to time; 


Functions of 
the Authority. 


Constitution 
of the 
Handloom 
Weavers and 
Workers 
Welfare Fund. 


Utilisation of 
Fund. 


Annual 
Report. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law 
in force. 


Power to 
make rules. 


220 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) providing respectable pension for handloom workers above the age of 
55 years; 
(c) providing interest-free loans to handloom weavers and workers; 


(d) making ex-gratia payments at prescribed rates to each of the bereaved 
families of handloom weavers who die in harness; 


(e) providing loans at a nominal rate of interest for purchasing cotton yarn and 
other necessary raw materials to the handloom weavers; 


(f) providing an annual assistance of twenty-four thousand rupees to the families 
of weavers who own handloom to modernize their equipment; 


(g) providing special assistance to women weavers to set up small-scale handloom 
workshops; 


(A) providing healthcare facilities to the handloom weavers and workers and 
their dependent family members; 


(i) providing educational facilities and vocational training to the wards of weavers 
and workers; and 


(j) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed. 


8. (J) The Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, an 
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and 
submit it to the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall cause the report submitted to it under sub-section 
(L) to be laid before each House of Parliament. 


9. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be laid 
before each House of Parliament. 


0. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force in respect of any of the matters provided under this Act. 


II. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 22i 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Handloom Sector is one of the largest unorganized economic activities after 
agriculture and constitutes an integral part of rural and semi-rural livelihood. Handloom 
weaving constitutes one of the richest and most vibrant aspects of our country's cultural 
heritage. Indian handloom artists are globally known for their unique hand-spinning, weaving, 
and printing style. In the financial year 202-22, Indian exported handloom accounted for 
worth Rs. !,693 crores. It not just contributes to the country's economy but has also been the 
backbone of the rural population involved in the handloom sector. According to the Handloom 
Census 209-20, the industry employs about 3,522,52 handloom workers across the country. 


Despite the aforementioned, the sector today faces many challenges. One of the most 
concerning challenges among them is the lack of social security for handloom weavers. Long 
working hours and complex work accompanied by low wages have pushed new generations 
of handloom weavers to look for different avenues of employment. Such decisions are 
motivated by the exploitative nature of work and non-profitable labour of procuring yarn and 
weaving for which handloom weavers sometimes take loans and get stuck in the cycle of 
debt. The overall number of weavers decreased by |9 per cent. from 43.3] lakh in 2009-0 to 
35.25 lakh in 20I9-20. Moreover, the Handlooms (Reservation of Articles for Production) 
Act, l985 focuses on the preservation of handloom articles with blurring attention being 
given to securing the interest of the weavers, especially the women workers who constitute 
72.29 per cent. of the total handloom workers whose future are insecure. 


Furthermore, less visibility of handloom products in the market has also added to the 
problems of workers. Most handlooms enjoy prominence only in their locality and people 
elsewhere are unaware of the existence of many other varieties. The reason behind this is 
poor marketing and the industry's inability to adopt current marketing techniques. Promoting 
export of such products needs dedicated funds from the Government to market products. 
Despite this Government allocations for handloom in national and State budgets are being 
reduced and reversed. 


The Bill, therefore, will strive to enact for the interest of handloom weavers by 
establishing an authority that will look after the welfare of the workers. The proposed authority 
would do so by undertaking the functions prescribed above and by establishing local welfare 
committees and dedicated welfare funds for the handloom weavers. The authority will also 
set up a mechanism to address the grievances and long-pending demands of the weavers. 
Such an initiative would encourage and empower the handloom sector to flourish in the 
domestic and global markets. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SANJEEV KUMAR SINGARI 
January 9, 2023. 


222 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute the National Handloom Weavers and Workers 
Welfare Authority. Clause 5 provides for certain steps to be taken by the authority for the 
welfare of the handloom weavers and workers. Clause 5 also provides for the constitution of 
the local committee for handloom weavers. Clause 6 seeks to constitute the National Handloom 
weavers fund. 


This Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the consolidated fund of India. It is 
estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore per annum would involve from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty crore may also be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause | of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 223 


Bit No. 98 oF 2023 


A Bill to prohibit violence against healthcare service providers, patients, and their 
attendants and to prevent damage or loss to property in healthcare service facilities 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER-I 
PRELIMINARY 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Healthcare Service Providers and Facilities (Prevention Short title, 


of Violence and Damage to Property) Act, 2023. exlent 
application 
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India. and 


commencement. 


Definitions. 


224 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(3) It applies to clinical establishments defined and registered under the Clinical 
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 20l0 or under any State Act for the time 
being in force. 


(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in other cases, the Central Government. 


(b) "arms" means arms as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the Arms Act, 959; 


(c) "damage" includes loss or harm to property, whether in whole or in part, with 
or without taking possession of the property that renders it inadequate for its designated 
purpose or wholly or partially incapable of performing its function; 


(d) "healthcare services" means the administrative, curative, rehabilitative, 
preventive, promotive, and supportive services for the control of diseases, injuries, or 
disabilities as well as measures ensuring the health of persons and include activities 
that ensure or provide support or access for persons in need of these healthcare 
services or activities such as searching for, collecting, treating or transporting persons 
in need of healthcare or the administration of healthcare service facilities; 


(e) "healthcare service facilities" include healthcare centres, hospitals, healthcare 
teaching facilities, diagnostic centres, blood banks, medical clinics, nursing homes, 
maternity homes, dental clinics, all registered alternative medicine healthcare facilities, 
physiotherapy clinics, medical camps, first-aid posts, or any other premises or 
conveyance that is wholly or partly used for providing healthcare services in the 
public and private sectors; 


(f) "healthcare service providers" in relation to a healthcare service facility means 
the administrative, clinical, support, and auxiliary staff including students in healthcare, 
and includes the following— 


(i) registered medical and dental or alternative medicine practitioners 
including those having provisional registration; 


(ii) registered nurses; 

(iii) medical students; 

(iv) nursing students; 

(v) paramedics; 

(vi) all registered alternative medicine's practitioners 
(vii) paramedical students; 
(viii) pharmacists; 

(ix) Lady Health Workers; 
(x) polio workers; 

(xi) volunteers; 

(xii) management staff; and 


(xiii) non-clinical staff; 


23 of 20I0. 


54 of 959. 


0 of 207. 


45 of l860. 


45 of 860. 


39 of 987. 


39 of 987. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 225 


(g) "mental anguish" means extreme pain, distress of mind, severe misery or 
mental suffering; 


(h) "mental illness" means a mental illness as defined in clause (s) of section 2 
the Mental Healthcare Act, 207; 


(7) "obstruction" means any act that hinders the provision of healthcare services; 
(j) "patient" means any recipient of healthcare services; 
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed rules made under this Act; 


(J) "property" means any property, movable or immovable in possession of or 
under the control of any healthcare service facility or healthcare service provider in 
relation to his professional duty; 


(m) "relevant authority" means a competent authority in relation to healthcare 
services facilitates or healthcare services providers as provided in any other laws, 
rules, and regulations of the State Government, as the case may be; and 


(n) "violence" means and includes harassment, provocation, or use of force 
against a person, group or community, or healthcare service facility which results in 
mental anguish, physical injury, or death to the healthcare service providers or 
beneficiary of healthcare services, or results in interruption of healthcare services 
provision or damage to such property and shall not include— 


(i) collateral or defensive violence, if any, caused by the law; and 


(ii) enforcing agencies or security personnel of the healthcare service 
facility on duty. 


CHAPTER-II 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 


3. No person shall use violence against a healthcare service provider, patient or his 
attendants, or any other person within a healthcare service facility. 


4. (7) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3, shall be punished under the 
relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code, 860. 


(2) Where an act, in contravention of section 3, causes bodily injury or death or which 
in the ordinary course of nature is likely to cause injury or death, such person shall be liable 
to punishment under the relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code, !860: 


Provided that in case of injury to a healthcare service provider or to the patient or his 
attendant, as the case may be, in addition to the punishment specified above, the accused 
shall also be liable to pay compensation to such healthcare service provider, patient, or his 
attendant, as the case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


5. (J) If an act, in violation of section 3, causes mental anguish without causing any 
bodily injury or harm to a healthcare service provider, patient, or his attendants, as the case 
may be, the person to whom mental anguish has been caused may apply for mediation and 
settlement with the person or persons causing such mental anguish in such manner and 
procedure as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Central Government may, by notification, authorize the Authorities constituted 
under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 987, for the purposes of institution mediation 
under this Act. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Legal Services Authorities Act, 987, 
the Authority authorized by the Central Government under sub-section (2) shall complete 
the process of mediation within a period of three months from the date of application made 
by the plaintiff under sub-section (/): 


Prohibition of 
violence. 


Punishment. 


Institutional 
Mediation and 
Settlement. 


Prohibition of 
damage to 
Property. 


Penalty for 
contravention 
of section 6. 


Prohibition of 
obstruction or 
disruption of 
healthcare 
service. 


Penalty for 
contravention 
of section 8. 


Prohibition of 
carrying 
weapons into 
a healthcare 
facility. 


226 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Provided that the period of mediation may be extended for a further period of two 
months with the consent of the parties: 


Provided further that, the period during which the parties remained occupied with the 
institution mediation, such period shall not be computed for the purpose of limitation under 
the Limitation Act, 963. 


(4) If the parties arrive at a settlement, the same shall be reduced into writing and shall 
be signed by the parties to the dispute and the mediator. 


(5) The settlement arrived at under this section shall have the same status and effect as 
if it is an arbitral award on agreed terms under sub-section (4) of section 30 of the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 996: 


Provided that if the parties fail to arrive at a settlement for any reason, section 4 of the 
Act shall be applied. 


6. No person shall cause damage or loss to property owned by or under the care of 
healthcare service providers or healthcare facilities in connection with or incidental to their 
activities in healthcare service facilities. 


7. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 6, shall be punished with— 


(a) imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years or with a fine 
equivalent to double the market value of the property damaged or lost at the time of the 
commission of the offence or with both, if an act causes irreparable wrongful damage 
or loss to the property having value equivalent to or exceeding one lakh rupees; or 


(b) imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one year or with a fine equal 
to double the cost of repairing the damaged property including the cost of deprivation 
of healthcare services to the public or with both, if an act causes reparable wrongful 
damage or loss to property the value of which is equivalent to or exceeding one lakh 
rupees; or 


(c) imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one month or with the fine or 
with both, if an act which causes wrongful damage or loss to property having value 
less than one lakh rupees: 


Provided that where loss to property constitutes other offences to property, it 
shall be dealt with under the relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code, !860. 


8. No person shall cause disruption or obstruction of healthcare services in a healthcare 
facility. 


9. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 8 shall be punished with— 


(a) imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years or with fine which 
may extend to three lakh rupees but shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees or with 
both, if an act causes obstruction of healthcare services; or 


(b) imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one year or with fine which 
may extend to one lakh rupees but shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees or with 
both, if an act which in the ordinary course of nature is likely to cause interruption in 
the provision of healthcare services. 


0. No person shall keep, carry or display arms of any kind, including licensed weapons, 
within the premises of a healthcare service facility: 


36 of 963. 


26 of 996. 


45 of 860. 


45 of 860. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 227 


Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the carrying of arms 
officially allowed for security purposes to the law enforcing agencies or security personnel 
of a healthcare service facility on duty. 


Il. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section l0 shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend upto six months but shall not be less than one 
month or with a fine which may extend to three lakh rupees but shall not be less than fifty 
thousand rupees or with both. 


2. Any registered medical and dental or alternative medicine practitioners, including 
those having provisional registration in a healthcare facility, are of the opinion that any 
person is imminent to act in contravention of the provisions of this act may document, report 
the behaviour, and refuse to treat the patient: 


Provided that if the person suffers from a fatal or life-threatening disease or is in dire 
need of immediate medical assistance, the provision of this section shall not be applicable on 
such person. 


3. If the registered medical and dental or alternative medicine practitioners, including 
those having provisional registration, refuses to treat someone for any reason which is not 
medically justified, which includes but are not limited to race, gender, caste, religion, sexual 
orientation, disability, and income, and fail to provide a reasonable cause for refusal to 
treatment, the license of such registered medical and dental or alternative medicine practitioners 
shall be suspended for a minimum period of two years. 


4. Where it is proved at any stage that no violation of the provisions of this Act was 
committed and the charge levied against the accused was false and malicious, the person 
levelling such false charge shall be prosecuted under the relevant provisions of the Indian 
Penal Code, 860. 


CHAPTER-III 
RESPONSIBLITIES 


5. (/) In addition to any other responsibility of a healthcare service facility or a 
healthcare service provider under any law for the time being in force, it shall be the 
responsibility of each healthcare service facility to,— 


(a) ensure that the healthcare service providers explain the procedures of 
treatment before and during the treatment to the complete understanding of the patients 
or their designated attendants in a presentable and comprehensible manner; 


(9) furnish in writing, the complete information about medical treatment provided 
by such healthcare service facility, to the patients or his designated attendants who 
seek treatment in the said facility in a presentable and comprehensible manner; 


(c) safeguard patient confidentiality and to maintain the highest standards of 
ethical conduct and not discriminate amongst patients except on the basis of medical 
need, and to provide emergency care as a humanitarian duty; 


(d) provide a copy of the whole or part of the patient's information sheet or 
medical record on demand to the patient concerned or his designated attendant. 


(e) ensure that the healthcare service providers adhere to the responsibilities 
specified in clause (a), (b), (c) and (d) or in any other law for the time being in force and 
also to address complaints of any violation in respect of the same, followed by 
appropriate action against the concerned healthcare service provider or the concerned 
person in the healthcare service facility, as the case may be, by the relevant authority. 


Explanation:— For the purposes of this section "appropriate action" means 
disciplinary action, suspension, cancellation or revocation of license for medical practice, 


Penalty for 
contravention 
of section l0. 


Refusal to 
treatment. 


Refusal to 
treat on 
malicious 
grounds. 


Punishment 
for False 
charge. 


Responsibilities 
of healthcare 
service 
facilities and 
healthcare 
service 
providers. 


228 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


profession, sealing of the healthcare facility or any other suitable action prescribed in 
laws, rules, regulations and standard operating procedures of the State Government, 
as the case may be. 


CHAPTER-IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Spot Inspection 6. (/) Whenever the Sub-Divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate or 
by officers. any police officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector of Police receives information from 


any person or upon his own knowledge that an offence has been committed in contravention 
of this act within his jurisdiction, he shall immediately himself visit the place of occurrence to 
assess the extent of violence, obstruction, loss and damage to the property and submit a 
report forthwith to the appropriate Government. 


(2) The Sub-Divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate and any police 
officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector of Police after inspecting the place or area shall, 
on the spot,— 


(i) draw a list of victim healthcare provider(s) or healthcare facilities or patient(s) 
or attendant(s); 


(ii) prepare a detailed report on the extent of violence, obstruction, loss, and 
damage to the property of victim(s), which may be categorized in the following form:— 


(a) Category A—Abusive language; minor scuffle 


(b) Category B—Verbal threat to life, property or family; obstruction of 
emergency vehicle leading to interference with healthcare services 


(c) Category C—Acts that cause damage to property; damage to medical 
equipment 


(d) Category D—Threat or actual use of criminal force; armed interference 
in performance of duties; armed assault; theft of medical equipment or medical 
transport 


(e) Category E—Threat or actual use of explosive device. 


(iii) take effective and necessary steps to provide protection to the witnesses 
and other healthcare providers at the healthcare facility. 


Setting up 7. (7) The appropriate Government shall set up Health Committee under the charge of 
en the concerned Health Secretary and depute an Additional Director General of Police for 
eye carrying out the functioning assigned to it under this Act. 


(2) The Health Committees set up under sub-section (7) shall,— 


(a) conduct survey of the identified healthcare facilities where violence, 
obstruction, loss, or damage to the property has taken place; 


(b) make inquiries about the investigation and spot inspections conducted by 
various officers; 


(c) inform the nodal officer about the law and order situation in the identified 
healthcare facilities; 


(d) make enquiries about the wilful negligence by a public servant; 


(९) create awareness about mental health and illness and reducing the stigma 
associated with mental illness among healthcare providers; 


(f) encourage healthcare providers to seek support and care for their mental 
health, to help such providers identify risk factors associated with suicide and mental 


0 of 207. 


2 of 974. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 229 


health conditions, and to help such providers learn to respond to such risks, with the 
goal of preventing suicide and mental health conditions under the Mental Healthcare 
Act, 207; 


(g) set up peer support groups among healthcare providers and provide mental 
healthcare and follow-up services, as appropriate; 


(A) conduct a review on improving healthcare providers’ mental health and the 
outcomes of programs authorized under this Act; 


(i) conduct awareness campaigns advocating the provisions of this act and 
further help in the deterrence of the same; 


(7) review the position of cases registered under the Act; and 


(k) submit a monthly report on or before the 20th day of each subsequent month 
to the State Government/nodal officer about the action taken and proposed to be taken 
in respect of the above. 


8. (J) The appropriate Government shall nominate a nodal officer to coordinate the 
functioning of the Executive Magistrates and authorized police officers or other officers 
authorized by them, investigating officers, and other officers responsible for implementing 
the provisions of the Act. 


(2) The nodal officer shall by the end of every quarter review,— 
(i) the reports received by the appropriate Government under section l6; 
(ii) the position of cases registered under the Act; and 


(iii) various kinds of measures adopted for providing immediate relief in cash or 
kind or both to the healthcare provider(s) or healthcare facilities. 


9. The provisions of this Act, except as otherwise expressly provided, shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in 
force. 


20. No court other than Magistrate of the First Class shall try an offence, punishable 
under this Act on the report of a Police Officer not below the rank of a sub-inspector. 


2. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, |973, shall mutatis mutandis 
apply to the procedural matters including trials and bails under this Act. 


22. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Nomination 
of Nodal 
Officer. 


Application of 
other laws not 
barred. 


Cognizance of 
offence. 


Application of 
the Code of 
Criminal 
Procedure, 
973. 


Power to 
make rules. 


230 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Healthcare Service Providers and Facilities (Prevention of Violence and Damage 
to Property) Bill, 2023 is an essential piece of legislation aimed at safeguarding the well-being 
of healthcare professionals, patients, and healthcare facilities. The primary purpose of this 
bill is to address the rising incidents of violence and damage to property that healthcare 
service providers and facilities are facing and to provide them with adequate protection and 
support. The Supreme Court, in Indian Medical Association v. Union of India, took 
cognizance of this issue and directed the Central Government to issue guidelines to protect 
doctors and healthcare workers from violence. The Court has also directed the State 
Governments to implement these guidelines and to take strict action against those who 
violate them. 


According to the Indian Medical Association, over 75 per cent of healthcare providers 
in India have faced violence at some point in their careers. Furthermore, a survey conducted 
by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare revealed that 45 per cent of healthcare facilities 
in the country have experienced some form of violence, ranging from verbal abuse to 
physical assaults. These statistics reflect the gravity of the situation and underscore the 
importance of this Bill. This Bill seeks to address these challenges by establishing 
comprehensive prevention, intervention, and accountability measures. The existing laws 
provide recourse to criminal litigation alone— a process most healthcare providers are 
reluctant to initiate. This Bill mandates arbitration as the first recourse in cases of minor 
offenses under the act, which would offer a much simpler and faster means of resolution and 
not burden the court at the same time. By implementing strict measures to prevent violence 
and damage to property within healthcare facilities, the Bill aims to create an atmosphere 
conducive to quality healthcare delivery. This includes the establishment of State Health 
Committees to deter potential acts of violence and collecting comprehensive data as well. 


Furthermore, the Bill recognizes the importance of supporting healthcare professionals 
who have been victims of violence or damage to property. It proposes measures to ensure 
adequate psychological support and counseling for affected individuals. By addressing 
the aftermath of such incidents, the Bill acknowledges the importance of supporting the 
well being and recovery of healthcare professionals, thus promoting retention and job 
satisfaction within the sector. 


By creating a framework that prevents violence, supports victims, and holds offenders 
accountable, this Bill not only enhances the quality of healthcare services but also protects 
the fundamental rights and safety of those working in the healthcare sector. It is a necessary 
step toward building a society where healthcare providers can perform their duties without 
fear, and patients can receive the care they need in a secure environment. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI ; MOHAMMAD JAWED 
July 03, 2023. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 7 of the Bill provides for setting up Health Committee by the appropriate 
Government for carrying out purposes of this Act. It further provides for conduct survey of 
the identified healthcare facilities where violence, obstruction, loss, or damage to the 
property has taken place and for creating awareness about mental health and illness and 
reducing the stigma associated with mental illness among healthcare providers by the 
Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees seven hundred 
crore per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


232 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 


the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 233 


Bit No. 33 oF 2023 


A Bill to establish an Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Committee to 
ensure regulation and development of urban areas in the country and for all matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (4) This Act may be called the Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Short title, 
Act, 2023. extent and 


commencement. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


234 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "Committee" means the Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) 
Committee established under section 3; 


(c) "Municipality" means an institution of Self-Government constituted under 
article 243Q of the Constitution; 


(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(e) "urban areas" means the territorial areas of a Municipality as is notified by 
the Government under article 243Q of the Constitution. 


Establishment 3. (7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish 
of Urban a Committee to be known as the Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Committee for 


पा carrying out the purpose of this Act. 


and 
Regulation) 


Committee. (a) the Prime Minister of India who shall be the ex—officio Chairperson of the 
Committee; 


(2) The Committee shall consist of— 


(b) the Union Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs—ex-officio member; 


(c) one member of Parliament each from the House of the People and the Council 
of States to be nominated by presiding officers of the Houses concerned—ex-officio 
Member; 


(d) a representative of NITI Aayog to be appointed by the Central Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed—ex-officio Member; 


(९) a representative from Indian Administrative Services to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed who shall be the Member- 
Secretary to the Committee; and 


(f) one senior architect engineer to be appointed by the Central Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed—Member. 


(3) The salary, allowances and terms of conditions of services of officers and staff of 
the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Committee shall meet at least twice in a month: 
Provided that the Committee shall meet at such time as the Chairperson deems fit. 


(5) The Union Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs shall provide secretarial 
assistance to the Committee. 


Functions 4. The Committee shall recommend the State Governments to,— 
of the 


Committee. (a) ensure availability of means for the development and regulation of urban 
areas under this jurisdiction; 


(b) impart modern training in techniques of urban development to the institutions 
and persons involved in the regulation and development of urban areas; 


(c) the method for financing the development of urban areas and to ensure that 
seventy five per cent. of the expenditure shall be borne by the Central Government and 
rest of the twenty-five per cent. by the State Government; 


(d) put an obligation of the District Magistrate concerned to ensure 
appropriate development and regulation of urban areas under his jurisdiction; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 235 


(e) establish durable, strong and inclusive infrastructure required for 
development and regulation of urban areas in the country; 


(f) establish natural land cover including parks and playgrounds in the urban 
areas in the country; 


(g) ensure availability of safe housing, clean water, water management, healthcare 
facilities and appropriate educational facilities in the urban areas of the country; 


(h) ensure complete ban on encroachment upon lakes, wet lands and rivers; 


(i) establish balance between supply and demand of public transport 
facilities in the urban areas; 


(7) ensure availability of electric buses, establish bus corridor and bus rapid 
transit system for promoting green mobility in the urban areas; 


(k) promote e-participation of urban local bodies in development and 
regulation of urban area under their jurisdiction; 


(J) establish satellite cities along with metropolitan cities to make a balance 
between population and resources; and 


(m) undertake such other measures as are required for regulation and development 
for urban areas. 


5. (/) The Committee shall prepare once every year, as may be prescribed, an annual 
report giving the summary of its activities, including schemes it has undertaken and 
recommended to the Government during the previous year and it shall contain statements of 
annual accounts of the Authority. 


(2) Acopy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and the Central 
Government shall lay the report before each House of Parliament as_ soon as it is received. 


6. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. 


7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or give such 
direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or 
expedient for the removal of any difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of three years from the date of 
commencement of this Act. 


8. (/) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State Governments, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this section, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before the Parliament while it is in session for a total period of fourteen days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the 
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, the Parliament makes any 
modification in the rule or decides that the rules should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 


Annual report. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulty. 


Power to 
make rules. 


236 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


India's biggest tragedy after independence is the migration of about fifty crore people 
from their ancestral homes, villages. Studying the changes in this socio-economic structure 
reveals that almost one-third of the country's population (about 3.6 per cent.) is now living 
in cities. Census data of 20 shows that the number of people leaving the villages and 
migrating to the cities is increasing continuously and now thirty-seven crore and seventy 
lakh people live in the cities. Comparing the figures of 200 and 20I census, it is found that 
during this period the population of cities increased by nine crore and ten lakh, whereas the 
population of villages increased by only nine crore and five lakh. 


The population of villages in the country is still about 68.84 crores, that is, two-thirds 
of the total population of the country, but the contribution of agriculture in the country's 
GDP has been continuously decreasing to only fifteen per cent. There is a decline in the 
standard of living in villages, lack of education, health, basic facilities, lack of employment, 
so people from there are coming to the cities in search of a better life. As a result, all other big 
cities including the metropolitan cities of the country have turned into slums. Out of a total 
of 7.89 crore families living in cities across the country, |.37 crore families live in slums. 


Urbanization should be seen as an opportunity and urban centres as engines of growth. 
Urban and rural development in the country should complement each other. If we analyse 
from the point of view of development in the field of urbanization in different States of India, 
it would be found that the amount and speed of urbanization in different States are not the 
same. For urbanization and development to go on the same track, there should be people- 
centric urban development, which can weave the fabric of such cities, which shall be built 
according to the required global standards. A city that is two steps ahead of people's 
aspirations...a city built on global best practices...a city that integrates technology, 
transportation, energy efficiency, proximity to work, etc. A city in which all urban development 
plans are taken forward with people's participation. 


As per a United Nations Report, globally, a total of 3l such cities are home to an 
estimated 5 crore people. This is 6.8 per cent. of the world's total population. By the year 
2030, the number of mega cities shall increase to 4] and their population shall be 7.3 crore, 
which would be 8.7 per cent. of the population of the entire world. The administrative 
boundaries of the cities have not been relied upon in this report. instead of this, priority has 
been given to use the concept of growing urban area. The report reveals that only people 
from urban areas live in these mega cities. About 2 per cent. of the world's people live in 
these, whose population is between 50 thousand and one crore. By the year 2030, 60 per 
cent. of the world's population shall live in small and big cities, which is currently 54 per cent. 
Most developing cities in Asia and Africa are seeing population growth, and by 2030, 33 of 
the 4] mega cities shall be in third world countries. 


According to this report by the United Nations Department of Economics and Social 
Affairs, by the year 2030, India shall have seven mega cities, each with a population of 
96 lakh. Among these seven, Delhi shall be second in terms of population. 


The World Cities Report, 206 states that at present, the country has five (Delhi, 
Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore and Chennai) mega cities, each with a population of more than 
one crore. Hyderabad and Ahmedabad shall also join them by the year 2030. 


The need is to create development centres across the country instead of adopting 
foreign models for urbanization. Inequality and imbalance shall increase further by adopting 
foreign models. Uneven and imbalanced urbanization is not correct considering the diversity 
of India. We cannot replicate in India what China has done, development in China has been 
more in the coastal areas, while other areas are still lagging behind. 


In view of the above, the present Bill is very important so that the people of the urban 
areas of India may be able to live in conditions suitable for humans. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; MANOJ KOTAK 
January 20, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 237 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an Urban Areas (Development and 
Regulation) Committee. It also provides for appointment of senior architect engineer to the 
Committee. Clause 6 provides for the Central Government to provide funds. The Bill, therefore, 
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that 
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore per annum will be involved 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved. 


238 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out 


the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 239 


But No. 47 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of Fake News on Social Media Regulatory 
Authority to prohibit fake news on social media and for matters connected therewith. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:- 


I. () This Act may be called the Prohibition of Fake News on Social Media Act, 2023. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by 


notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) "authority" means the Fake News on Social Media Regulatory Authority 
established under section 4; 


240 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) "fake news" includes the following or combinations thereof:— 
(i) misquotation or the false and/or inaccurate report of one's statement; 


(ii) editing audio or video which results in the distortion of facts and/or 
the context; or 


(iii) purely fabricated content. 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


(d) "social media platform" means any user-specific web-based technology 
intended to create virtual connection through the internet such as social networking 
sites, blog sites, video-sharing sites and the like; and 


(e) "social media user" includes any person or group of persons, natural or 
juridical, organized or unorganized, that utilizes social media platforms to send messages 
and/or information across through any social media account, verified or under a 
pseudonym, fictitious or false account/page name for whatever purposes it may serve. 


Prohibition on 3. The Central Government shall ensure a complete prohibition on fake news on social 


Fake News on media platform. 
Social Media. 


Constitution 4. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute 
of Fake News an Authority to be known as the Fake News on Social Media Regulatory Authority for 


on Social है f thi 
Media carrying out the purpose of this Act. 


Regulatory (2) The Authority shall consist of,— 
Authority. 


(a) the Union Minister of Information and Broadcasting-ex-officio Chairperson; 


(b) one member each from the House of the People and the Council of States to 
be nominated by the presiding officers of the Houses concerned; 


(c) two representatives from social media platform to be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed - as member; and 


(d) one Indian Administrative Service Officer who shall be the Secretary to the 
Authority. 


(3) The Authority shall meet at least twice in a month: 
Provided that the Authority may meet at such time as the Chairperson may deem fit. 


(4) The Union Ministry of Information and Broadcasting shall provide secretarial 
assistance to the Authority. 


(5) The Salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of services 
of members appointed under clause (c) of sub-section (2) shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Functions of 5. The Authority shall,— 


Authority. 
(a) ensure complete ban on promotion and spread of fake news on the social 


media platform; 


(b) ensure prohibition on the posting of contents which are abusive and obscene 
including anti-feminism and insult to the dignity of the female on the social media 
platform; 


(c) prohibit publication of content amounting to disrespect of Sanatan symbols 
and beliefs on the social media platform; 


(d) prohibit publication of content promoting superstition on the social media 
platform; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 24] 


(e) ensure that only those contents are posted on the social media platform 
which are based on authentic research on the subjects related to science, history, 
religion, philosophy, literature; and 


(f) ensure that appropriate punitive action in accordance with the provision of 
Indian Penal Code, |860 is taken on the person posting fake news on the social media 
platform. 


6. Any social media users, if found guilty by the Authority for posting fake news on 
the social media platform shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend upto seven 
years and fine which may extend upto rupees ten lakhs or with both. 


7. (7) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act 
or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time 
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for 
the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the 
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (l), where a contravention of 
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the 
consent or connivance, of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation.—for the purpose of this section:— 


(i) "company" means any body corporate and include a firm or other association 
of individuals; and 


(ii) "director" in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 


8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after expiry of the period of three years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


9. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


Penalties. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


242 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Social media is made up of two main words, the word Social means the information 
shared by people and the word Media means the means of sharing information like 
WhatsApp, Facebook, YouTube, Instagram, Pinterest, Twitter , Linkedin , Snapchat etc. 


India is a vast market for social media companies. India has sixty crore WhatsApp 
users. At the same time, 240 million Indians are using Facebook while 45 million Indians are 
using Twitter accounts. In India, WhatsApp has become the major platform for the exchange 
of true as well as false news. But compared to Twitter, WhatsApp is a private messaging 
service. The researchers say that private messaging networks such as WhatsApp also 
influence the flow of news. In India, news spreads mostly by word of mouth. 


There is no doubt that internet media has emerged as a powerful medium of learning 
and reading along with freedom of expression. However, it is also very important to understand 
whether the news shown on social media or any other platform is true or false. 


Earlier, when a person was dependent on newspapers for news, he used to be exposed 
to news filtered through many mediums, but today is the era of "real time news" where any 
fake news is shared by millions of people. It is tweeted and retweeted, sometimes even 
someone's idea is shared and someone's personal propaganda is accepted as truth. 


Internet media has blurred the distinction between public and personal. What you talk 
and think about with your family in dinner, immediately becomes public through a post. 
Freedom of Expression also has its own importance. But to what extent is it justified to tamper 
with the facts in the name of this freedom? One of the major threats to internet media is 
divisive elements releasing fake news on their websites and then sharing it through social 
media. Significantly, terrorist organizations like ISIS have made social media the main medium 
of their recruitment and internet media is helping them in this work. 


As of now, there is no clear law that prohibits fake news, although there are some 
measures other than this, which can solve the problem to some extent. Complaint in respect 
of fake news can be lodged to Indian Broadcast Foundation and Broadcasting Content 
Complaints Council. On the other hand, if fake news means hate mongering, FIR may be 
lodged under sections I53 and 295 of Indian Penal Code. If an attempt is made to tarnish the 
dignity of an individual or organization through fake news, then Civil or criminal cases can be 
filed for defamation. There is no doubt that all these measures cannot solve the problem of 
fake news. 


On social media, heart-wrenching fake videos continue to circulate and rumours are 
spread. The problem of fake news is becoming more complex because the number of people 
using the internet in India is continuously increasing. At present, twenty seven per cent of 
India's population use the Internet. India has the second largest number of Internet users in 
the world after China. 


A report by the Media Lab of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has revealed 
that Social media has become the prime destination of fake news. The research included 
,20,000 news stories that were shared and retweeted on Twitter by 3 million people between 
2006 and 207. This figure is 70 per cent more as compared to real news. According to the 
study regarding fake news. 80 per cent of fake news is spread through 0.! per cent of Twitter 
accounts. One per cent of Twitter users spread 00 per cent fake news. Due to fake news, 
itis very difficult to identify the true information. For false news and information, the term 
‘fake news' is very limited. The Government or Non-Government people are also using fake 
news a lot. It is being used as a weapon with a specific goal in mind. In order to achieve their 
goal, many fake accounts are trying to change the public opinion through fake news etc. 


Fake news is being spread in the form of satire or parody, misleading content, impostor 
content, fabricated content, contextless news and manipulated content. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 243 


Today social media is the biggest force in the world, but caution is also necessary in its 
use. A small piece of fake news can create a ruckus in the whole country. It should also be 
informed that on receiving any kind of material, firstly its veracity is required to be checked, 
only then it should be accepted as a correct one. Without knowing truth, no message should 
be forwarded so as to avoid the menace of fake news. There is a system of verification of 
news items on all platforms. Although, in order to check the facts, one has to visit some 
social media etc., but fact check is necessary to stop the spread of fake news. Technology 
has a big role to play in this regard. People should be made aware of mechanisms to verify 
messages before they are forwarded. 


The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Code of 
Conduct) Amendment Rules, 2022 have been issued. However, in this law there is no provision 
to ban fake news. Hence, it is very important for India to legalize the Prohibition of Fake News 
on Social Media Bill, 2022 in the country. It should be implemented at the earliest to ensure 
that the topics on the social media platforms are in line with the Indian social decency and 
culture. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; MANOJ KOTAK 
20 January, 2023. 


244 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Fake News on Social Media 
Regulatory Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act. It further provides for salary 
and allowances payable to the members of the Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual 
recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore per annum will be involved from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 245 


Bit No. 37 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for establishment of Regional Waste Disposal Management Cluster 
for waste management in the country and for matters connected therewith. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Waste (Disposal and Management) Act, 2023. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "Committee" means the Inspection and Promotion Committee constituted 
under section 5; 


Establishment 
of Regional 
Waste 
Disposal 
Management 
Cluster. 


Duty of the 
municipal 
authority. 


Constitution 
of Inspection 
and 
Promotion 
Committee. 


246 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(c) "municipal authority" means Municipal Corporation, Municipal Committee, 
Municipality, Nagar Palika, Nagar Nigam, Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council including 
Notified Area Committee (NAC) or any other local body constituted under the relevant 
statutes and entrusted with the responsibility of management and handling of municipal 
solid wastes; 


(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(e) "Regional Cluster" means the Regional Waste Disposal Management cluster 
established under section 3; 


(f) "segregation" means separation of municipal solid wastes into organic, 
inorganic, bio-degradable, non-biodegradable, recyclable and non-recyclable waste 
and hazardous wastes; 


(g) "waste-energy plants" means plants where solid waste is treated using 
different techniques to produce any form of energy; and 


(h) "waste generating unit" means any entity, household or large manufacturing 
facility where waste is generated and which require waste disposal. 


3. (/) The appropriate Government shall establish Regional Cluster, to be known 
as the Regional Waste Disposal Management Cluster for every ten cities under their 
respective jurisdiction to ensure collection and waste management in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) The Regional Cluster established under sub-section () shall be utilized for,— 
(a) segregation of waste; 

(b) transportation of re-cyclable waste to waste-energy plants; and 

(c) disposal of non-recyclable and non-biodegradable wastes. 


(3) The eighty per cent. of the expenditure in relation to establishment of Regional 
Clusters in the States shall be borne by the Central Government and rest of the twenty 
per cent. by the State Government concerned and expenditure in relation to Union territory 
shall be borne by the Central Government. 


4. It shall be duty of the Municipal authority to— 
(a) collect and segregate waste from the waste generating units; 


(b) transport the re-cycled waste to the waste-energy plants 
waste and non-biodegradable waste to the Regional Cluster. 


and non-recyclable 


5. (J) The Central Government shall constitute a Committee to be known as the 
Inspection and Promotion Committee for the purposes of operation and management of 
Regional Clusters. 


(2) The Inspection and Promotion Committee shall consist of,— 


(a) the Prime Minister of India who shall be the ex-officio Chairperson of the 
Committee; 


(b) the Union Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs ex-officio member; 


(c) one representation of NITI Ayog to be appointed by the Central Government 
as member; 


(d) four member of Parliament out of which two shall be from the House of the 
People and two shall be from the Council of the States to be nominated by the presiding 
officer of the Houses concerned as members; 


(e) an expert from the field of Waste Management as member; and 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 247 


(f) an official from the Indian Administrative Service or equivalent to be appointed 
by the Central Government who shall be the member-secretary of the Committee. 


(3) The Committee shall meet at least twice in a month: 
Provided that the Committee may meet as and when decided by the Chairperson. 


(4) The Union Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs shall provide secretarial 
assistance to the Committee. 


6. The Committee shall,— 
(a) ensure the establishment of Regional Cluster; 


(b) ensure that the persons at the Regional Cluster are trained and aware about 
the modern technique of the waste disposal; 


(c) ensure that expenditure involved in the establishment of Regional cluster is 
made available; 


(d) ensure that all urban areas of the country have access to the Regional Cluster; 


(e) provide employment opportunities to unorganized worker and small 
entrepreneurs at the Regional Cluster; 


(f) inspect that the municipal authority transports the segregated wastes to the 
Regional Cluster; and 


(g) promote use of re-cycleable waste. 


7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act. 


8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law, for the time being in force. 


9. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Functions of 
the 
Committee. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
requisite funds. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 


Power to 
make rules. 


248 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Every year India generates 62 million tonnes of waste. Of these, about 43 million 
tonnes (70%) is collected and about 2 million tonnes is treated and 3] million tonnes is 
dumped at landfill sites. With changing consumption patterns and rapid economic growth, it 
is estimated that urban waste generation will increase to 65 million tonnes by the year 2030. 
Most of the dumps or waste disposal sites in India have exceeded their capacity and the 
upper limit of 20 metres. It is spread over a total of 47,456.66 acres of land in the country. The 
total weight of this waste pile is |8.67 crore tonnes. 


Under the Swachh Bharat Mission the municipal corporations are asked to prepare 
and send action plans for biological disposal of the legacy landfill. This waste is later disposed 
of as fuel and organic soil. These are used in road construction and other works. When the 
waste dump is removed, the Municipal Corporation plans an alternative use of that land. 
According to the data, there is about 47 thousand acres of such land in the country. 


It is a matter of concern that there is no plan yet for the disposal of this waste. It is 
spread over a total of 47,456.66 acres of land in the country. There is already scarcity of land 
in the cities of the country. People are forced to live hellish life in less space. Due to its spread 
in every city, there is always a danger of spreading of the epidemic from waste. There is also 
no uniformity in waste disposal as all cities deal with waste in their own way in which there 
is a lot of economic expenditure along with the labour force. 


Therefore, creation of Regional Waste Disposal Management Cluster is highly necessary. 
With the creation of Regional Waste Disposal Management Clusters, the burden of waste 
will not accumulate on any one city. Waste can be disposed of in less portions of land, due 
to which the people of the city will be able to get land for housing which is currently covered 
with waste. There will be no fear of spread of epidemic and bad smell. 


Rising incomes, rapid but unplanned urbanization and changing lifestyles have resulted 
in an increase in the amount of waste in India and changes in its composition (with increased 
use of paper, plastic and other inorganic material). Improper waste management in India has 
many effects on the environment and health. There is a need to formulate a long-term strategy 
to address the future challenges of solid waste management in Indian cities with a focus on 
addressing the environmental and public health hazards resulting from the current state of 
solid waste management. 


Governments are working at every level regarding the construction of smart cities in 
the country and cleanliness under the Swachh Bharat Mission. However, as the population 
is increasing, so is the amount of waste. The waste coming out of homes and factories is 
posing a big problem in the cities. Meanwhile, shocking figures are revealed regarding the 
waste. According to them, there are a total of 854 large waste piles or landfill sites in the 
country. Months old waste has accumulated at these places. This is called the legacy landfill. 
Of these, more than 50 per cent of the legacy landfill sites are located in five States only. It 
means that maximum amount of waste has been piled up in these five States. There is no plan 
either for its disposal. Out of total 854 legacy landfill sites, 59] legacy landfill sites are 
present in 5 States. Karnataka has [36 legacy landfill sites. There are 28 legacy landfill sites 
in Rajasthan. Andhra Pradesh has I5 legacy landfill sites. There are l] legacy landfill sites 
in Madhya Pradesh and 0! in Telangana. The second phase of the Swachh Bharat Mission- 
Urban has been launched by the Central Government. It aims to make the cities waste free. 
Also, under the mission, a target has been set to dispose of the legacy landfills in the cities 
by the end of five years. A target has been set for its completion by 2026. 


A dashboard has also been launched in this regard since 28 November 2022. It is 
updated continuously. This happens when an action plan is prepared by the cities and sent 
to the ministry through the State Governments. According to the data available till 4.30 P.M. 
on December 6, there are a total of 854 legacy landfills in the country. It is spread over a total 
of 47,456.66 acres of land in the country. The total weight of this waste pile is 8.67 crore 
tonnes. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 249 


Solid waste management practices in most urban areas in India suffer from great 
inefficiencies; along with this they suffer from other administrative constraints like problem 
of decision making and cost planning. Municipal bodies functioning under the State 
Government are often short of staff, while most of their financial budget is spent on waste 
dumping exercises. In addition, many municipal bodies hire private contractors for waste 
collection and disposal with the aim of making a profit. 


There is a lack of awareness among a large section of the population about the 
segregation of household waste. Failure to properly segregate trade waste leads to its mixing 
in landfills. Waste materials such as food scraps, paper, plastic and liquid waste mix and 
decompose, leaching contaminated water into the soil and releasing harmful gases into the 
atmosphere. 


In most of the cities in India, waste is dumped near the villages on its outskirts which 
affects the environment of the villages and creates many health hazards. Due to this rural- 
urban conflicts are arising. There is a need to develop a system of Extended Producer 
Responsibility in India to ensure that product manufacturers are made financially liable for 
different parts of the life cycle of their products. It involves the return, recycling and final 
disposal of products at the end of their useful life cycle and thus promotes a circular economy. 


In view of the above, the Bill seeks to establish Regional Waste Management Cluster 
so that proper disposal of waste can be done by creating a waste disposal management 
cluster at the regional level. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; MANOJ KOTAK 
January 23, 2023. 


250 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for Establishment of Regional Waste Disposal Management 
Cluster. Clause 5 provides for the constitution of Inspection and Promotion Committee for 
the purposes of operation and management of Regional Clusters. Clause 7 provides for 
Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is 
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per annum would be involved 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25i 


But No. |4 07 2023 
A Bill to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (J) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Short title and 
Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2023. Cone 


(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect. 


2. In section |9 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Amendment 
56 of 2007. Act, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), for the words of section 9. 
"types of services", the words "types of services including sports and yoga" shall be substituted. 


Amendment 
of section 20. 


Amendment 
of section 2]. 


Insertion of 
new section 
2iA. 


Social Security 
for Senior 
Citizens. 


252 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


3. In section 20 of the principal Act, after clause (i), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


"(ia) free medical and healthcare facilities to the senior citizens in all Government 
and private hospitals including full reimbursement of amount spent on medicines and 
treatment.". 


4. In section 2 of the principal Act, in clause (0), after the words "radio and the print,", 
the words "and by organizing seminars, symposium and lectures" shall be inserted. 


5. After section 2, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 


"2A. (L) The State Government shall provide social security to all senior citizens and 
ensure their protection from exploitation and ill-treatment to ensure a peaceful life and 
healthcare for them. 


(2) For the purpose of providing social security under sub-section (l), the State 
Government shall, inter alia, provide the following facilities: — 


(7) monthly pension to each senior citizen, who is unable to maintain himself and 
who does not have any children or relative, in such manner and at such rate as may be 
prescribed; 


(ii) subsidy to each senior citizen up to ninety percent for amount spent on 
travel by road, air and railways; 


(iii) providing free legal aid to all the senior citizens including setting up of "fast 
track courts" for prompt disposal of cases wherein senior citizens are involved; and 


(iv) determining criteria for accreditation and registration of voluntary 
organizations and trusts involved in the welfare of senior citizen.". 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 253 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the modern era, senior citizens have become victims of globalization and are often 
neglected by their family members. Senior citizens have to face several kinds of problems, 


because after attaining the age of sixty years or above, they are obviously retired and in such 
condition neither they get any work nor are they in a position to work. 


Often, it is also seen that the children of elderly people do not help them financially. In 
such situation they have to face financial problems and they also face many problems in 
buying medicines and other essential items, household items and for two meals a day. 


It is a fact that steps for facilities and other welfare measures are being taken by the 
Central Government and other social institutions for senior citizens. But, still a lot needs to 
be done for their happy and dignified stay in the society. 


In 99], the United Nations General Assembly had also requested the Governments to 
formulate relevant policies in this regard. 


Although, the Government has enacted the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and 
Senior Citizens Act, 2007 to provide for more effective provisions for the maintenance and 
welfare of parents and senior citizens guaranteed and recognised under the Constitution. 
However, there is a dire need to provide social security to the senior citizens including 
financial security, healthcare and shelter and protection from abuse and exploitation. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; GOPAL CHINAY YA SHETTY 
December 2, 2022. 


254 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for State Government to provide yoga and sports 
facilities in the old age homes meant for the senior citizens. Clause 3 provides for the State 
Government to provide free medical and healthcare facilities to the senior citizens. Clause 4 
provides for the State Government to organize seminars, symposiums and lectures to create 
awareness about the provisions of this Act. Clause 5 provides for the State Government to 
provide social security to the senior citizens including monthly pension, subsidy in travel 
and free legal aid. The expenditure in relation to the States shall be borne by the State 
Governments from their respective Consolidated Funds. However, the expenditure in relation 
to Union territories shall be borne by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted 
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about rupees seven hundred crore per annum would be involved from the 
Consolidated Fund of India is likely to be involved. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees seven crore is also likely to be involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 255 


Bit No. 2! 67 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In article 24 of the Constitution, for the words, 'High Court for each State’, the Amendment 
words, 'High Court for each State to be known by the name of the State' shall be substituted. of article 24. 


256 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


The Maharashtra Government had issued an order in the year 960, which clearly 
stated that the 'Bombay High Court’ would henceforth be known as the ‘Maharashtra 
High Court’. But this order was not implemented. Bombay was renamed Mumbai in the 
year 995, but the name of Bombay High Court remained the same. Since, the city called 
Bombay no longer exists, but the High Court is on the name of 'Bombay' only, which is not 
appropriate. 


The pronunciation of the word 'Maharashtra' connotes special significance in the life 
of a Maharashtrian. Therefore, its use should find expression in the name of the High Court 
also. It is much needed to change the name of "Bombay High Court" to "Maharashtra 
High Court" for implementation of a clause of the Maharashtra Adaptation of Laws 
(State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 960 for the protection of the distinctive culture, 
heritage and traditions of the people of the State of Maharashtra. 


In this context, it is also to be noted that in a PIL to rename "Bombay High Court" as 
"Maharashtra High Court", the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its order dated 03.]].2022 has 
mentioned that this matter involves parliamentary procedures. Hence, it cannot be interfered 
with by the courts and, however, if such a change is to be made, it should be done through 
a parliamentary or legislative body. 


Therefore, alongwith the request that in article 24 of the Constitution for the words 
"There shall be a High Court for each State", the words "There shall be a High Court by the 
name of the State for each State" shall be substituted. It is also forwarded that the concerned 
authorities of other States may also be directed to change the names of their High Courts in 
accordance with the names of the States in which they are situated. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; GOPAL CHINAY YA SHETTY 
December \2, 2022 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 257 


Butt No. 79 or 202[ 
A Bill further to amend the National Commission for Minorities Act, 992. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (7) This Act may be called the National Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Short title and 
Act, 202]. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


I9 of 992. 2. In section 2 of the National Commission for Minorities Act, 992 for clause (c), the Amendment 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:— of section 2. 
"(c) ‘minority’, means,— 
(i) areligious community notified as such by the Central Government; and 
(ii) religious communities notified as such by the State Government based 


on the demographic data calculated on the basis of the latest decadal census 
data of the State concerned: 


Provided that no religious community shall be notified as a minority community in a 
State if the population of that community is more than twenty per cent. of the total population 
of that State;". 


258 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


The National Commission for Minorities was established under the National 
Commission for Minorities Act, !992 with the vision of addressing the feeling of inequality 
and discrimination that pervaded among some sections of the minorities. However, the 
term ‘minority’ has neither been clearly defined in the Constitution nor in the original legislation. 
This has led to conflicting interpretations by the judiciary. 


A minority, normatively, may be differentiated from the dominant group on the basis of 
the power asymmetry. Religious minorities are sometimes not able to preserve their culture, 
ethnicity and educational system on account of not being at par with the immediate majority 
community. It is thus imperative that religious minorities be defined on a State-wise basis 
rather than on a pan India basis. Linguistic minorities are already being defined in this 
manner. 


Defining religious minorities on a pan India basis has not only created a wave of 
inequality across different States but has also encouraged those who do not belong to 
religious minorities and to convert for social, political and economic benefits. 


Further, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to 
National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities of !8 December, l992 had called for 
protecting minorities within their respective territories. This would be possible only if 
minorities are defined State-wise. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the National Commission for Minorities Act, 992 
with a view to provide that a religious community shall be a 'minority' community for the 
purposes of this Act only if,— 


(a) notified as such by the Central Government; or 


(b) notified as such by the State Governments based on the demographic data 
calculated on the basis of the latest decadal census data of the State concerned only 
if population of such religious community is less than twenty per cent. of the total 
population of that State. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SANJAY JAISWAL 
February 23, 2020 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 259 


Bit No. 222 or 2022 


A Bill to provide for regulation of tour operators and travel agents by providing for 
compulsory registration of these operators and agents by competent authority; and 
by prescribing requisite norms and infrastructure for various tour and tourist related 
activities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Tour Operators and Travel Agents (Regulation) Short title and 
Act, 2022. commencement. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3)It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Compulsory 
registration of 
Tour 

Operators and 
Travel 

Agents. 


Procedure for 
registration. 


260 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requites,— 


(a) ‘appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State, and in all other Cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "Competent authority" means any office or Officer notified by the 
appropriate Government under section 4; 


(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(d) "tour operator or travel agent" means any person including any establishment 
who undertakes and conducts packaged tours tothe various parts of the country and 
outside India or provides transport, passport and visa facilities, reservation of seats 
for airlines, rail, bus, steamer and ships, arrange accommodation, entertainment and 
other tourism related services and consultancy to tourists; and 


(e) "tourist" means any person who undertakes any journey or visits any 
place in or outside India and includes a pilgrim. 


3. (/) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette appoint, no person or establishment shall work as tour operator or travel 
agent without prior registration with the competent authority. 


(2) Any person or establishment found working as tour operator or travel agent 
without registration shall be guilty of an offence punishable under this Act. 


4. (/) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
acompetent authority for the purposes of registration of tour operator or travel agents 
within its jurisdiction. 


(2) Any person or establishment willing to work as tour operator or travel agent shall 
apply to the competent Authority for the purpose of registration in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed. 


(3) Any person or establishment working as tour operator or travel agent before the 
commencement of this Act shall apply for registration to the competent authority within a 
period of forty-five days from the date of commencement of this Act in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) On receipt of an application for registration as tour operator or travel agent the 
competent authority shall scrutinize the application and may call for such other information 
or documents from the applicant as_may be prescribed. 


(5) The competent authority shall, before registering any tour operator or travel agent, 
inspect the infrastructure and facilities available with the tour operator or travel agent to 
have the first hand information and ensure the compliance of the norms and standards 
fixed by the appropriate Government in this behalf. 


(6) The competent authority shall, after being satisfied with the various requirements 
under this Act, grant a registration certificate to the applicant in such manner and form as 
may be prescribed which shall be valid for three years. 


(7) The competent authority shall renew the registration of any tour operator or travel 
agent only after re-inspecting the infrastructure facilities with the tour operator or travel 
agent and on fulfilment of requirements and norms fixed in this behalf by the appropriate 
Government under this Act. 


(8) The competent authority may refuse to register or renew registration of a tour 
operator or travel agent if he fails to comply with the norms and standards fixed by the 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 26l 


appropriate Government in this behalf or the competent authority finds its infrastructure 
insufficient for the purpose of working as tour operator or travel agent: 


Provided that in case of non-registration or non-renewal of registration of a tour 
operator or travel agent, the competent authority shall record reasons in writing and 
communicate the same to the applicant. 


(9) The competent authority shall take a decision on the application filed under 
sub-section (2) within a period of thirty days. 


(/09) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
an appellate authority, to provide opportunities to the person aggrieved by the orders of 
the competent authority. 


5. The appropriate Government shall,— 


(a) fix the maximum fee to be charged by the tour operator and travel agents for 
various tour related activities; 


(b) fix the rate at which vehicles shall be made available to tourists; 
(c) prescribe norms and standards for various activities; 


(d) lay down norms for minimum infrastructure for starting and running tour 
operations; 


(e) prescribe such other norms as may be necessary for the purpose. 


6. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and also 
with fine which may extend to five lakhs rupees. 


7. (7) Where a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule, direction 
or order made thereunder has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time 
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company 
for the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the 
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention was committed without his 
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where a contravention of 
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, order, or direction made thereunder has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the 
consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation:—For the purpose of this section:— 


(i) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or association of 
individuals; and 


(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 


8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 


Appropriate 
Government 
to prescribe 
norms for 
tour operator 
and travel 
agents. 


Penalty. 


Offences by 
company. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Overriding 
effect of the 
Act. 


Power to 
make rules. 


262 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three 
years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force on the subject and save as 
aforesaid the provisions of the Act shall be in addition to and not derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force. 


0. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions aforesaid both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
25 of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity or anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 263 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

At present, there is no legislation to regulate the tourism industry, particularly the 
travel agencies operating in various regions of the country. This sector is unorganised and 
any person can start a travel agency anywhere by setting up a small shop just with a 
telephone facility. There is no ban on such travel agents and as a result, in some of the 
cases, anti social or mischievous elements sneak into this business and flourish in the name 
of providing travel consultancy. There have been cases when the foreign tourists have 
been cheated and robbed of their valuables by the unscrupulous travel agents. The 
Association of Domestic Tour Operators has held several meetings with the Ministry to 
make registration of a travel agency mandatory to curb the untoward incidents and dubious 
practices indulged in by some travel agents with ulterior motives. It becomes all the more 
important to check this menace of unregulated travel agencies, by suitable legislative 
measures. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; JANARADAN SINGH 'SIGRIWAL' 
November 22, 2022. 


264 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause L0 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 265 


Bit No. 229 or 2022 


A Bill to provide for the formulation and implementation of a comprehensive nationapl 
policy for ensuring overall development of the dalit youth belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes and oppressed 
categories and for their welfare to be undertaken by the Central Government and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Dalit Backward and Oppressed Youth (Development 
and Welfare) Act, 2022. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Formulation 
of 


comprehensive 


national 
policy. 


266 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the Government of 
the State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) ‘backward youth’ means youth belonging to castes which have been declared, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, as backward by the appropriate Government 
from time to time; 


(c) 'dalit youth’ means a youth belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be; 


(d) ‘oppressed youth' means a youth who has been a victim of any cruelty or 
discriminations for the reason that he professes any faith or religion other than religion 
or faith professed by majority of persons in that State or belongs to a caste not 
covered in SCs or a victim of poverty, as the case may be; 


(e) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(f) 'youth' means any person who has attained the age of eighteen years but is 
not above the age of forty-five years. 


3. (L) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate a comprehensive 


national policy for the overall development and welfare of the dalit, backward and oppressed 
youth of the nation. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (J), the 


national policy may provide for: 


(a) Free higher education, including medical, technical and information 
technology education; 


(b) Free coaching training for admission to management courses with assured 
admission in management institutes of repute; 


(c) Books, stationery, equipment and educational gadgets free of cost; 

(d) Scholarships in deserving cases; 

(e) Hostel facilities free of cost; 

(f) Free public transport facilities; 

(g) Monthly pocket expenses allowances at such rate as may be prescribed; 
(h) Free entertainment facilities; 

(i) Free access to all libraries and technical institutions; 


(j) Training in sports to every eligible youth covered under this Act and facilities 
and appropriate incentives to participate in sports activities, events and tournaments 
in and outside the country; 


(k) Provision of free of cost healthy and nutritious meals to all the student 
youth covered under this Act in the schools, colleges, universities, hostels and 
technical institutions; 


(L) Free medical and healthcare; 


(m) Apprenticeship in business, trade, vocation etc. in factories and commercial 
establishments; 


(n) Providing military training to physically fit youth covered under this Act 
and those successfully completing training to be given preference for recruitment in 
defence services; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 267 


(0) Free of cost coaching and study material for all India Services and other 
competitive examinations which are conducted by Union Public Service Commission, 
State Public Service Commissions and other examinations bodies such as of 
Railways, Banks Staff Selection Commission and other bodies of the Government at 
the Centre, States and Union Territories; and 


(p) Such other facilities, incentives and welfare measures as may be prescribed 
from time to time. 


4. (!) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the appropriate Government shall provide gainful employment to the youth covered 
under this Act as per their ability and qualification. 


(2) If the appropriate Government fails to provide gainful employment, the youth 
shall be paid unemployment allowance on monthly basis at such rate as may be prescribed 
till he is given gainful employment. 


5. The Central Government shall— 


(0) appoint expert committees in the capital of every State and Union Territories 
and in every district for carrying out the purposes of this Act; 


(ii) promote youth cooperatives such as village industry ventures, dairy 
projects, food processing, poultry, fair price shops, LPG distribution at village or 
district level to provide self employment to youth belonging to dalits, backward 
and oppressed classes; and provide requisite financial assistance and guidance to 
them for procuring raw materials and promoting marketing; 


(iii) ensure availability of requisite credit at nominal rate of interest from the 
Banks and other Financial Institutions to the youth covered under this Act for their 
self employment projects; and 


(iv) extend such other welfare measures to the youth covered under this Act 
as it may deem appropriate and necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 


7. (/) The Central government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Employment 
and 
unemployment 
allowance. 


Miscellaneous 
provisions. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
requisite 
funds. 


Power to make 
rules. 


268 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The youth are the strength of a strong nation and are capable of substantially 
influencing polity. In recent times, youth have transformed some monarchies into Republics 
by overthrowing monarchial power. As such, youth are always at the centre stage of 
socio-political activities of every country and similar is the position in our nation. To 
maintain this strength, a clear youth policy is required to rid the country of problems related 
to education, poverty, nutrition, employment opportunities, self employment, vocational 
training, health, sports etc. The country at present has no institutional mechanism to harness 
the potential of our youth and channelize their energy for the betterment of the country. The 
plight of the youth belonging to backward communities such as Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes who have been oppressed for centuries is 
even worse. Even today the Dalit youth have to face social ostracization; though thanks to 
the reservation policy propounded by Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, many of them have 
made some progress, but youth of the backward classes still require special attention 
because there is need to instill a sense of belonging among them by providing them all 
opportunities for their overall development so that they too can contribute to the progress 
of the country to their full potential. The facilities and opportunities should be provided as 
a matter of right and it should not be allowed to remain a privilege of the elite only. Employment 
needs to be guaranteed to them and if employment opportunities are not provided to them, 
they have to be given unemployment allowance. They have to be linked directly to the 
production processes by eliminating disparities between rural and urban youth. For this, a 
comprehensive national policy is an absolute necessity. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DEH JANARDAN SINGH 'SIGRIWAL' 
22 November, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 269 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for a national policy for the Dalit, backward and oppressed 
youth under which various facilities are to be provided to such youth. Clause 4 provides for 
employment opportunities and payment of unemployment allowance by the Government. 
Clause 5 provides for promoting youth co-operatives such as village industry ventures, 
dairy projects, food processing etc. at village and district level and requisite financial 
assistance; requisite credit at nominal rate of interest from banks and other financial 
institutions and other welfare measures to the youth. Clause 6 makes it mandatory for the 
Central Government to provide requisite funds to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is 
estimated that a sum of rupees thirty thousand crore may be involved as recurring expenditure 
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of Rupees Twenty Thousand crores may also 
be involved for creating assets and infrastructure. 


270 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 of the Bill gives the power to the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


Bit No. 239 oF 2022 


A Bill to provide training on social and emotional learning to all educators and students 
enrolled in schools affiliated to Central Board of Secondary Education, Indian 
Certificate of Secondary Education and State Education Boards using curricula 
and materials that are scientifically accurate, age appropriate, and culturally relevant 
and for other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows: 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
l. (7) This Act may be called the Promotion of Social and Emotional Learning in Short title, 


Schools Act, 2022. extent and 


commencement. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


Definitions. 


Constitution 
of the 
Committee. 


Composition 
of the 
Commission. 


Term of 
office of the 
members of 
the 
Commission. 


272 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a)"appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State, and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b)"Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Commission for Promotion of Social 
and Emotional Learning in Schools, appointed under section 4; 


(८2) "Commission" means the Commission for Promotion of Social and Emotional 
Learning in Schools set up under section 3; 


(d)"prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(e) "Student Committee" means Committee set up under section 3; and 
(f) "teacher coordinator" means the authority appointed under section |6. 
CHAPTER II 
COMMISSION FOR SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL LEARNING IN SCHOOLS 


3. (J) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
a Commission to be known as the Commission for Promotion of Social and Emotional 
Learning in Schools to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions 
assigned to it under this Act. 


(2)The Commission shall be a body corporate by the above name, having perpetual 
succession and a common seal. 


(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi. 
4. The Commission shall consist of,— 


(a) The Secretary, Department of Higher Education in the Union Ministry of 
Education, Chairperson, ex-officio; 


(b) two members from amongst the eminent persons of ability and integrity, 
who— 


(i) have a thorough understanding and expertise of social and emotional 
learning; and 


(ii) have experience of working as an expert in human psychology; 


(c) two members from amongst the eminent persons of ability and integrity, 
who,— 


(i) have a thorough understanding and expertise in the field of academia; 


(ii) have experience of working with and implementing different 
pedagogical techniques: 


be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the Ministry 
of Education: 


Provided that at least one of the four members appointed under clause (b) or (c) shall 
be a woman. 


5. (J) The Chairperson and every member of the Commission shall hold office for 
a term of three years from the date of assumption of office and shall be eligible for 
re-appointment for not more than three terms: 


Provided that under no circumstances, the Chairperson or any member shall hold 
office after attaining the age of seventy years. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 273 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), the Chairperson or a 
member may— 


(a) resign, by giving in writing to the Central Government, a notice of not less 
than six months; or 


(b) be removed from their office in accordance with the provisions given in 
section 6. 


(3)The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 


6. (/) The Central Government may, by order, remove the Chairperson, or a member 
from office, if the Chairperson or a member— 


(a) becomes mentally unstable to continue in their position; 
45 of 860 (b) is convicted of an offence under the Indian Penal Code, 860; 


(c) acquires financial or other interests which may prejudice their decisions and 
functions; 


(d) has in the opinion of the Central Government and the Court, so abused his 
position as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the public interest. 


(2) The Chairperson or a member shall not be removed under any clause of 
sub-section (/), unless the Central Government gives in writing the reasons for their dismissal 
and the Chairperson or the member is given a reasonable opportunity of defending 
themselves in the matter. 


7. (४) The Commission may, at any point, associate with itself any person whose 
advice or assistance it may desire in carrying out any of the purposes of this Act but not in 
contravention of any other law. 


(2) A person associated with the Commission under sub-section (/) shall have a right 
to take part in discussions relevant to that purpose, but shall not be a member for any other 
purpose. 


8. (J) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary as the Chairperson may 
deem fit. 


(2)The Commission shall regulate its own procedure. 


(3)The Commission shall have the autonomy to allocate and spend the funds on the 
functions assigned to it under this Act. 


CHAPTER III 


FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION FOR PROMOTION OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL 
LEARNING IN SCHOOLS 


9. (।/) The Commission shall develop and implement the curricular for promotion of 
social and emotional learning in all schools. 


(2) The Commission shall have the authority to receive annual reports from all the 
State and Central education boards and act according to them as per the requirement. 


0. Without prejudice to anything contained in sub-section (/) of section 9 the 
Commission shall also perform the following functions, namely:— 


(a) review and monitor the working of every District Education Officer and the 
concerned Grievance Redressal Office; 


(b) ensure coordination among every District Education office and Grievance 
Redressal Office; 


Removal 
from the 
Membership 
of the 
Commission. 


Advice sought 
by the 
Commission. 


Meeting of 
the 
Commission. 


Functions of 
the 
Commission. 


Other 
Miscellaneous 
functions. 


Education 
Boards to 
integrate 
social and 
emotional 
learning in 
Curricula. 


Activities for 
social and 
emotional 
learning in 
school 
curriculum. 


Constitution 
of Student 
Committee. 


Psychological 
test/interview 
for the 
members of 
student 
committee. 


274 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(c) submit an annual report to the Central Government, within such time as prescribed 
by the Central Government, giving a full and detailed account of the activities undertaken 
by it in the previous year, and the Central Government shall cause every such report to be 
laid before both houses of Parliament. 


(d) make suggestions to the Central Government on the financial support required to 
implement the social and emotional learning and to fulfil the other functions assigned to it 
under this Act; and 


(e) prescribe the study material that shall be included in school curriculum related to 
social and emotional learning. 


CHAPTER IV 
INCLUSION OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL LEARNING IN SCHOOL CURRICULUM 
I. The Central and State Education Boards shall,— 


(a) modify their course content to integrate the Social and Emotional learning 
in their curriculum; and 


(b) use biographies of famous 5 Indian personalities and poems that focus on 
the various resolution styles adopted by them during the time of crisis: 


Provided that the course content shall be relevant as well as socially and culturally 
sensitive. 


2. (/) The schools shall implement the curricula prescribed by respective Education 
Boards to impart social and emotional learning through experience, demonstration, play 
narratives, role play, stories and other means that draw the attention of children. 


(2) The students shall be given positive credits on their report cards for their 
participation in the activities related to social and emotional learning: 


Provided that the evaluation shall be based on the efforts shown by the students 
during the class activity and not on the academic marks. 


CHAPTER V 
STUDENT COMMITTEE (BUDDY PROJECT) IN SCHOOLS 


3. (/) The appropriate Government shall ensure that all schools shall constitute 
a student committee consisting of five representatives each from class-5, class-9 and 
class-!2 who shall act as a mentor for the students of the junior classes. 


(2)The participation of the students as a representative of the student committee 
shall be voluntary. 


(3)The process to select the representatives to the student committee shall be such 
as may be prescribed: 


Provided that at least one-half of the representatives shall be girls. 


4. (/) A candidate for selection as a representative shall be required to undergo a 
written psychological test as may be prescribed. 


(2) A selected representative shall undergo an interview by Board consisting of the 
teacher coordinator, school psychological counsellor and a third party counsellor. 


(3) Each representative shall be given a certificate of appreciation after successful 
completion of a year long tenure. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 275 


5. (/) The students of a school shall be divided in following three categories for the 
purpose of representation in the Student Committee from each category: 


(a) Class- to Class-4: The students of the first group shall have the representative 
from class-5; 


(b) Class-5 to Class-8: The students of the second group shall have the representative 
from class-9; and 


(c) Class-9 to Class-2: The students of the third group shall have the representative 
from ९]४६४५४- 2. 


(2) The students shall be encouraged to approach the respective student 
representatives and the teacher coordinator, mentioned under section 6, for any problem 
faced by them. 


CHAPTER VI 
TEACHER COORDINATOR IN SCHOOLS 


6. () The appropriate government shall ensure that all schools appoint at least one 
teacher coordinator subject to a maximum of four teacher coordinators who shall look after 
the activities regarding social and emotional learning in the school. 


(2)The schools may independently select a qualified counsellor on their own, 
otherwise a teacher shall be selected by the Principal who shall undergo a workshop 
conducted by the experts from the Department of Education in order to qualify as a 
coordinator. 


(3)The content of the workshop, which shall be organized bi-annually by the 
Commission, shall focus on the various ways to include social and emotional learning in 
schools. 


(4) The teacher coordinator shall be given a book, specially designed for by the 
Commission that will suggest the activities that can be organised in the school. 


(5)The teacher coordinators of the Government schools and of the schools affiliated 
to State Education Boards shall participate in an additional workshop which shall be 
conducted by the appropriate Government through the experts in the field of social and 
emotional learning in the local language. 


(6) The teachers of other educational boards shall participate in the workshop 
conducted by the Commission: 


Provided that teachers may additionally participate in the State Government workshops 
at will. 


(7) The participation in the workshop shall be mandatory in order to become a teacher 
coordinator and failure in attending three consecutive workshops would result in immediate 
dismissal from the position. 


(8) Upon successful completion of the workshops, teachers shall be granted a certificate 
of participation. 
7. (J) At the beginning of every academic year all students shall participate in a 


heuristics lab. 


(2)The activities of heuristics lab shall be recorded and submitted to the District 
Education Officer within first two months of the academic year. 


(3)The content of the activities of heuristics lab shall be designed by the teacher 
coordinator with the help of Student Committee as per the guidelines to be prescribed by 
the Commission: 


Representation 
in the Student 
Committee. 


Provision of 
teacher 
coordinators 
in schools. 


Provision 
regarding 
heuristics lab. 


Access to 
website to 
teacher 
coordinator. 


Direct 
reporting by 
remotely 
located 
school. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


276 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Provided that such activities shall focus to address the social, mental and relationship 
issues through group work, role play, games etc. 


CHAPTER VII 
ELECTRONIC DISSEMINATION OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL LEARNING 


8. The Commission shall design and maintain a dedicated website, especially for 
social and emotional learning and provided access to all the teacher coordinators, under 
which— 


(a) the teacher coordinator shall upload the pictures and videos of all the activities 
taking place in a school in a digital form; 


(b) various procedures, articles regarding the importance of the social and emotional 
learning, documents, notices, and testimonials from the teachers as well as students, shall 
be uploaded and updated from time to time; and 


(c) the teacher coordinator shall also use the electronic platform to provide feedback 
and suggest changes. 


9. The schools that are remotely located and are devoid of any proper communication 
channel digitally shall directly report to the District Education Officer, who shall be required 
to update the website. 


CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


20. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 


2. The provisions of this Act or the rules made there under shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of any other law, rules, orders or instructions. 


22. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be 
laid before each House of Parliament. 


23. (7) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government may, 
by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification on annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 277 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Rising stress amongst the youth is a common occurrence nowadays. But, there might 
be a suitable solution for this elusive problem. The true potential of a country can be really 
measured by the strength and skills of its youth. In India, we have one of the largest youth 
population on the planet. But the question remains that how well we have been able to 
harness and develop their inherent potential. 


We spend much less than the rest of the world on mental health issues (0.06% of the 
health budget is spent on mental healthcare) and have only 0.30 psychiatrists, 0.7 nurses, 
and 0.05 psychologists per !,00,000 mentally ill patients in the country. According to a 207 
WHO report, 0-20% of children and adolescents world-wide are believed to be affected 
with mental health issues, with suicide and self-harm being the second leading cause of 
death in this age group after road traffic injuries. The same report surveyed Indian adolescents 
of whom 25% reported being depressed, 7% mentioned being bullied, 8% spoke about 
suffering from anxiety, another 8% complained of experiencing loneliness, and a l0% 
reportedly had no close friends, all of which are warning signs pointing towards mental 
health issue. The actual figures are likely to be far higher due to under-reporting on account 
of lack of awareness, and due to the stigma attached to mental health. 


When we look at the current trajectory of mental health concerns in children and 
youth in India, we immediately correlate it to issues arising from an over-competitive 
environment and/or bullying. A 202 Lancet study also had a similar finding, wherein they 
pointed out that Indian adolescents were often pressured to have aspirations of a much 
higher level than the society around them was capable of keeping pace with, leading to 
disappointments at a greater scale. While it is important to understand the causes of such 
mental ill health, it is far more pertinent to tackle the root of these issues, and attempt to 
prevent it. Mental and emotional health are integrally related, with the later having a strong 
influence on the former. These begin developing at an early age, and help us in our personal, 
academic, social lives by equipping us with some basic life skills. Given schools' unique 
ability to access large numbers of children, they are most commonly identified as the best 
places to provide this support so as to promote the universal mental health of children. A 
key component of such a support system, which has been gaining rapid recognition 
worldwide, has been Socio- Emotional Learning (SEL). SEL has been found to be an effective 
tool in developing better control over one's emotions, and in enhancing the decision- 
making process of an individual. Research shows that SEL is associated with a positive 
impact on important mental health variables that increase children's attachment to school, 
enhance their motivation to learn, and reduce risky behaviours. 


SEL, when properly imparted to children or adolescents, is also understood to have a 
direct impact on their earnings over their lifetime. Apart from the above, for a country like 
India with its strong cultural diversity, there is an additional need for future generations to 
internalize SEL because they also help them in realizing the basic values expounded by our 
Constitution. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHuI; JANARDAN SINGH 'SIGRIWAL' 
November 22, 2022 


278 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Commission for Social Emotional 
Learning in Schools. Clause 5 inter alia provides for salary and allowances payable to the 
Chairperson and other Members of the Committee. Clause 20 makes it obligatory for the 
Central Government to provide requisite funds to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is 
not possible at present to quantify the funds that may be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to frame rules by 
notification in the Official Gazette, to carry out the provision of the Bill. The rules to be 
framed by the Government pertain to matters of administrative detail only, which cannot be 
laid down in the Bill itself. The delegation is, therefore, normal in character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 279 


Butt No. 63 or 2022 


A Bill to provide for proper handling and disposal of waste being generated by wind 
turbine and solar energy devices by prescribing norms and fixing responsibilities 
and duties on manufacturers, re-cyclers and consumers with regard to disposal 
of the waste generated by wind and solar energy devices and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Whereas decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on the Human 
Environment held at Stockholm in June, 4972, in which India participated, to take appropriate 
steps for the protection and improvement of human environment; 


WtereASs decisions were taken as part of Paris Agreement, 205 regarding Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDC); 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


280 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


AND whereas it is considered necessary to implement the decisions aforesaid to 
protect the environment from the ill-effects of non-biodegradable garbage; 


AND whereas article 48A of the Constitution enjoins upon the State to endeavour to 
protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Wind Turbine and Solar Energy Waste (Handling, 
Disposal and Recycling) Act, 2022. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "Board" means the Central Board for the Prevention, Control and Abatement 
of Wind Turbine Waste and Solar Energy Waste constituted under section 4; 


(c) "wind turbine waste" means the waste generated from the foundation, tower, 
components of the gearbox and generator and turbine blades; 


(d) "solar energy waste" means waste generated from solar panels, 
photovoltaic (PV) solar modules and other product which are discarded, surplus, 
obsolete, broken from solar energy devices; 


(e) "disposal" means disposal of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste 
according to prescribed norms to prevent contamination of ground water, surface 
water, ambient air quality and harmful effect on human health; 


(f) "hazardous waste" means any wind turbine waste and solar energy waste 
which by reason of any of its physical, chemical, reactive, toxic, flammable, explosive 
or corrosive characteristics causes danger or is likely tocause danger to health or 
environment, whether alone or when in contact with other wastes or substances. 


(g) "operator" means a person or establishment owning or operating a facility 
for collection, transportation and disposal of wind turbine waste and solar energy 
waste; 


(h) "consumer" means a person using products capable of generating wind 
turbine waste and solar energy waste; 


(i) "re-cycler" means any person or establishment engaged in re-cycling or 
re-processing of used solar equipment or wind turbine or assembly of their component; 


(/) "storage" means the temporary containment of wind turbine waste and solar 
energy waste in a manner so as to prevent its littering and hazardous effects on 
human being; 


(k) "transportation" means carrying of wind turbine waste and solar energy 
waste from one place to other place hygienically through specially designed transport 
vehicle so as to prevent littering and harmful effects on human being; 


(J) "distributor" means any person who distributes or re-sell wind turbine or 
photo-voltaic modules under his own name or trademark in the country; 


(m) "importer" means any person who sell photovoltaic modules from a third 
country in India; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 28i 


(n) "distance seller" means any person who sell solar-wind energy equipment 
and modules by means of distance communication directly to private households or 
to users other than private households in India; and 


(०) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. The disposal of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste by any person or 
company knowingly or otherwise in any drain, landfill, at public places such as streets, 
roads, market place, open vacant plots and such other places is hereby prohibited. 


4. The Central Government shall, within six months of the commencement of this Act, 
prepare and publish in the Official Gazette a National Policy for Scientific Management of 
Wind Turbine Waste and Solar Energy Waste Management for management of wind turbine 
waste and solar energy waste throughout the country. 


5. () The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
a Board to be known as the Central Board for the Prevention, Control and Abatement 
of Wind Turbine Waste and Solar Energy Waste for effective implementation of the 
provisions of the Act. 


(2) The Board shall consist of Chairperson and such other members to be appointed 
by Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of services 
of Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 


6. (J) The Board shall be responsible for prevention, control and abatement of wind 
turbine waste and solar energy waste in the country. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Board shall 
perform all or any of the following functions, namely:— 


(a) advise the Central Government on any matter concerning improvement of 
recycling of wind turbines, cells, panels and the prevention, control or abatement of 
solar energy waste; 


(b) monitor the implementation of the compliance criteria and procedure for 
handling and disposal of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste; 


(c) grant authorization and registration to a person or an agency engaged in 
collection or dismantling or recycling of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste 
provided that the applicant possesses appropriate facilities to handle the waste safety; 


(d) prescribe guidelines for household solar and wind energy users; 


(e) plan and cause to be executed a nation-wide programme for the prevention, 
control and abatement of solar energy waste; 


(f) plan and organize training of persons engaged or to be engaged in programmes 
for prevention, control and abatement of solar waste on such terms and conditions, 
as may be prescribed; 


(g) enhance information exchange, education and awareness raising programmes 
in all sectors of society through mass media regarding prevention, control and 
abatement of solar waste; 


(h) collect, compile and publish technical and statistical data relating to wind 
turbine waste and solar energy waste and the measures devised for its effective 
prevention, control and abatement; 


Prohibition 
on disposal of 
wind turbine 
waste and 
solar energy 
waste in 
public place. 


National 
Policy for 
Scientific 
Management 
of Wind and 
Solar Waste 
Management. 


Constitution 


of Central 
Board. 


Functions of 
the Board. 


Responsibilities 
of 
Appropriate 
Government. 


Duty of 
Manufacture. 


282 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(i) prepare manuals, codes or guides relating to prevention, control and 
abatement of solar energy waste; 


(j) prevent and monitor illegal dumping of solar energy waste; 


(k) improve institutional and technical capabilities of regional and 
sub-regional centres with training and technology transfer; 


(J) collect and disseminate information in respect of matters relating wind-solar 
pollution; and 


(m) perform such other functions as may be prescribed. 
7. The appropriate Government shall,— 


(a) ensure that all the wind turbine waste and solar energy waste generated 
within its territorial jurisdiction is handled and disposed of in accordance with 
compliance criteria and procedure as may be prescribed; 


(b) facilitate infrastructure facilities for collection, storage, transportation and 
disposal of solar and wind energy waste and wind turbine waste; 


(c) after due authorization, permit the operator to collect, transport and dispose 
of the solar waste and wind turbine waste in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) ensure earmarking or allocation of industrial space or shed for wind turbine 
waste and solar energy waste dismantling and recycling in the existing and upcoming 
industrial park, estate and industrial clusters; 


(e) ensure recognition and registration of workers involved in dismantling and 
recycling of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste; 


(f) undertake industrial skill development activities for the workers involved in 
dismantling and recycling of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste; 


(g) undertake annual monitoring and to ensure safety and health of workers 
involved in dismantling and recycling of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste; 


(h) prepare integrated plan for effective implementation of provisions for 
importers and distant sellers; 


(i) preparation and submit annual report to Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change regarding prevention, control and abetment of wind turbine 
waste and solar energy waste; and 


(j) encourage setting up of integrated Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facility 
(TSDFs) for ‘hazardous waste' management on Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode 
in clusters of hazardous waste generating industries. 


8. It shall be the duty of every manufacturer,— 


(a) to obtain Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) Authorization and manage 
their responsibilities; 


(b) to ensure that every solar and wind energy device offered for sale in the 
market contains— 


(i) the procedure for its handling and disposal; and 


(ii) the information about the parts which may be recycled and which not 
be re-cycled; 


(c) to set-up adequate number of collection centers for the hazardous waste; 


(d) to informing treatment facilities of the product's composition, including the 
potential use of hazardous materials; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 283 


(e) to inform end customers regarding disposal of their old PV modules; 


(f) to create public awareness through advertisements, publications and other 
electronic media about the hazardous substances in their products which may cause 
ill effects on human body; 


(g) to reduce the movement of hazardous and other wind turbine waste and 
solar energy waste; 


(h) to take complete responsibility financial and otherwise for the recovery and 
recycling of the wind turbine waste and solar energy waste; 


(7) to design the products to facilitate dismantling and recovery; and 


(/) to report annually of the wind turbines and PV modules to the prescribed 
agency of appropriate Government. 


9. It shall be the duty of every consumer to ensure that the wind turbine waste and 
solar energy waste is not disposed of in any manner except in the manner prescribed for the 
purpose. 


0. It shall be the duty of every re-cycler to,— 


(a) get his product registered with the appropriate Government in such manner 
as may be prescribed; 


(b) re-cycle only those parts of an solar and wind energy equipment that has 
been marked as re-cyclable by the manufacturer; 


(c) achieve mandatory collection and re-cycling targets as may be prescribed; 


(d) ensure that he is utilizing environmentally sound technologies and 
possesses, adequate technical capabilities, requisite facilities and equipment to recycle, 
reprocess or reuse hazardous wastes, as approved by the Central Pollution Control 
Board; 


(e) ensure that the recycling processes are in accordance with the standards 
laid down in the guidelines published by the Central Pollution Control Board from 
time to time; 


(f) ensure that residue generated thereof is disposed of in a hazardous waste 
treatment storage and disposal facility; and 


(g) obtain authorization and maintain records of wind turbine waste and solar 
energy waste handled by him and file annual return to Central Pollution Control 
Board. 


l. The transportation of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste shall be carried 
out as per the manifest system whereby the transporter shall be required to prevent leakage 
of the wind turbine waste and solar energy waste to informal sector during transportation 
and hazardous waste shall be transported as per protocols. 


2. It shall be the responsibilities of the importer and distant dealer to,— 


(a) collect the wind turbine waste and solar energy waste from the consumer 
and deposit it to the collection centre or dismantler or re-cycler as designated by 
manufacture in such manner as may be prescribed, as the case may be; and 


(b) ensure all protocols are followed as prescribed for the manufacture. 


3. (/) Where a person or the company contravenes any of the provisions of this Act 
or of any rules made under the act shall be punished with imprisonment for a term and with 
fine in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Explanation.—For the purpose of this section "company" means any corporate and 
includes a firm or other association of individuals. 


Duty of 
consumer. 


Duty of 
Re-cycler. 


Transportation 
of Wind 
Turbine Waste 
and Solar 
Energy Waste. 


Duty of 
Importer and 
Distant 
Dealer. 


Penalty. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to 
make rules. 


284 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(2) Urban Local Bodies shall collect the fine under sub-section (/) and the funds 
may be used to strengthen wind turbine and solar energy waste disposal system within 
their jurisdiction. 


4. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


5. (J) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 285 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Wind and solar energy seem more promising than ever. Fossil fuel is one of the major 
causes of the climate crisis. Renewable energy can limit climate disruption and boost energy 
security. India plans to generate 500 gigawatts of non-fossil energy by 2030, including 
40 GW of wind and 280 GW of solar power. Questions remain about whether the waste 
created at the end of the life cycle from solar panels and wind turbines will be as dangerous 
as the fossil fuels which they aim to replace. 


Though most part of wind turbines are made up of recyclable materials such as steel, 
iron, copper, and aluminium, rotor blades are made of composite materials based on carbon 
fibres, plastics, and resins. Due to their large size and sturdy build, transportation becomes 
expensive. Therefore, wind turbine blades pose a significant economic and environmental 
challenge as they reach their end-of-life stage. With some techniques, these can be reused 
and, eventually, turbines need to be de-commissioned. 


Manufacturing solar panels often require the use of several noxious chemicals. Add 
to that, solar panels have an operating lifespan of around 20 to 30 years. A solar panel is 
essentially made up of several sheets of silicon crystals called cells. Each cell making upa 
solar panel is sandwiched by an aluminium and glass layer. Together, they form the energy- 
producing components that convert sunlight into electricity. Normally silicon is recyclable, 
but to improve the solar cell's electrical efficiency, metals such as cadmium and lead are 
added. Studies have shown these metals can leach out of the cells and get into groundwater, 
as well as affect plants. These metals also have detrimental effects on human health as lead 
is known to impair brain development in children, and cadmium is a carcinogen. Several 
components of solar energy devices are hazardous and should be disposed of in a manner 
that does not harm the environment. 


Due to these challenges, non-conventional energy resources will lose their inherent 
environmental benefit if legislative and infrastructure frameworks are not effective for waste 
handling, disposal, and recycling. If waste recycling is left to the vagaries of the informal 
sector, we would face irreversible environmental damage and health problems. Many workers 
engaged in informal waste management operations are the most vulnerable and unaware of 
the hazards associated with them. The legal framework for the disposal of solar and wind 
energy waste will enable the adoption of clean energy in an ethical way and manufacturers, 
distributors, and consumers will be held responsible for the generated waste. It will also 
enable us to develop new business models for renewable energy as this waste contains 
many valuable and rare materials. A holistic approach to unconventional energy includes 
not only a green and clean perspective but also resource and material management. 


The large cost gap between recycling and discarding solar panels and wind turbine 
blades in landfills points to an unpleasant truth that manufacturers or consumers will not 
dispose of the solar cells or panels properly without regulations. With regulations, there 
will be an encouragement to invest in research to reduce pollutants and recycling costs. 


Promoting the 3 R Concept (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Hazardous Waste, the 
bill envisages creating a policy and infrastructure framework for proper channelization of 
solar and wind energy waste for processing. The fundamental approach is precautionary or 
polluter-pays principles, with the cardinal principles of accountability, transparency, and 
sustainability to ensure its proper implementation. While oil and gas prices have reached 
record-high levels, renewables are getting cheaper all the time. If energy prices will be lower 
and more predictable, there will be positive effects on food and economic security. 


As society continues to adopt unconventional power, the problem of disposal may 
worsen in the coming decades and we will lose the benefits of using clean energy. It is 
estimated that solar and wind waste will become the most prevalent form of waste in landfills 
in India soon. It is, therefore, high time that matter may be regulated before the situation 
becomes alarming. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; POONAMBEN HEMATBHAI MAADAM 
July 5, 2022. 


286 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall constitute a Board to 
be known as the Central Board for the Prevention, Control and Abatement of wind turbine 
waste and solar energy waste for effective implementation of the provisions of the Act. 
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall facilitate infrastructure 
facilities for collection, storage, transportation and disposal of waste. The expenditure 
relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. The 
Central Government may also have to provide some financial assistance to the States for 
this purpose. Also, the expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees four hundred and 
sixty crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five crore is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause I5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 287 


Butt No. 98 or 2022 
A Bill further to amend the National Green Tribunal Act, 20/09. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (Z) This Act may be called the National Green Tribunal (Amendment) Act, 2022. — Short title and 


५ wipe ‘ commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 
of section 5. 


Amendment 


of section 22. 


Amendment 


of section 35. 


288 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


2. In section l5 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 200 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act),— 


(a) in sub-section (), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: 


"Provided that in cases of relief and compensation to be paid to a group of 
persons, the Tribunal shall quantify the amount of compensation to be paid to each 
victim of pollution and other environmental damages in such manner as may be 
prescribed."; and 


(b) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: 


"(LA) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of providing relief and 
compensation and restitution of property and environment under clauses (a), 
(b) and (c) of sub-section (), establish a permanent panel of technical accessors 
on such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed.". 


3. In section 22 of the principal Act, after the existing proviso, the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


"Provided further that no appeal shall be made to the Supreme Court by 
a person against whom the award of compensation or relief is issued unless he 
deposits fifty per cent. of the amount of compensation awarded by the Tribunal 
to the Environmental Relief Fund constituted under the Public Liability Insurance 
Act, l99.". 


4. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (I), for the words 
"manner and the purposes", the words "manner, purposes and publication of information" 
shall be substituted. 


9 of 200. 


6 of 99]. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 289 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The National Green Tribunal (NGT) was set up in the year 20I0 to provide a speedy 
and specialised form of adjudication of environment related cases and to provide 
compensation to victims of environmental damage. An expeditious mechanism is very much 
necessitated to finalise the process of assessing the compensation and disbursing it to the 
victims at the earliest. 


As per the present system, the compensation must first be remitted to the environment 
relief fund which was set up under the Public Liability Insurance Act, 99l. When the NGT 
awards the compensation to victims of environmental damage, it must be transferred from 
the fund to the district collector having local jurisdiction for a disbursement. In practice, 
when there are large number of victims, the NGT awards a lump sum, leaving it to the 
collector to determine individual claims. This goes against the objective of the National 
Green Tribunal Act, 200. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the National Green Tribunal Act, 20l0 with a view 
to provide process for assessment of environmental damage and quantifying environmental 
compensation and recast the process of appeal and formation of panel of technicians to 
assist the National Green Tribunal in surveying damage and quantifying compensation. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELuI; E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER 
August 0, 2022. 


290 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Tribunal shall establish a permanent panel 
of technical accessors for the purpose of quantifying relief and compensation and restitution 
of property and environment. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of 
about rupees one hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules regarding the 
publication of information for which the amount of compensation or relief credited to the 
Environment Relief Fund shall be utilized. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29] 


But No. 292 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 
of the 
Seventh 
Schedule. 


292 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In the Seventh Schedule to Constitution,— 


(i) in List II — State list, in entry 7, the words "and embankments" shall be 
omitted; and 


(ii) in List II — Concurrent List, after entry 47, the following entry shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


"48. Flood, riverine erosion control, embankments and management.". 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 293 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Despite flooding being an annual phenomena in the State of Assam, it is unfortunate 
that the struggle of tens of lakhs of people has been sidelined in the national discourse on 
development. In the previous seven decades ([95-2022), there was not a single year when 
the State didn't endure flooding. Moreover, over the years the floods have gotten more 
widespread and fiercer, inflicting increasing losses and damage to the State's economy, 
agriculture and infrastructure, with human misery also growing all around. 


The State witnessed disastrous floods in the years 95, 968, 972, 987, 988, 2004, 
2008, 202 and most recently in 209. Observing what has already transpired in the months 
of May and June, the year 2022 has shaped up to become one of those catastrophic flood 
years for the State. Erosion too is a grave concern —the Assam Water Resources Department 
estimated the annual average loss of land due to river erosion at nearly 8000 hectares, 
causing damages running into hundreds of crores every year. 


While the modern approach to flood management is dominated by Structural solutions 
like embankments, the necessity of the hour is to implement an integrated flood and erosion 
management strategy and design a long term action plan expressly for the State of Assam to 
minimise the twin calamity of flood and erosion. Given the nature and scale of the problem, 
and that it involves the larger question of river-basin management, the role and support of 
the Union Government is key. The comprehensive tackling of flooding and riverine erosion, 
cannot be left to the meager resources of a single state like Assam, 40% of Assam's area 
(close to 32 lakh hectares) is flood-prone, roughly four times higher than the national mark. 


The Standing Committee of Parliament on Water Resources in 202, expressing concern 
at the nationwide menace of flood mooted that "flood control and management" should be 
brought under the concurrent list of the Constitution for the overall national interest of 
integrated development of water resources. This intervention is crucial since most rivers 
flow across multiple States and flood control measure taken by one State State may have 
inter-state ramifications. 


Thus, considering the above facts, it is proposed in the Bill that "flood, Riverine 
erosion control embankments and management" be included in the Seventh schedule to the 
Constitution so that both the Centre and State governments can play their due role in the 
field of flood and riverine erosion control and management. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DE Lut; PRADYUT BORDOLOI 
November 2, 2022. 


294 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bit No. 94 oF 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Hindu Succession Act, |956. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
Short title and l. (J) This Act may be called the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 2. In section 2 of the Hindu Succession Act, 956,— 30 of 956. 


of section 2. हि : . हि 
(i) in sub-section (/), after clause (८), the following clause shall be inserted, 


namely:— 


"(cd) to the Members of any Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of 
clause (25) of article 366 of the Constitution"; and 


(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 295 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
As per section 2(2) of the Hindu Succession Act, 956, the provisions of this Act do 
not apply to the Members of any Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of clause 25 of article 
366 of the Constitution. This creates unjust situation wherein the members of the Scheduled 
Tribes, irrespective of gender, are not legally entitled to an equal share in their father's/ 
Hindu Undivided Family properties. Such discrimination is antithetical to article l4 of the 


Constitution which time and again have been clarified by the Hon'ble Supreme Court at the 
Madras High Court. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 956 with a view to 
provide equal rights to members of Schedule Tribes irrespective of gender difference on the 
property of their father's/Hindu Undivided Family properties. 


New DELHI; GAUTHAM SIGAMANI PON 
July 04, 2023. 


296 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bit No. 03 oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) 
Act, 957. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 
Short title l. (/) This Act may be called the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) 
and Amendment Act, 2023. 


commencement. 
(2)It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notificatiol 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 297 


2. After section 4 of the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) 
20 of 957. Act, |957, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:— 


"4A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4 of the Act, the Central 
Government shall, as soon as may be, by issuing a notification, exclude coal mining 
activities in,— 


(i) Vadaseri and East Sethiathope lignite blocks which fall in the zone protected 
under the Tamil Nadu Protected Agriculture Zone Development Act, 2020; and 


(ii) Michaelpatti which falls in a major paddy growing area adjoining a very 
fertile part of the Cauvery delta.". 


Insertion of 
new section 
4A. 


Exclusion of 
Vadaseri and 
East 
Sethiahope 
lignite blocks 
and Michael- 
patti in the 
State of Tamil 
Nadu from 
operation of 
coal mining. 


298 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


The Vadaseri and East of Sethiathope lignite blocks all in the zone protected under 
the Tamil Nadu Protected Agriculture Zone Development Act, 2020 and Michaelpatti falls in 
a major paddy growing area adjoining a very fertile part of the Cauvery delta. The 
Government's unilateral move to auction three coal blocks in above areas had the potential 
to cause considerable disquiet in the delta, the main food producing area in the State of 
Tamil Nadu. The Tamil Nadu Protected Agriculture Zone Development Act, 2020, prevents 
the exploitation of coal bed methane. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI GAUTHAM SIGAMANI PON 
July 4, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 299 


Butt No. l!0 07 2023 


A Bill to provide for the protection of privacy and security in the Indian telecommunication 
sector, establish a comprehensive framework for the collection, storage, and use of 
personal data by telecom service providers, in accordance with the principles of 
transparency, users rights and consent and for matters connected therewith. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTERI 
PRELIMINARY 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Indian Telecom (Privacy and Security) Act, 2023. हक title, 
an 

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 

in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


commencement. 


Definitions. 


300 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: 


(a) "Authority" means the Data Protection Authority as designated by the 
Central Government under the provisions of this Act; 


(b) "automated" means any digital process capable of operating automatically 
in response to instructions given or otherwise for the purpose of processing data; 


(c) "business data" means data collected and processed by entities for 
commercial or business purposes, including customer data, financial transaction data, 
marketing data, and any other data related to the operations of a business entity; 


(d) "consent" means any freely given, specific, informed, and unambiguous 
indication of the user's agreement to the processing of their personal data; 


(e) "data" means a representation of information, facts, concepts, opinions or 
instructions in a manner suitable for communication, interpretation or processing by 
humans or by automated means; 


(f) "data fiduciary" means any person who alone or in conjunction with other 
persons determines the purpose and means of processing of personal data; 


(g) "data principal" means the individual to whom the personal data relates and 
where such individual is a child includes the parents or lawful guardian of such a 
child; 


(A) "data processor" means any person who processes personal data on behalf 
of a Data Fiduciary; 


(i) "Data Protection Officer" means an individual appointed as such by a 
Significant Data Fiduciary under the provisions of this Act; 


(9) "gain" means— 


(i) a gain in property or a supply of services, whether temporary or 
permanent; or 


(ii) an opportunity to earn remuneration or greater remuneration or to 
gain a financial advantage otherwise than by way of remuneration. 


(k) "harm", in relation to a Data Principal, means— 

(i) any bodily harm; or 

(ii) distortion or theft of identity; or 

(iii) harassment; or 

(iv) prevention of lawful gain or causation of significant loss; 
(J) "loss" means— 


(i) a loss in property or interruption in supply of services, whether 
temporary or permanent; or 


(ii) a loss of an opportunity to earn remuneration or greater remuneration 
or to gain a financial advantage otherwise than by way of remuneration. 


(m) "National Data" means data collected and processed by public entities or 
authorized agencies in the interest of national security, public safety, or for the purpose 
of fulfilling legal obligations or public functions; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 30] 


(n) "person" includes— 
(i) an individual; 
(ii) a Hindu Undivided Family; 
(iii) a company; 
(iv) a firm; 


(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not; 


(vi) the State; and 


(vii) every artificial juristic person, not falling within any of the preceding 
sub-clauses; 


(०) "personal data" means information relating to an identified or identifiable 
individual, including but not limited to name, address, contact details, identification 
numbers, biometric data, financial information, health information and sensitive 
personal information; 


(p) "personal data breach" means any unauthorised processing of personal 
data or accidental disclosure, acquisition, sharing, use, alteration, destruction for 
loss of access to personal data, that compromises the confidentiality, integrity or 
availability of personal data. 


(q) "prescribed" means prescribed by Rules made under the provisions of this 
Act; 


(r) "processing" in relation to personal data means an automated operation or 
set of operations performed on digital personal data, and may include operations 
such as collection, recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation, alteration, 
retrieval, use, alignment or combination, indexing, sharing, disclosure by transmission, 
dissemination or otherwise making available, restriction, erasure or destruction; 


(s) "proceeding" means any action taken by the Board under the provisions of 
this Act; and 


(t) "public data" means information that is publicly available and accessible, 
including data published by Government agencies, public institutions, or made 
available by individuals through public channels, such as social media profiles; 


(u) "public interest" means in the interest of any of the following: — 
(i) sovereignty and integrity of India; 
(ii) security of the State; 
(iii) friendly relations with foreign States; 
(iv) maintenance of public order; 


(v) preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence 
relating to the preceding sub-clauses; and 


(vi) preventing dissemination of false statements of facts. 


(v) "Telecom service provider" means any person or entity engaged in providing 
telecommunication services to the public, including voice, data, or any other form of 
communication service; 


(w) "User" means any person who avails or has availed of the services provided 
by a telecom service provider; 


Telecom 
Service 
Providers to 
adopt Privacy 
Principles. 


User rights. 


Data breach 
notification. 


302 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


CHAPTER II 
PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION 


3. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, it shall be the responsibility of every telecom service provider to adopt and implement 
privacy policies and practices that ensure the protection of users' privacy, in line with 
nationally recognized privacy principles. 


(2) The privacy policy under sub-section (/) shall be transparent, easily accessible, 
and written in clear and concise language. 


(3) Every Telecom service providers shall obtain explicit consent from users for the 
collection, processing, and storage of their personal data in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


4. Every User shall have the right to,— 


(a) access his personal data held by telecom service providers and rectify 
any inaccuracies or errors; 


(b) withdraw consent for the processing of his personal data, subject to the 
provisions of this Act; 


(c) request the erasure or deletion of his personal data when it is no longer 
necessary for the purpose it was collected or processed; and 


(d) data portability, allowing him to transfer his personal data from one telecom 
service provider to another. 


5. (/) Every Telecom service provider shall establish a mechanism to promptly detect 
and report any unauthorized access, use or disclosure of personal data, commonly referred 
to as data breaches in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) For the purpose of sub-section (), the telecom service provider shall, in case of a 
data breach, notify the affected users without undue delay with relevant information about 
the breach and the measures taken or to be taken to mitigate the adverse effects of such 
data breach in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The data breach notification under sub-section (2) shall be issued promptly and 
without undue delay after the detection of the data breach, taking into account the nature 
and severity of the breach and the potential risks to individuals. 


(4) The data breach notification process under sub-section (l) shall include the 
following elements, namely:— 


(A) Identification and assessment under which every telecom service 
provider shall,— 


(i) promptly investigate and assess the scope, impact, and causes of the 
data breach; and 


(ii) determine the types of data affected, the number of individuals 
impacted, and the potential risks associated with the breach. 


(B) Notification to affected individuals under which every telecom service 
provider shall,— 


(i) notify affected individuals without undue delay, providing clear and 
concise information about the breach, the types of data involved, potential 
risks, and recommended steps to mitigate harm; and 


(ii) ensure that the notification is accessible, written in plain language, 
and delivered through appropriate communication channels. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 303 


(C) Notification to Relevant Authorities under which every telecom service 
provider shall notify the appropriate regulatory authorities, such as the designated 
Data Protection Authority, about the breach, providing comprehensive details of the 
incident, including the nature of the breach, the affected data, and the measures taken 
to address the breach and mitigate harm. 


(D) Collaboration with Law Enforcement under which every telecom service 
provider shall,— 


(i) cooperate with law enforcement agencies in cases where criminal 
activity is suspected or involved in the data breach; and 


(ii) provide necessary information and assistance to support 
investigations and prosecution. 


(E) Remediation Measures under which every telecom service provider shall 
take immediate steps to contain and remediate the breach, including closing security 
vulnerabilities, restoring affected systems, and implementing measures to prevent 
similar incidents in the future. 


(F) Communication with Third Parties under which every telecom service 
provider shall,— 


(i) assess and communicate the breach to relevant third parties, such as 
business partners or service providers, whose data may have been compromised 
or impacted by the breach; and 


(ii) collaborate with the parties concerned to ensure coordinated response 
and protection of shared data. 


(5) For the purpose of this Act, every telecom service provider shall,— 


(a) maintain records of all data breaches, including their causes, impact, and 
remedial actions taken which shall be made available for review by the designated 
Data Protection Authority under section |l; and 


(b) periodically review and update their data breach notification mechanisms to 
ensure their effectiveness in responding to evolving threats and privacy risks, past 
incidents and best practices shall be incorporated into the continuous improvement 
of breach response procedures. 


(6) The designated Data Protection Authority under section I shall after receipt of 
records of data breach by the telecom service provider provide guidance and support to 
entities regarding data breach notification obligations, best practices for incident response, 
and the Coordination of breach-related activities to ensure consistency and effectiveness 
in protecting individuals’ rights and interests. 


(7) Any non-compliance with data breach notification requirements under this Act 
may result in penalties, fines, or other appropriate sanctions imposed by the designated 
Regulatory Authority, reinforcing the importance of timely and transparent communication 
in the event of a breach. 


6. The Central Government shall,— 


(a) conduct public awareness and education campaigns to inform individuals 
about their rights and actions to take in the event of a data breach in such manner as 
may be prescribed; and 


(b) encourage telecom service providers, industry associations, and relevant 
stakeholders to share information, best practices, and insights regarding data breach 
prevention, detection, and response, thereby fostering a collective effort in 
safeguarding data privacy and security. 


Central 
Government 
to conduct 
public 
awareness 
campaign. 


Encryption 
Standards and 
Data Security 
Measures. 


Telecom 
Service 
Providers to 
mitigate the 
impact of 
Data 
Breaches. 


Encouraging 
Data Security 
Best 
Practices. 


Security 
safeguards. 


Data 
Protection 
Authority. 


304 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


CHAPTER III 
ENCRYPTION STANDARDS AND Data SECURITY MEASURES 


7. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish 
robust encryption standards for effective data security measures in the Indian 
telecommunication sector to recognize the importance of safeguarding personal data and 
upholding the privacy rights of individuals in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The encryption standard established under sub-section (i) shall,— 


(a) outline the significance of encryption and other security measures focused 
on the protection of personal data; 


(b) require telecom service providers to implement encryption standards that 
align with the secure transmission and storage of personal data to protect it from 
unauthorized access and interception; 


(c) mandate the use of strong encryption algorithms and key management 
practices to maintain the confidentiality and integrity of data throughout its lifecycle; 


(d) prioritize the implementation of appropriate technical and organizational 
measures to safeguard personal information against unauthorized access, data 
breaches and misuse of sensitive data; 


(e) involve the use of cryptographic keys to encode and decode data ensure 
that only authorized parties may access and understand the information; and 


(f) enable the telecom service provider to meet their legal obligations by 
safeguarding personal data from unauthorized access and protecting individuals' 
privacy rights. 


8. Every telecom service provider shall, in the event of a data breach, promptly notify 
affected individuals to mitigate the potential harm caused by the unauthorized access to 
their data. 


9. The Central Government shall encourage telecom service provider to adopt best 
practices in data security including the implementation of encryption technologies to protect 
personal data, fostering trust with customers and partners improve their overall data 
management processes and secure handling of data, streamlining data management 
procedures, and enhancing the efficiency of data handling within the Indian 
telecommunications sector. 


0. (7) Every telecom service provider shall implement appropriate technical and 
organizational measures to protect personal data against unauthorized access, disclosure, 
alteration, or destruction including encryption, access controls, firewalls, and regular security 
audits. 


(2) Every telecom service provider shall ensure that their employees and contractors 
adhere to strict security protocols. 


CHAPTER IV 
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT 


. (/) The Central Government shall designate the Telecom Regulatory Authority of 
India (TRAIT) as Data Protection Authority to oversee the implementation and enforcement 
of privacy and data protection policies in the Indian telecommunications sector, in 
coordination with the State and Union territory authorities. 


(2)The Data Protection Authority designated under sub-section (/) shall collaborate 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 305 


with the State and Union territory authorities to formulate and implement regulations and 
guidelines that ensure the protection of privacy and data security in the telecommunications 
industry, taking into account the specific requirements and concerns of each region. 


(3) The Data Protection Authority, in collaboration with the State and Union Territory 
authorities, shall,— 


(a) monitor and assess the compliance of telecom service providers with privacy 
and data protection regulations at the regional level; 


(b) investigate complaints and reports of privacy violations within their 
respective jurisdictions, including unauthorized access, use or disclosure of personal 
data; 


(c) conduct audits and inspections of telecom service providers' data protection 
practices in coordination with the State and Union territory authorities; 


(d) impose penalties, fines, or other appropriate sanctions on non-compliant 
telecom service providers in accordance with the regional regulations and guidelines; 


(e) collaborate with the State and Union territory authorities, other regulatory 
bodies, law enforcement agencies, and international organizations to address privacy 
and data protection issues at the regional and national levels; 


(f) promote public awareness and education regarding privacy rights and the 
importance of data protection in the telecommunications sector, in coordination with 
the State and Union territory authorities; 


(g) issue region specific guidelines, codes of practice and standards to ensure 
the effective implementation of privacy and data protection measures including 
guidelines for,— 


(i) requirements for obtaining and managing user consent for the 
collection, processing, and storage of personal data, tailored to the regional 
context; 


(ii) specifications for secure storage and transmission of personal data, 
including encryption standards, as per regional requirements; 


(iii) protocols for data breach notifications and incident response 
mechanisms, ensuring coordination with the State and Union territory 
authorities; 


(iv) the protection of user rights, such as the right to access, rectify and 
delete personal data aligned with regional privacy laws; and 


(v) measures to ensure the privacy and security of communication services, 
including the prohibition of mass surveillance and the protection of encryption 
technologies, in coordination with the State and Union territory authorities. 


(h) conduct regular assessments of the effectiveness of privacy and data 
protection policies at the regional and national levels; and 


(i) make recommendations for improvements and updates to ensure their 
alignment with emerging privacy challenges, regional requirements, and 
technological advancements. 


(4) The Data Protection Authority designated under sub-section (i) shall have the 
necessary powers and resources, in coordination with the State and Union territory 
authorities, to fulfill its responsibilities effectively. 


(5) The Data Protection Authority may appoint such members of personnel with 
expertise in privacy, data protection, and telecommunications at the regional level to support 
its functions in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Prohibition of 
Mass 
Surveillance. 


Transparency 
in 
Government 
Surveillance. 


Judicial 
Review. 


Protection of 
Whistleblowers. 


Safeguarding 
Communication 
Encryption. 


Oversight and 
Accountability. 


306 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(6) The Central Government shall provide the Data Protection Authority and the 
regional authorities with the independence and autonomy required to carry out their duties 
effectively and ensure that the Data Protection Authority and the regional authorities 
operate transparently and are accountable to the public and stakeholders. 


(7) The Data Protection Authority, in coordination with the State and Union territory 
authorities, shall maintain a proactive approach to privacy and data protection by 
collaborating with industry stakeholders, academia, and civil society organizations at the 
regional and national level to help stay abreast of emerging technologies, best practices, 
and evolving privacy concerns specific to each region. 


(8) The Central Government, in consultation with the State and Union territory 
authorities shall periodically review the performance and effectiveness in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER V 
PRIVACY AND PROTECTION AGAINST MASS SURVEILLANCE 


2.(/) No telecom service provider shall engage in or facilitate any formof mass 
surveillance of users communications, including the bulk collection, interception, or 
monitoring of personal data without the consent of the lawful authority. 


(2) Any requests for interception or monitoring of personal data shall be based on 
lawful grounds and subject to judicial review. 


3. (/) The Central Government shall ensure transparency in government surveillance 
activities by issuing an annual report that provides information on the number and nature 
of surveillance requests made by government agencies. 


(2) The report shall also include details regarding the legal basis for the surveillance, 
the duration of surveillance and the measures taken to protect the privacy and security of 
personal data. 


4. (J) Any request for interception or monitoring of personal data by government 
agencies shall require prior authorization from a competent judicial authority, in accordance 
with the principles of due process and proportionality. 


(2) The judicial authority shall review the necessity and proportionality of the 
surveillance request, taking into consideration the potential impact on privacy rights and 
the existence of alternative means to achieve the legitimate objective. 


5. (/) Any whistleblowers who disclose information related to unlawful surveillance 
practices shall be protected from any form of retaliation or prosecution. 


(2) It shall be the responsibility of the Central to establish a Whistleblower protection 
mechanism to encourage individuals to come forward and report any violations of privacy 
rights in the context of mass surveillance. 


6. No telecom service provider shall be compelled to introduce vulnerabilities or 
weaken encryption technologies in their communication services. 
7. (7) The Data Protection Authority shall have the power to,— 


(a) investigate any complaints or reports related to violations of privacy rights, 
including unauthorized mass surveillance; 


(b) impose penalties and sanctions on telecom service providers found guilty 
of engaging in unlawful mass surveillance practices; and 


(c) conduct audits and assessments to ensure compliance with privacy 
regulations and the protection of citizens' rights. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 307 


8. (/) The Central Government shall actively engage in international cooperation to 
address cross border surveillance issues and promote the protection of privacy rights in 
the global context. 


(2) For the purpose of sub-section (I), bilateral and multilateral agreements shall be 
established by the Central Government to facilitate information sharing and cooperation in 
investigating and combating unlawful mass surveillance activities. 


CHAPTER VI 
ETHICAL AND MIXED LICENSING 


9. The Central Government shall, in order to promote ethical practices in the 
telecommunications sector, establish a framework for ethical licensing to ensure that 
telecom service providers adhere to ethical standards, including transparency, accountability 
and responsible business conduct. 


20. Every telecom service provider seeking ethical license under section |9 shall meet 
specific eligibility criteria, which may include:— 


(a) demonstrated commitment to user privacy and data protection; 
(b) compliance with relevant ethical guidelines and codes of conduct; 


(c) Implementation of measures to mitigate environmental impact and promote 
sustainability; 


(d) support for social causes and corporate social responsibility initiatives. 
2. Every ethically licensed telecom service providers shall,— 

(a) adopt transparent and fair business practices; 

(b) protect user privacy and confidentiality; 


(c) safeguard personal data in accordance with applicable privacy laws and 
regulations; 


(d) promote digital inclusivity and accessibility for all users; 
(e) contribute to environmental sustainability efforts; and 


(f) support social initiatives, community development, and digital literacy 
programmes. 


22. The Central Government shall, in recognition of the benefits of public and private 
collaboration in the telecommunications sector, establish a frame work for mixed licensing 
for partnerships between public and private entities to promote efficient and inclusive 
provision of telecommunication services. 


23. (/) The Central Government may enter into partnerships with private entities for 
the provision of telecommunication services, subject to transparent and competitive bidding 
processes. 


(2) The terms and conditions of public-private partnerships under sub-section (l) 
shall be clearly defined, ensuring accountability, fair competition and in public interest. 


24. (/) The mixed license holders shall have the access to public infrastructure, 
spectrum allocation, or financial incentives. 


(2)The mixed license holders shall bear certain responsibilities, including: — 
(a) complying with regulatory requirements and standards; 


(b) Ensuring fair pricing and quality of services; 


International 
Cooperation. 


Ethical 
Licensing 
Framework. 


Eligibility 
Criteria for 
Ethical 
Licensing. 


Obligation and 
Responsibilities 
of Ethically 
Licensed 
Providers. 


Mixed 
Licensing 
Framework. 


Public-Private 
Partnership. 


Benefits and 
Responsibilities 
of Mixed 
License 
Holders. 


Review and 
Monitoring. 


Revocation 

of Ethical and 
Mixed 
Licenses. 


Promotion 
and 
Recognition. 


Collaboration 
and 
Knowledge 
Sharing. 


Basis for 
lawful Data 
Collection. 


Notice and 
Transparency. 


Consent and 
Withdrawal. 


Data Storage, 
Security and 


Confidentiality. 


308 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(c) protecting user privacy and data in accordance with applicable laws; and 


(d) contributing to the development of telecommunications infrastructure in 
underserved areas. 


25. () The Data Protection Authority shall review and monitor the compliance of 
ethical and mixed license holders with their obligations and responsibilities. 


(2) For the purpose of sub-section(l), regular audits, inspections and reporting 
mechanisms shall be implemented to ensure adherence to ethical standards and regulatory 
requirements. 


26. (/) The Ethical or mixed licenses issued under this Act may be revoked in cases of 
non-compliance with the prescribed obligations and responsibilities. 


(2) The revocation process shall include due process, including notice, an opportunity 
to be heard and appeal mechanisms. 


27. (7) The Central Government shall establish mechanisms to recognize and promote 
ethical and mixed license holders who demonstrate exceptional commitment to ethical 
practices, sustainability and social responsibility. 


(2) The recognition under sub-section () may include awards, incentives or preferential 
treatment in public procurement processes. 


28. () The Ethical and mixed license holders shall be encouraged to collaborate and 
share best practices to further enhance ethical standards, technological advancements and 
social impact in the telecommunications sector. 


(2) For the purpose of sub-section (/), platforms and forums may be established to 
facilitate knowledge exchange and foster innovation among ethical and mixed license holders. 


CHAPTER VII 
COLLECTION, STORAGE AND PROCESSING OF DATA BY TELECOM PUBLIC SERVICE PROVIDER 


29. Every telecom service provider shall collect data, including personal, public, 
business and national data, based on the consent of the data subject, compliance with legal 
obligations, performance of a contract, protection of vital interests, public interest or legitimate 
interests pursued by the entity or a third party. 


30. (J) Every telecom service provider shall provide clear and concise notices to 
individuals at the time of data collection, informing them about the purposes, legal basis, 
categories of data collected, data retention period and any third parties with whom the data 
may be shared. 


(2) The notices and sub-section (/) shall contain the details about the rights the 
individuals have over their data, including the right to access, rectify, erase, restrict 
processing, data portability, and object to the processing of their personal data. 


3. (/) Every telecom service provider shall obtain voluntarily given, specific, informed 
and un-ambiguous consent from individuals before collecting their data, unless an alternative 
lawful basis applies including obtaining consent for the collection, storage and processing 
of personal, public, business and national data. 


(2) The Individuals shall have the right to withdraw their consent at any time and the 
telecom service provider shall respect and facilitate the withdrawal process. 


32. (/) Every telecom service provider shall implement appropriate technical and 
organizational measures to ensure the security and confidentiality of the data they 
collect,store, and process applicable to personal, public, business and national data. 


(2) The Data under sub-section (l) shall be stored in a manner that prevents 
unauthorized access, accidental loss, destruction, alteration, or disclosure and encryption, 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 309 


access controls, regular security assessments and other relevant security measures shall 
be employed to safeguard data in such manner as may be prescribed. 


33. (/) Every telecom service provider shall retain data, including personal, public, 
business and national data as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes for which it was 
collected, unless a longer retention period is required or permitted by law. 


(2) Every telecom service provider shall establish data retention policies that are 
proportionate, considering the nature of the data, legal requirements, legitimate business 
needs and any specific provisions related to public or national data and once the intention 
period expires, the data shall be deleted. 


CHPATER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


34. No telecom service provider shall discriminate against users based on_ their 
personal characteristics, including but not limited to race, religion, gender or sexual 
orientation, in the provision of services or the processing of personal data. 


35. The Central Government shall undertake public awareness campaigns to educate 
citizens about their privacy rights, the risks associated with mass surveillance and the 
measures they may take to protect their privacy online. 


36. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the Authority for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. 


37. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law, for the time being in force, regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act. 


38. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


39. (7) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Data 
Retention. 


Non- 
Discrimination 
and Equality. 


Public 
Awareness and 
Education in 
mass 
surveillance. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Act not to be 
in derogation 
of other Laws. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

In recent years, there has been a growing emphasis on privacy and data protection 
globally. In India, the right to privacy was recognized as a fundamental right by the 
Supreme Court in the landmark Puttaswamy judgment. By establishing and maintaining an 
independent and empowered Data Protection Authority requires substantial financial 
resources. Robust compliance and enforcement mechanisms are essential for ensuring 
adherence to privacy regulations. Effective public awareness and education initiatives will 
play a crucial role in promoting a privacy-conscious culture. By investing in privacy, India 
can foster a secure and trusted digital environment, promote innovation, and enhance the 
rights and trust of its citizens. 


Data security measures are crucial in maintaining the confidentiality, integrity, and 
availability of personal data. In an increasingly interconnected world, where threats to data 
privacy are ever-present, organizations must prioritize the implementation of appropriate 
technical and organizational measures to safeguard personal information. These measures 
protect against unauthorized access, data breaches, and misuse of sensitive data. 


Encryption is a fundamental data protection technique that converts sensitive 
information into an unintelligible format, rendering it unreadable to unauthorized individuals. 
By employing encryption, organizations can maintain the confidentiality and integrity of 
personal data, thereby bolstering data security and protecting individuals’ privacy rights. 


Implementing encryption measures brings several benefits to organizations and 
individuals within the Indian telecommunications sector. First and foremost, encryption 
also acts as a powerful deterrent to potential attackers, as encrypted data remains unreadable 
and unusable without the appropriate decryption keys. 


Encryption plays a crucial role in minimizing the impact of data breaches by ensuring 
that even if data is compromised, it remains secure and protected from unauthorized use. 
This significantly reduces the risks associated with data breaches and enhances the trust 
individuals place in organizations handling their data. 


Compliance with encryption standards and other data security measures outlined in 
the Indian Telecom Privacy and Security Bill is essential for organizations operating within 
the telecommunications sector. 


Compliance demonstrates a commitment to protecting personal data and upholding 
individuals' privacy rights. Organizations that adhere to the prescribed encryption standards, 
employ robust encryption technologies, and implement effective data security measures 
can demonstrate their accountability and responsibility in handling sensitive information. 


The Bill emphasizes the need for continual evaluation and improvement of data security 
measures. As technology evolves and new threats emerge, organizations must remain 
vigilant and adapt their encryption standards. 


Hence this Bill 


New DE Lut; RITESH PANDEY 
July 04, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3i] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause |l of the Bill provides for the appointment of members of personnel — with 
expertise in privacy, data protection, and telecommunications at the regional level to support 
the functions of the Data Protection Authority. Clause 36 provides that the Central 
Government shall under public awareness campaigns to educate citizens about their privacy 
rights and risks associated with mass Surveillance alongwith the measures they may take 
to protect their privacy online. Clause 36 provides for the grant of funds by the Central 
Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred 
crore per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 39 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


Short title, 
and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


3i2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bit No. 286 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Citizenship Act, /9535. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In the Citizenship Act, 955 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in 
section 2, in sub-section (/), in clause (b), after sub-clause (ii), the following second proviso 
shall be inserted, namely: 


"Provided further that any person belonging to the Tamil community from Sri Lanka, 
who entered into India after Ist day of July, !983 shall not be treated as illegal migrant for the 
purposes of this Act." 


57 of ॥955. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3i3 


3. In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, in clause (d), in the proviso, for the Amendment 
words "Bangladesh or Pakistan", the words "Bangladesh or Pakistan and any person Of the Third 
belonging to the Tamil community in Sri Lanka" shall be substituted. 32606; 


3]4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Citizenship Act, 955 (57 of 955) was enacted to provide for the acquisition and 
determination of Indian citizenship. It is a historical fact that trans-border migration of Tamil 
population has been taking place continuously to the territories of India from the areas 
comprised in Sri Lanka since the wake of the Sri Lankan Civil War. Tens of thousands of Sri 
Lankan Tamils have fled to India to seek shelter and continued to stay in India even if their 
travel documents have expired or they have incomplete or no documents. According to the 
records of the Ministry of Home Affairs, there are over 92,000 Sri Lankan Tamil refugees 
residing in Tamil Nadu as of 202]. 


Under the existing provisions of the Citizenship Act, migrants belonging to the Tamil 
community from Sri Lanka who entered into India without valid travel documents or if the 
validity of their documents has expired are regarded as illegal migrants and ineligible to 
apply for Indian citizenship under section 5 or section 6 of the Act. 


The Bill seeks to grant immunity to the migrant of the aforesaid Sri Lankan Tamil 
community so that any proceedings against them regarding in respect of their status of 
migration or citizenship does not bar them from applying for Indian citizenship. The competent 
authority, to be prescribed under the Act, shall not consider any proceedings initiated 
against such persons regarding their status as illegal migrant or their citizenship matter 
while considering their application under section 5 or section 6 of the Act, if they fulfil all the 
conditions for grant of citizenship. 


Many persons of Indian origin including persons belonging to the said minority 
community from the Sri Lanka have been applying for citizenship under section 5 of the 
Citizenship Act, l955 but they are unable to produce proof of their Indian origin. Hence, 
they are forced to apply for citizenship by naturalisation under section 6 of the said Act, 
which, inter alia, prescribe twelve years residency as a qualification for naturalisation in 
terms of the Third Schedule to the Act. This denies them many opportunities and advantages 
that may accrue only to the citizens of India, even though they are likely to stay in India 
permanently. Therefore, it is proposed to amend the Third Schedule to the Act to make 
applicants belonging to the Tamil community from Sri Lanka eligible for citizenship by 
naturalisation if they can establish their residency in India for five years instead of the 
existing eleven years. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DE Lut; KALANIDHI VEERASWAMY 
July 3, 2022 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


Bit No. 3 oF 2023 
A Bill to amend the Emigration Act, /963. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Emigration (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title and 


: nes é commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


inthe Official Gazette, appoint. 


3l of 983. 2. After section 8 of the Emigration Act, |983 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Insertion of 


Act), the following Chapter and sections thereunder shall be inserted, namely:— =a Chapter 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


"CHAPTER ITA 
WELFARE OF EMIGRANTS 


Central 8A. The Central Government shall undertake or cause to be undertaken, specially in 
Government the countries where there are substantial number of emigrants, with a view to assess the 
to access the folowing in regard to emigrants:— 


details of 
emigrants. (a) access to basic human rights; 

(b) access to healthcare facilities including emergency service; 

(c) access to social protection schemes of the destination country; 

(d) access to legal support services in cases of despite resolution with the 

recruiting agent; and 

(e) access to timely grievance redressal. 
Register of 8B. The Central Government shall prepare and maintain a register of records containing 
es of the details of emigrants and their dependent in such manner as may be prescribed. 
migrants. 
Formulation 8C. (J) The Central Government shall formulate and implement welfare schemes for 
of Welfare emigrants in such manner as may be prescribed. 
Schemes for 
Emigration. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing procession, such schemes 

shall provide for,— 

(a) old age protection; 

(b) life insurance; 

(c) disability coverage; 

(d) skill upgradation; and 

(e) such other measures as the Central Government may consider necessary. 
Constitution 8D. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official gazette, constitute 


of Emigrants a Fund to be known as the Emigrants Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this 
Welfare Fund. Act 


(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf grants such sums of money to the Fund as the Central Government may think 
fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(3)The Fund shall be utilized for the purposes of implementation of welfare schemes 
formulated under section 8D.". 


Amendment 3. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (), for the words "two years and 
of section 24... with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees", the words "twenty five years and with 
fine which may extend to rupees five lakh" shall be substituted. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3[7 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Indians have a long history of migration to many parts of the world like Australia, 
Canada, UAE, United Kingdom and the USA. Post-Independence, migrants have taken up 
jobs in almost all professions ranging from semi-skilled work in the construction industry to 
highly skilled jobs as doctors and engineers. Today, India has the world's largest diaspora 
community. Data suggest that India's diaspora communities are in as many as |0 countries 
where they have not just secured jobs but are as successful as to become CEOs of companies 
and start-ups such as Google LLC & Alphabet Inc, Microsoft and Adobe. These emigrants 
have contributed to not only the economic development of their host countries but have 
equally benefited India. In 202], India received U.S. $87 billion in official remittances which 
was the world's largest such flow, amounting to nearly fifteen per cent of all global transfers 
to low and middle-income countries, as noted by the World Bank. 


But the growing number of Indian migrants overseas has proportionately heightened 
the number of issues faced by them. The highly skilled population from India as per 
Government data migrates to countries like the UK, USA and Canada, where they have time 
and again faced racially motivated attacks. Indians moving for tech-based jobs have been 
exploited with low wages, long working hours and sometimes lawsuits for quitting the job. 
As per an independent report, Indian workers in the US are also being sued for quitting their 
jobs. 


Many Indian migrants comprising semi-skilled and unskilled workers migrated to Gulf 
countries to work in construction and oil factories. These emigrants under Emigrant Check 
Required (ECR) migrate for a considerable number of years under contract. They are 
particularly vulnerable due to their socio-economic and occupational status. Over years 
Ministry of External Affairs has received many complaints from emigrants for pending 
wages, absence of any social support, language barriers, discrimination for being foreign, 
and poor living conditions. 


While the Ministry of External Affairs has been looking after the emigrants' affairs as 
directed in the Emigration Act of 983. However, the core issues of safety and welfare of 
emigrants is still to be addressed majorly because the Ministry does not maintain data on 
Indian citizens going abroad for migration. Without proper data, effective address of the 
issues of such a large Indian diaspora spread across countries is not possible. Further, it 
has attained limited success in regulating the agents who deceive migrants by overpricing 
visas and incomplete information about the contract period, salary, overtime and related 
details. The Indian Government has so far not institutionalized any permanent mechanism 
and resources with host countries to evacuate its workers in case of emergency. The 
evacuation of l-2 million workers in a limited time becomes not only tough but also a 
security challenge. 


This Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Emigration Act, !983 with a view to address 
the emigrants’ issues pertaining to social security and healthcare and also prioritize 
maintaining robust data of all the Indian emigrants for better-informed decisions and fastening 
their grievance redressal mechanism. It also provides for constitution of an Emigrant Welfare 
Fund for the welfare of emigrants. 


Hence this Bill. 


New छापा; KALANIDHI VEERASWAMY 
November 24, 2022. 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 8B provides for the Central Government to 
prepare and maintain a register of records containing the details of emigrants and their 
dependants. It further vide proposed section 8D provides for the constitution of Emigrants 
Welfare Fund. It also provides for the Central Government to provide sums to the Fund. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore will be 
involved per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crores is also likely to be involved 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3i9 


Bit No. 86 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for enhancement of livelihood security in the urban regions of the 
country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in 
every financial year to every household whose adult members volunteers to do the 
given work and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Pingali Venkayya National Urban Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint: 


Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this 
Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall 
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


320 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:— 
(a) "adult" means a person who has completed eighteen years of age; 


(b) "applicant" means the head of a household or any of its other adult members 
who has applied for employment under the Scheme; 


(c) "Central Council" means the Central Urban Employment Guarantee Council 
constituted under sub-section (/) of Section 0; 


(d) "household" means the members of a family related to each other by blood, 
matriage or adoption and normally residing together and sharing meals or holding a 
common ration card; 


(e) "implementing agency" includes any department of the Central Government 
or a State Government, any urban local authority or Government undertaking or 
non-governmental organisation authorised by the Central Government or the State 
Government to undertake the implementation of any work taken up under a Scheme; 


(f) "manual work" means any physical work which any adult person is capable 
of doing with or without any skill or special training; 


(g) "minimum wage" in relation to any area, means the minimum wage fixed by 
the State Government in accordance with the section 6 of the Code on Wages, 209; 


(h) "National Urban Fund" means the National Urban Employment Guarantee 
Fund established under sub-section (/) of section 20; 


(i) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 


(j) "preferred work" means any work which is taken up for implementation on a 
priority basis under a Scheme; 


(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(J) "Programme Coordinator" means an officer of the State Government 
designated as such under sub-section (/) of section !4 for implementation of the 
Scheme; 


(m) "Programme Officer" means an officer appointed under sub-section (/) of 
section |5 for implementing the Scheme; 


(n) "project" means any work taken up under a Scheme for the purpose of 
providing employment to the applicants; 


(o) "Scheme" means a Scheme notified by the State Government under 
sub- section (/) of section 4; 


(p) "semi-skilled work" means any physical work which any adult person may 
be capable of doing with little training or as specified by Union or State Government; 


(q) "State Council" means the State Urban Employment Guarantee Council 
established under sub-section (/) of section 2; 


(r) "State Urban Fund" means the State Urban Employment Guarantee Fund 
established under sub-section (/) of section 2]; 


(s) "urban area" means any area in a State as those areas covered by any urban 
local body or a Cantonment Board established or constituted under any law for the 
time being in force; 


(t) "urban local body" means institution of self-Government constituted under 
article 243 Q of the Constitution; and 


(u) "wage rate" means the wage rate referred to in Section 6; 


29 of 20I9. 


29 of 209. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 32 


CHAPTER II 
GUARANTEE OF EMPLOYMENT 


3. (/) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such urban area in 
the State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every household whose 
adult members, by application, volunteer to do manual or semi- skilled work not less than 
one hundred days of such work in a financial year in accordance with the Scheme made 
under this Act. 


(2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme shall be 
entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work. 


(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily wages shall be 
made on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the date on which such 
work was done. 


(4) The Central Government or the State Government may, within the limits of its 
economic capacity and development, make provisions for securing work to every adult 
member of a household under a Scheme for any period beyond the period guaranteed under 
sub-section (l), as may be expedient. 


CHAPTER III 
EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEME AND UNEMPLOYMENT ALOWANCE 


4. (/) For the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of section 3, every State 
Government shall, within six months from the date of commencement of this Act, by 
notification, make a Scheme for providing one hundred days of guaranteed employment in 
a financial year to every household in the urban areas covered under the Scheme and 
whose adult members, by application, volunteer to do manual or semi-skilled work subject 
to the conditions laid down by or under this Act. 


(2) The State Government shall publish a summary of the Scheme made by it in at 
least two local newspapers, one of which shall be in a vernacular language circulating in the 
area or areas to which such Scheme shall apply. 


(3) The Scheme made under sub-section (/) shall provide for the minimum features 
specified in Schedule I. 


5. (/) The State Government may, without prejudice to the conditions specified in 
Schedule II, specify in the Scheme the conditions for providing guaranteed employment 
under this Act. 


(2) The persons employed under any Scheme made under this Act shall be entitled to 
such facilities not less than the minimum facilities specified in Schedule I. 


6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code on Wages, 20I9, the State 
Government(s) may, by notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes of this Act: 


Provided that the wage rate specified shall not be less than floor wage which 
the Central Government may, by notification, specify for the purposes of this Act. 


Provided further that the wage rate specified from, time to time, under any such 
notification shall not be at a rate less than one hundred and seventy-six rupees per 
day for the manual work and two hundred and seventy-six rupees per day for the 
semi-skilled work. 


7. (.) If an applicant for employment under the Scheme is not provided such 
employment within fifteen days of receipt of his application seeking employment or from 
the date on which the employment has been sought in the case of advance application, 
whichever is later, he shall be entitled to adaily unemployment allowance in accordance 
with this section. 


Guarantee of 
Employment 
in Urban 
Areas. 


Employment 
Guarantee 
Scheme and 
Unemployment 
Allowance. 


Conditions for 
providing 
guaranteed 
employment. 


Wage Rate. 


Payment of 
Unemployment 
Allowance. 


Non- 
disbursement 
of 
unemployment 
allowance in 
certain 
circumstances. 


Disentitlement 
to receive 
unemployment 
allowance in 
certain 
circumstances. 


322 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(2) Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be prescribed by the 
State Government and subject to the provisions of this Act and the Schemes and the 
economic capacity of the State Government, the unemployment allowance payable under 
sub-section (l) shall be paid to the applicants of a household subject to the entitlement of 
the household at such rate as may be specified by the State Government, by notification, in 
consultation with the State Council: 


Provided that no such rate shall be less than one-third of the wage rate for the 
first thirty days during the financial year and not less than one-half of the wage rate 
for the remaining period of the financial year. 


(3) The liability of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance to a 
household during any financial year shall cease as soon as— 


(a) the applicant is directed by the Urban Local Body or the Programme Officer 
to report for work either by himself or depute at least one adult member of his 
household; or 


(b) the period for which employment is sought comes to an end and no member 
of the household of the applicant had turned up for employment; or 


(c) the adult members of the household of the applicant have received in total at 
least one hundred days of work within the financial year; or 


(d) the household of the applicant has earned as much from the wages and 
unemployment allowance taken together which is equal to the wages for one hundred 
days of work during the financial year. 


(4) The unemployment allowance payable to the household of an applicant shall be 
sanctioned and disbursed by the Programme Officer. 


(5) Every payment of unemployment allowance under sub-section (/) shall be made 
or offered not later than fifteen days from the date on which it became due for payment. 


(6) The State Government may prescribe the procedure for payment of unemployment 
allowance under this Act. 


8. (J) If the Programme Officer is not in a position to disburse the unemployment 
allowance in time or at all for any reason beyond his control, he shall report the matter to the 
District Programme Coordinator and announce such reasons in a notice to be displayed on 
his notice board or website and the notice board or website of the Urban Local Body and 
such other conspicuous places as he may deem necessary. 


(2) Every case of non-payment or delayed payment of unemployment allowance shall 
be reported in the annual report submitted by the Programme Coordinator to the State 
Government along with the reasons for such non-payment or delayed payment. 


(3) The State Government shall take all measures to make the payment of unemployment 
allowance reported under sub-section (/) to the concerned household as expeditiously as 
possible. 


9. An applicant who— 

(a) does not accept the employment provided to his/her household under a 
Scheme; or 

(b) does not report for work within fifteen days of being notified by the Programme 
Officer or the implementing agency to report for the work; or 

(c) continuously remains absent from work, without obtaining a permission 
from the concerned implementing agency for a period of more than one week or 
remains absent for a total period of more than one week in any month, 


shall not be eligible to claim the unemployment allowance payable under this 


Act for a period of three months but shall be eligible to seek employment under the 
Scheme at any time. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 323 


CHAPTER IV 
IMPLEMENTING AND MoniTorING AUTHORITIES 


0. (L) With effect fromsuch date as the Central Government may, by notification 
specify, there shall be constituted a Central Council to be called the Central Urban Employment 
Guarantee Council to discharge the functions and perform the duties assigned to it by or 
under this Act. 


(2) The headquarters of the Central Council shall be at Delhi. 


(3) The Central Council shall consist of the following members to be appointed by the 
Central Government, namely:— 


(a) a Chairperson; 


(b) not more than such number of representatives of the Central Ministries not 
below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India as may be determined 
by the Central Government; 


(c) not more than such number of representatives of the State Government as 
may be determined by the Central Government as may be determined by the Central 
Government; 


(d) not more than fifteen non-official members representing Urban Local Bodies, 
organizations of workers and disadvantaged groups: 


Provided that not less than one-third of the non-official members nominated 
under this clause shall be women: 


Provided further that not less than one-third of the non-official members shall 
be belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward 
Classes and Minorities; 


(e) such number of representatives of the States as the Central Government 
may, by rules, determine in this behalf; 


(f)a Member-Secretary not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government 
of India. 


I. (/) The Central Council shall perform and discharge the following functions and 
duties, namely:— 


(a) establish a central evaluation and monitoring system; 


(b) advise the Central Government on all matters concerning the 
implementation of this Act; 


(c) review the monitoring and redressal mechanism from time to time and 
recommend improvements required; 


(d) promote the widest possible dissemination of information about the Schemes 
made under this Act; 


(e) monitoring the implementation of this Act; 


(f) preparation of annual reports to be laid before Parliament by the Central 
Government on the implementation of this Act; 


(g) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the Central 
Government. 


(2) The Central Council shall have the power to undertake evaluation of the various 
Schemes made under this Act and for that purpose collect or cause to be collected statistics 
pertaining to the urban economy and the implementation of the Schemes. 


Central Urban 
Employment 
Guarantee 
Council. 


Functions and 
Duties of 
Central 
Council. 


State Urban 
Employment 
Guarantee 
Council. 


Principal 
Authorities 
for planning 
and 
implementation 
of Schemes. 


District 
Programme 
Coordinator. 


324 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. (L) For the purposes of regular monitoring and reviewing the implementation of 
this Act at the State level, every State Government shall constitute a State Council to be 
known as the (name of the State) State Employment Guarantee Council with a Chairperson 
and such number of official members as may be determined by the State Government and 
not more than fifteen non-official members nominated by the State Government from Urban 
Local Bodies, organisations of workers and disadvantaged groups: 


Provided that not less than one-third of the non-official members nominated 
under this clause shall be women: 


Provided further that not less than one third of the non-official members shall 
be belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward 
Classes and Minorities. 


(2)The terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and members of the 
State Council may be appointed and the time, place and procedure of the meetings (including 
the quorum at such meetings) of the State Council shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
State Government. 


(3)The duties and functions of the State Council shall include— 


(a) advising the State Government on all matters concerning the Scheme and its 
implementation in the State; 


(b) determining the preferred works; 


(c) reviewing the monitoring and redressal mechanisms from time to time and 
recommending improvements; 


(d) promoting the widest possible dissemination of information about this Act 
and the Schemes under it; 


(e) monitoring the implementation of this Act and the Schemes in the State and 
coordinating such implementation with the Central Council; 


(f) preparing the annual report to be laid before the State Legislature by the 
State Government; 


(g) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the Central Council 
or the State Government. 


(4) The State Council shall have the power to undertake an evaluation of the Schemes 
operating in the State and for that purpose to collect or cause to be collected statistics 
pertaining to the urban economy and the implementation of the Schemes and Programmes 
in the State. 


3. (L) The Urban Local Bodies shall be the principal authorities for planning and 
implementation of the Schemes made under this Act. 


(2) The Urban Local Bodies shall,— 


(a) finalize and approve shelf of projects to be taken up under a programme under the 
Scheme; 


(b) supervise and monitor the projects taken up; and 


(c) carry out such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State Council, from 
time to time. 


4. (/) The Collector of the district or any other district level officer of appropriate 
rank as the State Government may decide shall be designated as the District Programme 
Coordinator for the implementation of the Scheme in the district. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 325 


(2) The District Programme Coordinator shall be responsible for the implementation 
of the Scheme in the district in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder. 


(3) The functions of the District Programme Coordinator shall be— 


(a) to assist the Urban Local Bodies in discharging its functions under this Act 
and any scheme made thereunder; 


(b) to accord necessary sanction and administrative clearance wherever 
necessary; 


(c) to coordinate with the Programme Officers functioning within his jurisdiction 
and the implementing agencies to ensure that the applicants are provided employment 
as per their entitlements under this Act; 


(d) to review, monitor and supervise the performance of the Programme Officers; 
(e) to conduct periodic inspection of the works in progress; and 
(f) to redress the grievances of the applicants. 


(4) The State Government shall delegate such administrative and financial powers to 
the District Programme Coordinator as may be required to enable him to carry out his 
functions under this Act. 


(5) The Programme Officer appointed under sub-section (/) of section |5 and all other 
officers of the State Government and local authorities and bodies functioning within the 
district shall be responsible to assist the District Programme Coordinator in carrying out his 
functions under this Act and the Schemes made thereunder. 


(6) The District Programme Coordinator shall prepare in the month of December every 
year a labour budget for the next financial year containing the details of anticipated demand 
for manual or semi-skilled work in the district and the plan for engagement of labourers in 
the works covered under the Scheme and submit it to the State Government. 


5. (L) Forevery State, the concerned Government shall appoint aperson who is not 
below the rank of Joint Secretary with such qualifications and experience as may be 
determined by the State Government as Programme Officer. 


(2) The Programme Officer shall assist the Urban Local Body in discharging its 
functions under this Act and any Scheme made thereunder. 


(3) The Programme Officer shall be responsible for matching the demand for 
employment with the employment opportunities arising from projects in the area under his 
jurisdiction. 


(4) The Programme Officer shall prepare a plan for the Urban Local Body under his 
jurisdiction by consolidating the project proposals received. 


(5) The functions of the Programme Officer shall include— 


(a) monitoring of projects taken up by the Urban Local Body and other 
implementing agencies within the Block; 


(b) sanctioning and ensuring payment of unemployment allowance to the eligible 
households; 


(c) ensuring prompt and fair payment of wages to all labourers employed under 
a programme of the Scheme within the Block; 


(d) ensuring that regular social audits of all works within the jurisdiction of the 
Urban Local Body are carried out by the Gram Sabha and that prompt action is taken 
on the objections raised in the social audit; 


Programme 
Officer. 


Responsibilities 
of the Urban 
Local Bodies. 


Social Audit 
of work. 


Responsibilities 
of State 
Governments. 


Grievance 
Redressal 
Mechanism. 


326 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(e) dealing promptly with all complaints that may arise in connection with the 
implementation of the Scheme within the jurisdiction; and 


(f) any other work as may be assigned to him by the District Programme 
Coordinator or the State Government. 


(6) The Programme Officers shall function under the direction, control and 
superintendence of the District Programme Coordinator. 


(7) The State Government may, by order, direct that all or any of the functions of a 
Programme Officer shall be discharged by the Urban Local Body. 


6. (/) The Urban Local Body shall be responsible for identification of the projects in 
the Urban area to be taken up under a Scheme and for executing and supervising such 
works. 


(2) A Urban Local Body may take up any project under a Scheme within the Urban 
area as may be sanctioned by the Programme Officer. 


(3) Every Urban Local Body shall, prepare a development plan and maintain a shelf of 
possible works to be taken up under the Scheme as and when demand for work arises. 


(4) The Urban Local Body shall forward its proposals for the development projects 
including the order of priority between different works to the Programme Officer for scrutiny 
and preliminary approval prior to the commencement of the year in which it is proposed to 
be executed. 


(5) The Programme Officer shall allot at least fifty per cent, of the works in terms of its 
cost under a Scheme to be implemented through the Urban Local Body. 


(6) The Programme Officer shall supply each Urban Local Body with: 
(a) the muster rolls for the works sanctioned to be executed by it; and 


(b) a list of employment opportunities available elsewhere to the residents of 
the Urban Local Body. 


(7) The Urban Local Body shall allocate employment opportunities among the 
applicants and ask them to report for work. 


(8) The works taken up by an Urban Local Body under a Scheme shall meet the 
required technical standards and measurements. 


7. (7) The Urban Local Body shall monitor the execution of works within the Urban 
area. 


(2) The Urban Local Body shall conduct regular social audits of all the projects under 
the Scheme taken up within the Urban area. 


(3) The Urban Local Body shall make available all relevant documents including the 
muster rolls, bills, vouchers, measurement books, copies of sanction orders and other 
connected books of account and papers to the Urban area for the purpose of conducting 
the social audit. 


8. The State Government shall make available to the District Programme Coordinator 
and the Programme Officers necessary staff and technical support as may be necessary for 
the effective implementation of the Scheme. 


9. The State Government shall, by rules, determine appropriate grievance redressal 
mechanisms for dealing with any complaint by any person in respect of implementation of 
the Scheme and lay down the procedure for disposal of such complaints. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 327 


CHAPTER V 
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL AND STATE URBAN EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE FUNDS AND AUDIT 


20. (l) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a National Urban 
Fund to be called the National Urban Employment Guarantee Fund for the purposes of this 
Act. 


(2) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, credit by way of grants or loans such sums of money as the Central Government 
may consider necessary to the National Urban Fund. 


(3) The amount standing to the credit of the National Urban Fund shall be utilised in 
such manner and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 


2l.(.) The State Government may, by notification, establish a State Urban Fund to be 
called the State Urban Employment Guarantee Fund for the purposes of implementation of 
the Scheme. 


(2)The amount standing to the credit of the State Urban Fund shall be expended in 
such manner and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed by the 
State Government for the purposes of implementation of this Act and the Schemes made 
thereunder and for meeting the administrative expenses in connection with the implementation 
of this Act. 


(3)The State Urban Fund shall be held and administered on behalf of the State 
Government in such manner and by such authority as may be prescribed by the State 
Government. 


22. (/) Subject to the rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, 
the Central Government shall meet the cost of the following, namely:— 


(a) the amount required for payment of wages for unskilled manual work under 
the Scheme; 


(b) up to three-fourths of the material cost of the Scheme including payment of 
wages to skilled and semi-skilled workers subject to the provisions of Schedule II; 


(c) such percentage of the total costof the Scheme as may be determined by the 
Central Government towards the administrative expenses, which may include the 
salary and allowances of the Programme Officers and his supporting staff, the 
administrative expenses of the Central Council, facilities to be provided under Schedule 
II and such other item as may be decided by the Central Government. 


(2) The State Government shall meet the cost of the following, namely:— 
(a) the cost of unemployment allowance payable under the Scheme; 


(b) one-fourth of the material cost of the Scheme including payment of wages to 
skilled and semi-skilled workers subject to the provisions of Schedule II; 


(c) the administrative expenses of the State Council. 


23. (7) The District Programme Coordinator and all implementing agencies in the 
District shall be responsible for the proper utilisation and management of the funds placed 
at their disposal for the purpose of implementing a Scheme. 


(2) The State Government may prescribe the manner of maintaining proper books and 
accounts of employment of labourers and the expenditure incurred in connection with the 
implementation of the provisions of this Act and the Schemes made thereunder. 


(3) The State Government may, by rules, determine the arrangements to be made for 
the proper execution of Schemes and programmes under the Schemes and to ensure 
transparency and accountability at all levels in the implementation of the Schemes. 


National 
Urban 
Employment 
Guarantee 
Fund. 


State Urban 
Employment 
Guarantee 
Fund. 


Funding 
Pattern. 


Transparency 
and 
Accountability. 


Audit of 
Accounts. 


Penalty for 
non- 
compliance. 


Power to 
delegate. 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
to give 
directions. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


328 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(4) All payments of wages in cash and unemployment allowances shall be made 
directly to the person concerned and in the presence of independent persons of the 
community on pre-announced dates. 


(5) If any dispute or complaint arises concerning the implementation of aScheme by 
the Gram Panchayat, the matter shall be referred to the Programme Officer. 


(6) The Programme Officer shall enter every complaint in a complaint register maintained 
by him and shall dispose of the disputes and complaints within seven days of its receipt 
and in case it relates to a matter to be resolved by any other authority it shall be forwarded 
to such authority under intimation to the complainant. 


24. (/) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India, prescribe appropriate arrangements for audits of the accounts of the 
Schemes at all levels. 


(2) The accounts of the Scheme shall be maintained in such form and in such manner 
as may be prescribed by the State Government. 


CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 


25. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall on conviction be liable to 
a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 


26. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the powers exercisable 
by it (excluding the power to make rules) may, in such circumstances and subject to such 
conditions and limitations, be exercisable also by the State Government or such officer 
subordinate to the Central Government or the State Government as it may specify in such 
notification. 


(2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the powers exercisable by 
it (excluding the power to make rules and Schemes) may, in such circumstances and subject 
to such conditions and limitations, be exercisable also by such officer subordinate to it as 
it may specify in such notification. 


27. (/) The Central Government may give such directions as it may consider necessary 
to the State Government for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (/), the Central Government 
may, on receipt of any complaint regarding the issue or improper utilisation of funds granted 
under this Act in respect of any Scheme if prima facie satisfied that there is a case, cause 
‘an investigation into the complaint made by any agency designated by it and if necessary, 
order stoppage of release of funds to the Scheme and institute appropriate remedial measures 
for its proper implementation within a reasonable period of time. 


28. The provisions of this Act or the Schemes made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such law: 


Provided that where a State enactment exists or is enacted to provide 
employment guarantee for unskilled manual or semi-skilled work to urban households 
consistent with the provisions of this Act under which the entitlement of the households 
is not less than and the conditions of employment are not inferior to what is guaranteed 
under this Act, the State Government shall have the option of implementing its own 
enactment: 


Provided further that in such cases the financial assistance shall be paid to the 
concerned State Government in such manner as shall be determined by the Central 
Government, which shall not exceed what the State would have been entitled to 
receive under this Act had a Scheme made under this Act had to be implemented. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 329 


29. (/) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, 
it may, by notification, amend Schedule I or Schedule II and thereupon Schedule I or Schedule 
II, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly; 


(2) Acopy of every notification made under sub-section () shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 


30. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the District 
Programme Coordinator, Programme Officer or any other person who is, or who is deemed to 
be, a public servant within the meaning of section 2] of the Indian Penal Code, 860 in 
respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the 
rules or Schemes made thereunder. 


3. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, and subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without the prejudice of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the number of representatives of the State Governments under clause (e) of 
sub-section (3) of section 0; 


(b) the terms and conditions subject to which the Chairman and other members 
of the Central Council may be appointed, and the time, place and procedure of the 
meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) of the Central Council, under 
sub-section (4) of section 0; 


(c) the manner in which and the conditions and limitations subject to which the 
National Fund shall be utilised under sub-section (3) of section 20; 


(d) the rules relating to funding pattern to meet the cost of certain items under 
sub-section () of section 22; or 


(e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules. 


32. (/) The State Government may, by notification, and subject to the condition of 
previous publication, and consistent with this Act and the rules made by the Central 
Government, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 


(a) the terms and conditions upon which eligibility for unemployment allowance 
may be determined under sub-section (2) of section 7; 


(b) the procedure for payment of unemployment allowance under 
sub-section (6) of section 7; 


(c) the terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and members of 
the State Council may be appointed, and the time, place and procedure of the meetings 
(including the quorum at such meetings) of their appointment to the State Council, 
under sub-section (2) of section 2; 


(d) the grievance redressal mechanism at the Block level and the District level 
and the procedure to be followed in such matter under section 9; 


(e) the manner in which and the conditions and limitations subject to which the 
State Fund shall be utilised under sub-section (2) of section 2]; 


(f) the authority who may administer and the manner in which he may hold the 
State Fund under sub-section (3) of section 2]; 


(g) the manner of maintaining books of account of employment of labourers 
and the expenditure under sub-section (2) of section 23; 


Power to 
amend 
Schedules. 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make rules. 


Power of 
State 
Governments 
to make rules. 


Laying of 
rules and 
schemes. 


Power to 
remove 


difficulties. 


330 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(A) the arrangements required for proper execution of Schemes under sub-section (/) 
of section 23; 


(i) the form and manner in which the accounts of the Scheme shall be maintained 
under sub-section (2) of section 24; or 


() any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in- respect of which 
provision is to be made by the State Government by rules. 


33. (J) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall have 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(2) Every rule or Scheme made by the State Government under this Act shall, as soon 
as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of the State Legislature where there are 
two Houses, and where there is one House of the State Legislature, before that House. 


34. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three 
years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See Section 4(3)] 
MINIMUM FEATURES OF THE URBAN EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEME 
. The focus of the Scheme shall be on the following works, with no order of priority: 
(i) Waste Collection, Disposal and Management; 
(ii) Water Supply and Harvesting; 
(iii) Housing; 
(iv) Sewage and Septage Management 
(v) Enhancement of Green Spaces; 
(vi) Land development; 


(vii) Flood control and protection works including drainage in water logged 
areas; 


(viii) Heritage augmentation; and 


(ix) any other work which may be notified by the Central Government in 
consultation with the State Government. 


2. Creation of durable assets and strengthening the livelihood resource base of the 
urban poor shall be an important objective of the Scheme. 


3. The works taken up under the scheme shall be in urban areas. 


4. The State Council shall prepare a list of preferred works for different areas based 
on their ability to create durable assets. 


5. The Scheme shall be subject to appropriate arrangements as may be laid down by 
the State Government under the rules issued by it for proper maintenance of the public 
assets created under the Scheme. 


6. Under no circumstances shall the labourers be paid less than the minimum wage 
rate. 


7. When wages are directly linked with the quantity of work, the wages shall be paid 
according to the schedule of rates fixed by the State Government for different types of work 
every year, in consultation with the State Council. 


8. The schedule of rates of wages for unskilled labourers shall be so fixed that a 
person working for seven hours would normally earn a wage equal to the wage rate. 


9. The cost of material component of projects including the wages of the skilled and 
semi-skilled workers taken up under the Scheme shall not exceed forty per cent. of the total 
project costs. 


0. It shall be open to the Programme Officer or the Urban Local Body to direct any 
person who applied for employment under the Scheme to do work of any type permissible 
under it. 


ll. The Scheme shall not permit engaging any contractor for implementation of the 
projects under it. 


2. As far as practicable, a task funded under the Scheme shall be performed by using 
manual labour and not machines except sewage and septage Management. 


3. Every Scheme shall contain adequate provisions for ensuring transparency and 
accountability at all level of implementation. 


332 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


4. Provisions for regular inspection and supervision of works taken up under the 
Scheme shall be made to ensure proper quality of work as well as to ensure that the total 
wages paid for the completion of the work is commensurate with the quality and quantity of 
work done. 


5. The District Programme Coordinator, the Programme Officer and the Urban Local 
Body implementing the Scheme shall prepare annually a report containing the facts and 
figures and achievements relating to the implementation of the Scheme within his or its 
jurisdiction and a copy of the same shall be made available to the public on demand and on 
payment of such fee as may be specified in the Scheme. 


6. All accounts and records relating to the Scheme shall be made available for public 
scrutiny and any person desirous of obtaining a copy or relevant extracts therefrom may be 
provided such copies or extracts on demand and after paying such fee as may be specified 
in the Scheme. 


7. Acopy of the muster rolls of each Scheme or project under a Scheme shall be made 
available in the offices of the Urban Local Body and the Programme Officer for inspection 
by any person interested after paying such fee as may be specified in the Scheme. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 333 


THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See Section 5] 


CONDITIONS FOR GUARANTEED URBAN EMPLOYMENT UNDER THE SCHEME AND 
MINIMUM ENTITLEMENTS OF LABOURERS 


l. The adult members of every household who reside in any urban area; and are 
willing to do unskilled manual or semi-skilled work, may submit their names, age and the 
address of the household to the Urban Local Body in the jurisdiction of which they reside 
for registration of their household for issuance of a job card. 


2. It shall be the duty of the Urban Local Body to register the household, after making 
such enquiry as it deems fit and issue a job card containing such details of adult members 
of the household affixing their photographs, as may be specified by the State Government 
in the Scheme. 


3. The registration made under paragraph 2 shall be for such period as may be laid in 
the Scheme, but in any case, not less than five years, and may be renewed from time to time. 


4. Every adult member of a registered household whose name appears in the job card 
shall be entitled to apply for unskilled manual or semi-skilled work under the Scheme. 


5. All registered persons belonging to a household shall be entitled to employment 
in accordance with the Scheme made under the provisions of this Act, for as in any days as 
each applicant may request, subject to a maximum of one hundred days per household in a 
given financial year. 

6. The Programme Officer shall ensure that every applicant referred to in paragraph 5 
shall be provided unskilled manual or semi-skilled work in accordance with the provisions 
of the Scheme within fifteen days of receipt of an application or from the date he seeks work 
in case of advance application, whichever is later: 


Provided that priority shall be given to women in such a way that at least one-third of 
the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and requested for work under this Act. 


7. Applications for work must be for at least fourteen days of continuous work. 


8. There shall be no limit on the number of days of employment for which a person 
may apply, or on the number of days of employment actually provided to him subject to the 
aggregate entitlement of the household. 


9. Applications for work may be submitted in writing either to the Gram Panchayat or 
to the Programme Officer, as may be specified in the Scheme. 


0. The Urban Local Body and Programme Officer, as the case may be, shall be bound 
to accept valid applications and to issue a dated receipt to the applicant. Group applications 
may also be submitted. 


l. Applicants who are provided with work shall be so intimated in writing, by means 
of a letter sent to him at the address given in the job card and by a public notice displayed 
at the office of the Panchayats at the district, intermediate or village level. 

2. As far as possible, employment shall be provided within a radius of five kilometres 
of the village where the applicant resides at the time of applying. 

3. Anew work under the Scheme shall be commenced only if— 

(a) at least fifty labourers become available for such work; and 
(b) the labourers cannot be absorbed in the ongoing works. 
4. In cases the employment is provided outside such radius, the labourers shall be 


paid ten per cent. of the wage rate as extra wages to meet additional transportation and 
living expenses. 


5. Aperiod of employment shall ordinarily be at least fourteen days continuously 
with not more than six days in a week. 


6. In all cases where unemployment allowance is paid, or due to be paid, the Programme 
Officer shall inform the District Programme Coordinator in writing the reasons why it was not 
possible for him to provide employment or cause to provide employment to the applicants. 

7. The District Programme Coordinator shall, in his Annual Report to the State 
Council, explain as to why employment could not be provided in cases where payment of 
unemployment allowance is involved. 


334 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


8. Provision shall be made in the Scheme for advance applications, that is, an application 
which may be submitted in advance of the date from which employment is sought. 


9. Provision shall be made in the Scheme for submission of multiple applications by 
the same person provided that the corresponding periods for which employment is sought 
do not overlap. 


20. The Urban Local Body shall prepare and maintain or cause to be prepared and 
maintained such registers, vouchers and other documents in such form and in such manner 
as may be specified in the Scheme containing particulars of job cards and passbooks 
issued, name, age and address of the head of the household and the adult members of the 
household registered with the Urban Local Body. 


2l. The Urban Local Body shall send such list or lists of the names and addresses of 
households and their adult members registered with it and supply such other information to 
the concerned Programme Officer at such periods and in such form as may be specified in 
the Scheme. 


22. A list of persons who are provided with the work shall be displayed on the notice 
board of the Urban Local Body and at the office of the Programme Officer and at such other 
places as the Programme Officer may deem necessary and the list shall be open for inspection 
by the State Government and any person interested. 


23. If the Urban Local Body is satisfied at any time that a person has registered with 
it by furnishing false information, it may direct the Programme Officer to direct his name to 
be struck off from the register and direct the applicant to return the job card: 


Provided that no such action under this paragraph shall be directed unless the applicant 
has been given an opportunity of being heard in the presence of two independent persons. 


24. If any personal injury is caused to any person employed under the Scheme by 
accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, he shall be entitled to, free of 
charge, such medical treatment as is admissible under the Scheme. 


25. Where hospitalization of the injured worker is necessary, the State Government 
shall arrange for such hospitalization including accommodation, treatment, medicines and 
payment of daily allowance not less than half of the wage rate required to be paid had the 
injured been engaged in the work. 


26. If a person employed under a Scheme dies or becomes permanently disabled by 
accident arising out of and in the course of employment, he shall be paid by the implementing 
agency an ex-gratia payment at the rate of twenty-five thousand rupees or such amount as 
may be notified by the Central Government, and the amount shall be paid to the legal heirs 
of the deceased or the disabled, as the case may be. 


27. The facilities of safe drinking water, shade for children and periods of rest, 
first-aid box with adequate material for emergency treatment for minor injuries and other 
health hazards connected with the work being performed shall be provided at the work site. 


28. In case the number of children below the age of six years accompanying the 
women working at any site is five or more, provisions shall be made to depute one of such 
women workers to look after such children. 


29. The person deputed under paragraph 28 shall be paid wage rate. 


30. In case the payment of wages is not made within the period specified under the 
Scheme, the labourers shall be entitled to receive payment of compensation as per the 
provisions of the Code on Wages, 20]9. 


3]. The wages under a Scheme may be paid either wholly in cash or in cash and kind 
provided that at least one-fourth of the wages shall be paid in cash only. 


32. The State Government may prescribe that a portion of the wages in cash may be 
paid to the labourers on a daily basis during the period of employment. 


33. If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child accompanying any person 
who is employed under a Scheme, such person shall be entitled to, free of charge, such 
medical treatment for the child as may be specified in the Scheme and in case of death or 
disablement, through an ex-gratia payment as may be determined by the State Government. 

34. In case of every employment under the Scheme, there shall be no discrimination 
solely on the ground of gender and the provisions of the Industrial Relations Code, 209, 
shall be complied with. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 335 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act was enacted in the year 
2005, as one of the largest work guarantee programmes to guarantee one hundred days of 
employment in every financial year to adult members of any rural household willing to do 
public work-related unskilled manual work, thereby aiming to address the causes of chronic 
poverty through a rights-based framework. 


However, with the impact of COVID-I9 being largely concentrated on urban centres 
of the economy, which contribute nearly sixty-five percent to India's GDP, urban poverty as 
a form of poverty that is particularly visible in mega cities, characterized by poor living 
circumstances and income has been aggravated. 


With seventeen percent of urban households being slum dwellers, increasing 
inequalities and urban poverty ratios have a possibility of leading up to ghettoization of 
communities and rise in crime rates. In view of the above, it has become necessary to enact 
a legislation to ensure Urban Employment Guarantee. 


The Bill inter alia, seeks to,— 


(a) provide for one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment to every 
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work, or in addition, 
semi-skilled work to prepare a scheme to give effect to the guarantee proposed under 
the legislation; 


(b) ensure that every State Government, within six months from the date of 
commencement of this legislation, prepare a scheme to give effect to the guarantee 
proposed under the legislation; 


(c) provide one-hundred days of employment under the legislation at the wage 
rate as specified by the State Governments which shall not be less than the floor wage 
as specified by the Central Government in accordance with the Code on Wages, 209; 


(d) ensure that if an eligible applicant is not provided work as per the provisions 
of this legislation within the prescribed time limit, it will be obligatory on the part of 
the State Government to pay unemployment allowance at the prescribed rate; 


(e) constitute a Central Urban Employment Guarantee Council at the Central 
level and State Urban Employment Guarantee Councils at the State level in all States 
where the legislation is made applicable to for review, monitor and effective implement 
the legislation in their respective areas; 


(f) empower the Central Government to establish a National Urban Employment 
Guarantee Fund for the purposes of this legislation and also the State Governments 
to constitute National State Employment Guarantee Funds; 


(g) make provisions for transparency and accountability, audit, establishment 
of grievance and redressal mechanisms and penalty of non-compliance are also 
envisaged; and 


(h) make provisions for Minimum features of Urban Employment Guarantee 
Scheme and conditions for guaranteed Urban Employment under a scheme and 
minimum entitlements of labourers have been laid. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DE Lut; TALARI RANGAIAH 
March i5, 2023. 


336 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the State Government shall, in such urban area in the 
State and for such period as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every 
poor household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than 
one hundred days of such work in a financial year in accordance with the Scheme. Clause 7 
provides that if an applicant for employment under the Scheme made under proposed 
legislation is not provided employment within fifteen days of receipt of his application, he 
shall be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance. Clause l0 provides for constitution of 
a Central Urban Employment Guarantee Council and for appointment of its members. Clause 
2 provides for the Constitution of a State Urban Employment Guarantee Council. Clause I5 
provides for appointment of Programme Officer for implementing the provisions in the 
municipalities. Clause 20 provides for establishment of the National Urban Employment 
Guarantee Fund. Clause 2] provides for establishment of the State Urban Employment 
Guarantee Fund. Clause 22 provides that the Central Government shall meet the administrative 
expenses of the Programme Officers and his supporting staff and the administrative expenses 
of the Central Council. The expenditure in relation to States shall be borne by the State 
Government concerned. However, the expenditure in relation to Union Territories shall be 
borne by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of 
about rupees five thousand crore is likely to be involved per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore will also be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


59 of 988. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 337 


Bit No. 23] oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 7966. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 8 of the Motor Vehicle Act, l988, in sub-section (4), after the first 
proviso the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


"Provided further that the licensing authority shall not refuse to issue a learner's 
license to applicant affected by leprosy if such applicant has been certified by a 
registered medical practitioner as having either been cured of leprosy or having been 
administered with the first dose under Multi-Drug Therapy and with continuing 
treatment for leprosy being provided by such registered medical practitioner." 


Short title 
and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 8. 


338 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Leprosy, caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium leprae, primarily affects the peripheral 
nervous system causing skin lesions, numbness, and other deformities. As per the latest 
data from National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP), a total of 65,!47 new leprosy 
cases were detected during the year 2020-2 in India. India accounts for over half of the 
world's new leprosy patients, according to World Health Organisation. 


According to the 20th Law Commission report titled "Eliminating Discrimination 
against Persons Affected by leprosy" as of 204, India accounts for fifty eight per cent. of 
the new leprosy cases in the world, leading the list of countries that have reported high 
figures of leprosy infection globally. Although leprosy may cause irreversible disabilities, 
with advances in medicine, it is now a completely curable disease that can be rendered 
non-infectious early on in treatment itself, through Multi-Drug Therapy, which has cured 
more than fifteen million persons over two decades alone. Government of India has undertaken 
programs to provide free-of-cost treatment to Persons affected by leprosy. A major obstacle 
to uplift the status of Persons affected by leprosy is the social stigma associated with 
leprosy. In many spheres of life, such persons continue to be outcast from society. 


The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 2007 
("UNCRPD") promotes, protects and ensures the full and equal enjoyment of all human 
rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities. India has signed and 
ratified the UNCRPD, and is also a member of the UN General Assembly that unanimously 
passed the Resolution on the Elimination of Leprosy. 


Despite the fact that the notable efforts have been made so far and_ have significantly 
improved the lives of many people affected by leprosy and their family members, the long- 
standing stigma associated with leprosy and the archaic laws that apply to them persist. 
Thus, in order to remove the stigma of leprosy and eliminate the discrimination that still 
exists in society, the laws that directly affect the individual must be revised. 


In addition to the various laws that had been amended to eliminate discrimination, 
one such law is the Motor Vehicle Act of !988, which does not grant license to the persons 
affected by leprosy. This need is to amend section 8 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 988, as an 
exercise in affirmative action to accommodate the needs of people suffering from leprosy. 
The amendment makes the licensing authority liable to not deny a learner's license to any 
person affected by leprosy. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; UNMESH BHATYYASAHEB PATIL 
November 23, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 339 


Bit No. 78 oF 2023 
A Bill to amend the Code on Social Security, 2020. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Code on Social Security (Amendment) Act, 2023. — Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 
of section 5. 


Substitution 
of new 
heading for 
heading. 


Insertion of 
new section 
l08A. 


340 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In section I5 of the Code on Social Security, 2020 (hereinafter referred to as principal 
Act), in sub-section (/), in clause (b), after sub-clause (iii) the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


"Provided that the Employees Pension Scheme shall be revised every 
five years to index for inflation or to be linked to the interest payable on Government 
Security in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause,—"(a) "inflation" includes the rate of 
increase in the observed general price index between two time periods; and 


(b) "Government Security" includes a tradable instrument issued by the Central 
Government or the State Governments acknowledge the Government's debt obligation 
towards short term (usually called treasury bills with original maturities of less than 
one year) or long term security (usually called Government bonds or dated securities 
with original maturity of one year or more).”. 


3. In Chapter VIII of the principal Act, for the heading the following heading shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


"SOCIAL SECURITY AND CESS IN RESPECT OF BUILDING, OTHER 
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS AND INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKERS", 


4. After section l08 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:- 


"]084. () There shall be constituted an Inter-State Migrant Workers Welfare 
Fund for the welfare of inter-state migrant workers and there shall be credited 
thereto— 


(a) contribution from the States from where the inter-migrant worker has 
migrated; 


(b) contribution from the States to which migrant worker has migrated; 
(c) contribution from the principal employers; and 
(d) minimum contribution from the inter-State migrant worker. 


(2)The amount from the Inter-State Migrant Worker Welfare Fund shall exclusively 
be utilized for the welfare of inter-State migrant workers.". 


36 of 2020. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 34] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Social Security Code (the Code), 2020 has been enacted to amend and consolidate 
the laws relating to social security with the goal to extend social security to all employees 
and workers either in the organized or unorganized or any other sectors. The Code has vital 
provisions with respect to social security benefits to workers including gig workers. India's 
obligation to provide a comprehensive social security cover for the workers may be traced 
to several provisions enshrined in the Constitution of India which include inter-alia securing 
equal pay for equal work for both men and women; directions pertaining to the State's 
responsibility for making effective provisions for assistance in cases of unemployment, old 
age, sickness and disablement; for securing just and humane conditions of work. 


Pensions contribute to economic growth through a range of pathways at household, 
community and national levels. Within households, they are used for investing in children, 
tackling stunting and enabling them to attend and perform well in school, thereby helping 
them become a more effective and productive workforce. Pensioners and their families use 
the cash they receive to supplement in income generating activities while working age 
household members are better able to gain employment, increasing overall productivity of 
the labour force. They also enable households to recover their productivity more quickly 
following shocks. 


Pension indexation affects the income of a large and increasing number of older 
people. Without indexation, benefit increases are subject to discretionary decisions by 
governments or pension authorities, implying that the value of a pension in payment depends 
on economic and political cycles. Therefore, section I5 of the Code has been amended to 
include inflation indexed pensions schemes. 


Further, in the wake of the Covid-9 pandemic one of the issues that emerged is the 
conditions of the Inter-State Migrant Workers, their retention in job, food and ration facilities 
for them, etc. Therefore it is only imperative that a separate fund be created for the purpose 
of providing monetary support to Inter-state Migrant Workmen. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; UNMESH BHATY YASAHEB PATIL 
November 23, 2022. 


342 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill vide proposed new section l08A provides for constitution of an 
Inter State Migrant Workers Welfare Fund for the purpose of welfare of inter-state migrant 
workers. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per 
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about one hundred crore is also likely to be involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 343 


BiLt No. 35 oF 2022 


A Bill for combating and eliminating tuberculosis, and for the protection of the rights of 
patients affected by the tuberculosis disease and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


WHEREAS the General Assembly of the United Nations has adopted the Sustainable 
Development Goals, which call for a reduction in tuberculosis- related deaths and the World 
Health Organization has adopted the End TB Strategy for a reduction in the incidence of 
Tuberculosis by 2035 through collective global efforts; 


AND WHEREAS the Republic of India, being a signatory to the aforementioned Goals 
and Strategy, it is expedient to give effect to the said Goals and Strategy; 


AND WHEREAS the Republic of India ratified the World Health Organisation Framework 
Convention on Tobacco Control in 2005; 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Prohibition of 
Discrimination. 


344 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


AND WHEREAS the Republic of India has framed a National Strategic Plan for 
Tuberculosis Elimination 20!7-2025. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Tuberculosis (Treatment and Eradication) Act, 2022. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Aadhaar” means Aadhaar number issued by the Unique Identification 
Authority of India under sub-section (3) of section 3 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery 
of Financial and other Subsidies Benefits and Services) Act, 206; 


(b) “annual report” means a report giving the details of developmental activities 
taken up over the year by the Authority and detailing about targets set and achieved; 


(c) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government. 


(d) “Authority” means the Tuberculosis Eradication Authority constituted under 
section 4; 


(e) “company” means an entity registered under the Companies Act, 203; 


(f) “discrimination” means any act or omission which directly or indirectly, 
expressly or by effect, immediately or over a period of time,— 


(i) imposes any burden, obligation, liability, disability or disadvantage on 
any person or category of persons, based on one or more tuberculosis-related 
grounds; or 


(ii) denies or withholds any benefit, opportunity or advantage from any 
person or category of persons, based on one or more tuberculosis-related 
grounds, and the expression “discriminate” to be construed accordingly; 


(g) “guidelines” means any statement or any other document issued by the 
Central Government indicating policy or procedure or course of action relating to 
tuberculosis to be followed by the Central Government, State Governments, 
Governmental and non-Governmental organisations and establishments and 
individuals dealing with prevention, control and treatment of tuberculosis; 


(h) “Multi-drug Resistant Tuberculosis (MDR-TB)” means a strain of the 
tuberculosis bacteria resistant to two of the most effective anti- tuberculosis drugs 
available, isoniazid and rifampicin; 


(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act; 


(j) “tuberculosis” means an infectious disease caused by a bacterium, 
Mycobacterium Tuberculosis that is spread through the air; 


(k) “tuberculosis-affected person” means an individual who is suffering from 
any strain of the tuberculosis disease; and 


(l) “society” means an entity registered as society under the Societies 
Registration Act, |860. 


3. No person shall discriminate against the tuberculosis-affected person on any ground 
including any of the following, namely:— 


(a) the unfair treatment in, or in relation to employment or occupation; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 345 


(b) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, healthcare services; 


(c) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in educational 
establishments and services thereof; 


(d) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to, the right 
of movement; 


(e) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to the right 
to reside, purchase, rent or otherwise occupy, any property; 


(f) the denial of access to, removal from, or unfair treatment in, 
Government or private establishment in whose care or custody a person may 
be; and 


(g) the isolation or segregation of a tuberculosis-affected person. 


4. (/) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette specify, there shall be constituted an Authority to be known as the 
Tuberculosis Eradication Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall consist of,— 
(a) Minister of State, Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare— 


Chairperson, ex-officio; 

(b) Minister of State, Union Ministry of Women and Child Development—Vice- 
Chairperson, ex-officio; 

(c) Director General of Health Services, Union Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare—member, ex-officio; 

(d) Secretaries of the Union Ministries of Women and Child Development, Health 
and Family Welfare and Statistics and Programme Implementation—members, ex-officio; 


(e) Chairperson, National Commission for Women—member, ex-officio; 


(f) Director, National Institute of Health and Family Welfare—member, ex-officio; 
and 


(g) five doctors having expertise and with not less than thirty years of practice 
in the field of tuberculosis treatment to be appointed by the Central Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Authority shall have a Secretariat consisting of such number of officers and 
staff as may be necessary for efficient discharge of its functions. 


(4) The salary, allowances and terms of conditions of service of doctors appointed as 
members of the Authority and officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


(5) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed. 


5. (/) The Authority shall discharge such functions as may be necessary for treatment, 
prevention and eradication of tuberculosis in the country. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of forgoing provision, the Authority shall— 


(a) formulate a Charter outlining its objectives along with roadmap to eradicate 
tuberculosis, within one year of its constitution; 


(b) provide knowledge and information relating to control of tuberculosis to 
Tuberculosis Control Centres for disseminating it to people; 


Constitution 
of the 
Tuberculosis 
Eradication 
Authority. 


Functions of 
the Authority. 


Tuberculosis 
Control 
Centre. 


Molecular 
Testing and 
daily dose of 
Multi- Drug 
Resistant 
(MDR-TB) 
Tuberculosis. 


Availability of 
latest Anti- 
Tuberculosis 
Drugs. 


Enrolment 
under Aadhaar 
for 
Tuberculosis 
Patients 
seeking 
treatment. 


Healthcare 
coupons. 


Mobile 
tuberculosis 
vans for 
active 
screening. 


Mobile 
tuberculosis 
vaccine 
immunization 
drive. 


Air borne 
infection 
control in 
high risk 


areas. 


Nutritional 
support to 
tuberculosis 
patients. 


346 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(c) within one year of constitution, undertake a baseline study to collect 
comprehensive data about causes of tuberculosis, risk factors and vulnerable 
population. 


(d) direct the appropriate Government to assist in not necessary the baseline 
study; 


(e) direct healthcare service providers to follow the standard tuberculosis 
diagnosis and treatment protocol; and 


(f) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it, from time to time for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


6. (/) It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government to set up, within one 
year of its coming into force of this Act, in every district a centre to be known as the 
Tuberculosis Control Centre. 


(2) The Tuberculosis Control Centres shall provide free screening of tuberculosis and 
cost-free treatment to the patients. 


7. (/) The appropriate Government shall take measures for providing, as far as possible, 
Molecular Testing methods for diagnosis and daily dosage treatment for those living with 
Multi-Drug Resistant (MDR-TB) Tuberculosis, in particular. 


(2) The Central Government shall issue and give wide publicity to the necessary 
guidelines in respect of protocols for tuberculosis relating to Molecular Testing and Daily 
Dosage treatment. 


8. The Central Government shall take steps to ensure the introduction and availability 
of the latest anti tuberculosis drugs in all public hospitals and Government-run pharmacies. 


9. The Central Government and every State Government shall take measures to ensure 
that every Tuberculosis-affected person is enrolled under Aadhaar to ensure unique 
identification of patients seeking care and facilitate direct benefit transfers under the welfare 
measures. 


0. The appropriate Government shall also provide healthcare coupons to patients 
diagnosed with tuberculosis, which may be redeemed for cost-free treatment at private 
hospitals. 


Il. (/) The appropriate Government shall provide for mobile tuberculosis vans for 
active screening of tuberculosis, especially in remote rural areas. 


(2) The Patients found tuberculosis positive on mobile screening, shall be referred to 
the nearest tuberculosis Control Centre for follow-up care and treatment. 


i2. The appropriate Government shall undertake mobile tuberculosis immunization 
drive to vaccinate children who were either not vaccinated or underwent incomplete 
vaccination. 


3. The appropriate Government shall direct the concerned authorities to undertake air 
borne infection control in high risk and vulnerable areas. 


4. The appropriate Government shall provide additional nutritional support to 
tuberculosis patients at tuberculosis Control Centres, to incentivise patients to continue 
treatment and reduce drop outs. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 347 


5. Every registered company and society manufacturing and distributing tobacco 
related products, shall contribute five per cent. of their annual sales value towards research 
on new drugs and diagnostic tools for tuberculosis. 


6. The State Government shall provide extensive facilities at the primary health centres 
and tuberculosis Control Centres for diagnosis and treatment of drug resistant strain of 
tuberculosis. 


7. (2) The appropriate Government shall undertake outreach activities to communicate 
to citizens of the factors contributing to tuberculosis, symptoms of tuberculosis and its ill 
effects, especially in rural areas. 


(2) The nurses and the staff at the tuberculosis Control Centres shall educate the 
tuberculosis patients on the cough etiquette. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall mobilise the local population in increasing 
awareness of tuberculosis in citizens. 


8. The appropriate Government shall provide for tobacco cessation counselling 
services at all tuberculosis Control Centres. 


9. The appropriate Government shall— 


(a) undertake outreach and communication activities to increase awareness in 
women, especially in rural areas, of ill effects of tobacco consumption on their 
reproductive health and babies; 


(b) provide for tobacco cessation counselling services at all antenatal clinics 
and primary health centres; and 


(c) increase awareness in rural households about the lethal effect of indoor air 
pollution from chulhas, and undertake necessary steps to curb the same. 


20. (/) The Authority shall prepare once every year, as may be prescribed, an annual 
report giving the summary of its activities, including schemes it has undertaken and 
recommended to the Government over the year and it shall contain statements of annual 
accounts of the Authority. 


(2) Acopy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and the Central 
Government shall cause the report to be laid before each House of Parliament. 


2. The Central Government, shall from time to time, provide, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. 


22. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


23. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 


Funding 
research on 
new drugs and 
diagnostic 
tools for 
tuberculosis. 


Facilities for 
treating drug 
resistant strain 
of 
tuberculosis. 


Outreach 
activities to 
increase 
awareness of 
tuberculosis. 


Tobacco 
cessation 
services. 


Awareness in 
women of ill 
effects of 
tobacco 
consumption 
on 
reproductive 
health. 


Annual report 
and its laying 
before the 
Parliament. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulty. 


Power to 
make rules. 


348 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 349 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Tuberculosis (TB), the second (after COVID-9) deadliest infectious killer, is caused 
by bacteria (Mycobacterium tuberculosis) that most often affect the lungs. It can spread 
when people who are sick with TB expel bacteria into the air — for example, by coughing. 
Most people who develop the disease are adults in 2020 — men accounted for 56 per cent of 
all TB cases, adult women accounted for 33 per cent and children for |! per cent. Many new 
cases of TB are attributable to five risk factors which are: under-nutrition, HIV infection, 
alcohol use, (disorders) smoking and diabetes. 


TB is preventable and curable. About 85 per cent of people who develop TB disease 
can be successfully treated with a 6-month drug regimen. Treatment has the added benefit of 
curtailing onward transmission of infection. 


The COVID-9 pandemic has reversed years of global progress in tackling tuberculosis 
and for the first time in over a decade, TB deaths have increased, according to the World 
Health Organization’s 202 Global TB Report. Approximately, |.5 million people died from TB 
in 2020 globally. 


Reporting of tuberculosis (TB) cases in India went down by 4 per cent between 209 
and 2020 due to the COVID-9 pandemic, according to the World Health Organization’s 202 
Global TB Report. In March 202], an analysis by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
revealed that notification of TB cases in India reduced by 25 per cent between January and 
December 2020 because of the lockdown and diversion of resources for COVID-9 control 
measures. In March, April and May 2020, TB case notifications in India dropped by 20.55 per 
cent, 63.47 per cent and 46.33 per cent respectively, according to the Nikshay database, a 
web-enabled patient management system for TB control under the Union Government’s 
National TB Elimination Programme. During India’s second COVID-I9 wave in 202], a similar 
trend was seen, with notifications beginning to decline by April 202. As many as |,!6,645 
cases were notified in April 202, according to the Nikshay portal. India (26.2) was among the 
eight countries that accounted for over two-thirds of the global TB cases. India was also 
among the l0 countries making up 74 per cent of the global gap between estimated TB 
incidence and the number of people newly diagnosed with TB, according to the Global TB 
Report 202]. An estimated | .48 million people died due to TB globally in 2020. India accounted 
for 34% of them. Deaths due to TB in the country also rose by 3% compared to 209. 
Keeping all these points in view, a act is needed which ensures that proper treatment is given 
to Tuberculosis patients irrespective to other factors. 


The proposed Bill provides for free screening and treatment of tuberculosis at 
tuberculosis Control Centres established at district level in every State, provision for 
healthcare coupons that can be redeemed at any private hospital for free tuberculosis related 
treatment and care, mobile tuberculosis vans for screening of tuberculosis in high risk 
population, especially in rural areas. Tuberculosis positive patients thus screened shall be 
referred to the nearest tuberculosis Control Centres for follow-up treatment and care. The 
Bill also directs the appropriate Government to undertake mobile tuberculosis immunization 
drive to vaccinate children and to undertake air borne infection control activities in areas 
vulnerable to disease. The Bill aims to reduce drop outs from treatment and increase the 
patients compliance, through provision of nutritional supplements at tuberculosis Control 
Centres. To fund research in new drugs and diagnostic tools for tuberculosis, the Bill mandates 
all private and government companies involved in manufacture and distribution of tobacco 
related products, to contribute five per cent of their annual sales value. The Bill has provision 
to mobilise local population to increase outreach to citizens about factors contributing to 
tuberculosis, symptoms of tuberculosis, cough etiquette. The Bill provides for active 
screening and extensive facilities for treatment of multi-drug resistant strain of tuberculosis 
at tuberculosis Control Centres. 


Tobacco use is one of the main causes of tuberculosis, contributing to 7.9 per cent of 
tuberculosis related deaths in the country. Research has shown that providing tobacco 


350 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


cessation services to tobacco users, has proved to reduce the disease burden of tuberculosis. 
Recognising tobacco as a major contributor to tuberculosis, the Bill provides for integration 
of tobacco cessation counselling services at all tuberculosis Control Centre. As per the 
World Health Organisation statistics, India is home to second highest number of women 
smokers globally. According to the National Family Health Survey-3, the proportion of children 
with low birth weight, is greater among children born to mothers who use tobacco. The Bill 
also has provision to educate women of the ill effects of tobacco consumption on their 
reproductive health, provide for tobacco cessation couselling services at all antenatal clinics 
and primary health centres. The Bill also provides for measures to curb indoor air pollution 
created by chulhas (used in rural areas for cooking purposes). 


The Bill thus aims for the control, prevention and complete eradication of tuberculosis 
in the country. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; 
January 8, 2022. SHRIRANG APPA BARNE 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Tuberculosis Eradication 
Authority and also appointment of such number of officers and staff for its functioning. 
Clause 6 provides for establishment of Tuberculosis Control Centre. Clause 7 provides for 
molecular testing methods for diagnosis and daily dose of Multi-drug Resistant (MDR-TB) 
Tuberculosis. Clause 8 provides for introduction and availability of the latest anti- tuberculosis 
drugs in all public hospitals and Government- run pharmacies. Clause l0 provides for the 
cost-free screening and treatment of tuberculosis. Clause | | provides for mobile tuberculosis 
vans for active screening of tuberculosis. Clause |2 provides for mobile tuberculosis 
immunization drive. Clause l4 provides for nutritional support to tuberculosis patients. 
Clause |5 provides for funding research on new drugs and diagnostic tools for tuberculosis. 
Clause l6 provides for facilities for treating drugs resistant strain of tuberculosis. Clause 2l 
makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve recurring expenditure of 
three hundred crore rupees per annum which shall be charged from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to 
be involved. 


352 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make necessary rules for 


carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 353 


BILL No. 235 oF 2022 


A Bill to provide for establishment of Tourism Development Board for the Development of 
tourism in the country and for matters connected therewith. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Tourism Development Board Act, 2022. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Board” means the Tourism Development Board constituted under section 
4; and 


(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


Short title, 
extent and 
Commencement. 


Definitions. 


Declaration of 
an area as 
Tourist 
Destination. 


Constitution 
of Tourism 
Development 
Board. 


Appointment 
of Secretary 
and Chief 
Accounts 
Officer and 
other staff of 
the Board. 


Headquarter 
and other 
offices of the 
Board. 


Meetings and 
procedure of 
the Board. 


Constitution 
of a Tourism 
Development 
Board Fund. 


Objectives of 
the Board. 


354 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


3. (7) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that an area has tourism 
potential in view of its location, ancient or historical importance or natural beauty, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare that area to be a tourist destination. 


(2) An area declared under sub-section (/) as tourist destination shall be developed 
by the Board as per international standards. 


4. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
a Board to be known as the Tourism Development Board for development of tourism 
destinations. 


(2) The Board shall consist of — 
(a) The Union Minister of Tourism who shall be Chairperson, ex-officio; 


(b) The Union Minister of State in the Ministry of Tourism shall be 
Vice—Chairperson; 


(c) The Minister of Tourism of States representing each State shall act as 
ex-officio member; and 


(d) One member from each State having expertise in the field of tourism 
development, marketing and advertisement, to be nominated by the Central Government 
in consultation with State Government. 


(3) The nominated members shall hold office for a period of three years. 


(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of nominated 
members shall be such as may be prescribed. 


5. (/) The Central Government shall appoint the Secretary and the Chief Accounts 
Officer, respectively, of the Board in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Secretary and the Chief Accounts Officer shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as may be specified by the Central Government. 


(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of other officers and staff to 
the Board as may be required for its efficient functioning. 


(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the officers 
and staff of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 


6. (/) The headquarters of the Board shall be at New Delhi. 


(2) The Board shall have its State offices in every State capital or at such other places 
as it may deem fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


7. The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of its business at its meetings, as may be prescribed. 


8. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
a Fund to be known as the Tourism Development Board Fund. 


(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


9. The objects of the Board shall be— 
(a) to promote and develop tourism; 


(b) to improve and strengthen the existing infrastructure in and around ancient 
monuments, heritage sites and tourist destinations; 


(c) to develop new tourist destinations with all basic amenities; 


(d) to coordinate, support and interact with other departments and agencies for 
streamlining services and amenities in and around tourist destinations; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 355 


(e) to provide safety and security to tourists; 
(f) to facilitate and enhance the experience of the tourists; and 


(g) to publish in at least one local newspaper having circulation in that area for 
inviting objections and suggestions for development of a master plan of each tourist 
destination. 


0. The Board shall, as soon as may be, prepare a separate Master Plan for the Master Plan 


development of each tourist destination: for 
development 


The Board shall, before finalising a Master Plan, take into consideration all of tourist 
objections and suggestions from general public made under sub section 9(g). destination. 


Il. The Board shall— Duties of the 
Board. 
(a) prepare a calendar of activities including annual festival, melas, haats to be 


organized in the each forthcoming financial year for the Development of tourism at 
different tourist destinations; 


(b) advertise such activities as it considers necessary to promote tourism at 
different tourist destinations; 


(c) interact once in three months with the stake holders including representatives 
of the hoteliers, local authorities, police, Archaeological Survey of India and the Tourism 
Department of the State Government concerned for proper co- ordination to develop 
and strengthen tourism infrastructure in and around tourist destinations in the area; 


(d) provide amenities at such rate and in such manner to the visitors as may be 
notified by the Central Government in this regard; 


(e) provide such other amenities as it may deem fit for the development of 
tourist destinations; 


(f) recommend to the Central Government the measures to be taken for the 
development of tourist destinations; 


(g) coordinate with the local authorities functioning in the area regarding any 
developmental work undertaken or to be undertaken in or around a tourist destinations; 
and 


(h) maintain a website containing all essential information regarding the tourist 
destinations including hotels, monuments and heritage sites, tourist maps, help desk, 
district administration and tour operators with a view to provide necessary information 
and help to the tourists. 


2. The Central Government shall, from time to time, issue such directions to the Central 


Board, as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Government 
to issue 


directions. 
3. (/) The Board shall prepare every year an annual report in such form and manner, Annual 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, giving a full account of its activities during Report. 
the previous year, and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 


(2) Acopy of the report forwarded under sub-section (I) shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 


4. The Board may, by general or special order, direct that any power exercisable by it Power to 
under this Act may be exercised by such officer or local Board in such cases and subject to delegate. 
such conditions as may be specified therein. 


5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Removal of 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not difficulty. 


Power to 
make rules. 


356 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient 
for removal of the difficulty: 


(i) provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two 
years from the date of the commencement of this Act; and 


(ii) every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, 
be laid before each House of Parliament. 


6. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 357 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The tourism sector in India is an integral part of the Make in India programme. The 
tourism industry in India plays a role of significant economic multiplier and becomes critical 
since India has to grow at rapid rates and create jobs. 


The objectives of tourism development are to foster understanding between people, 
to create employment opportunities and bring about socio-economic benefits to the 
community, particularly in the interior and remote areas and to strive towards balanced and 
sustainable development and preserve, enrich and promote India’s cultural heritage. One of 
the major objectives is the preservation and protection of natural resources and environment 
to achieve sustainable development. India offers geographical diversity, world heritage 
sites and niche tourism products like cruises, adventure, medical, eco-tourism, etc. Promotion 
programmes like Incredible India has spurred growth in Tourists’ Arrivals and Employment. 


India is currently ranked 54th in World Economic Forum’s Travel and Tourism 
Development Index (202). The Government has also said that the country’s tourism sector 
will recover to the pre-pandemic level by mid-2024. The Centre also said that by 2030, the 
tourism sector will contribute $250 billion to the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). 


By 2047, the country intends to achieve $] trillion through the tourism sector — a 
sector that was worst affected by the corona virus pandemic. 


Since Tourism is a multi-sectoral activity and the industry is affected by many other 
sectors of the national economy. To achieve $] trillion target, the State has to ensure inter- 
governmental linkages and coordination. 


There are still a large number of places in India which have got immense tourist 
potential, but due to various reasons the potential could not be best utilized. Though, 
Incredible India programme has increased inflow of tourists, India still stands at 54th ranking 
which shows lack of facilities and amenities for the tourists. 


Whether it is Central Government or State Government, development of tourism sector 
can never be achieved by any Government alone. It can be developed only when both 
Central and State Governments work hand in hand. Keeping present scenario in view, a 
board empowered by an Act is needed to cater to the demand of tourism development. 


Hence, this Bill. 


New Delhi; 
November 2, 2022. SHRIRANG APPA BARNE 


358 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Tourism Development Board by 
the Central Government. Clause 5 provides for appointment of Secretary, Chief Account 
Officer and other staff of the Authority. Clause 6 provides for headquarters and other offices 
of the Authority. Clause 7 provides for meetings and procedure of the Authority. Clause 8 
provides for constitution of a Tourism Development Board Fund. Clause |! provides for the 
development of tourism through advertisement, maintaining of website and providing 
amenities for development of tourist destinations. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to 
give the exact amount to be incurred. However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of 
about one thousand crore will be involved per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause l6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 359 


BILL No. 26 oF 2022 


A Bill to provide for the welfare of sculptors, artists and artisans in rural areas and for 
matters connected therewith. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas — Short title, 
Upliftment Council Act, 2022. extent and 


commencement. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


The National 
Sculptors, 
Artists and 
Artisans of 
Rural Areas 
Upliftment 
Fund. 


The National 
Sculptors, 
Artists and 
Artisans of 
Rural Areas 
Upliftment 
Council. 


Functions of 
the Council. 


360 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “artisan” means any person engaged in making useful, decorative or artistic 
items manually from leaves or weeds or bamboo or any other material by traditional 
means in rural areas for earning his livelihood; 


(b) “artist” means any person who earns his livelihood by performing arts 
including music, dance, drama, play, singing to entertain public or displaying of his 
paintings or artistic skills to public in rural areas; 


(c) “Council” means the National Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas 
upliftment Council constituted under section 4; 


(d) “Fund” means the National Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas 
Welfare Fund constituted under section 3; 


(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(f) “sculptor” means any person engaged in carving of statues or making of 
decorative pieces or any other useful items from clay, cement, stone or any other 
material in rural areas for earning his livelihood. 


3. (/) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the National 


Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas Upliftment Fund. 


(2) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in 


such proportion, as may be prescribed. 


4. (/) The Central Government shall establish a Council to be known as the National 


Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas Upliftment Council. 


(2) The Council shall consist of following members, namely:— 
(a) Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central Government; 
(b) Joint Secretary of Ministry of Textiles, Vice-Chairperson, ex-officio; 


(c) A representative of the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
conversant with problems of small enterprises of sculptors, artists and artisans in rural 
areas of country; 


(d) five members representing Non-Governmental Organisations working for 
the welfare of sculptors, artists and artisans in rural areas, to be appointed by the 
Central Government; 


(e) five members representing the sculptors, artists and artisans in rural areas, to 
be appointed by the Central Government; and 


(f) A representative each of such other Ministries and Departments of the 
Government of India as may be decided by the Central Government. 


(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of 


the Chairperson and members of the Council shall be such, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 


5. (7) The Council shall administer the Fund for the welfare of sculptors, artists and 


artisans of rural areas. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Fund shall also 


be used for,— 


(a) payment of compensation to the next of kin of the sculptors, artists and 
artisans in the event of death during work; 


(b) payment of premium for life insurance; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 36] 


(c) payment of old age pension; 
(d) payment of disability allowance; 


(e) provision of free health care facility to sculptors, artists and artisans and 
their family members; 


(f) housing facility at subsidised rate to sculptors, artists and artisans; 


(g) financial assistance to sculptors, artists and artisans for production and 
marketing of their products and organization and advertisement of events; 


(h) preservation, promotion, development and dissemination of art, culture, 
education and social welfare of sculptors, artists and artisans; 


(i) empower unemployed sculptors, artists and artisans by providing them tools, 
techniques and financial assistance for self-employment and upliftment; 


(j) imparting skill development training to the sculptors, artists and artisans; 


(k) granting fellowship and scholarship for carrying out research in the rural 
areas particularly in the sculptures; and 


(09 awarding the well known sculptors, artists and artisans having social impact 
in the society. 


6. The Council shall submit every year a report, in such form and manner, as may be 
prescribed, of its activities to the Central Government. 


7. (2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Annual Report. 


Power to make 
rules. 


362 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Though various government and non-government projects, research studies, training 
programmes and financial/marketing assistance schemes are available to protect the interest 
of artisans involved in preserving such heritage of India in the form of handicrafts, the result 
is yet not satisfactory. It is general perception that Indian handicrafts are famous worldwide 
since centuries, but the fact is that apart from some artists the majority of rural sculptors, 
artists and artisans are starving and struggling to meet basic needs. 


Due to various reasons, this great cultural heritage is being threatened by forces both 
from within and outside. Hence, majority of such sculptors, artists and artisans now are at 
saturated position and do not wish their children to continue with such occupation. 


In view of the miserable condition of these sculptors, artists and artisans, it is the duty 
of the Government to provide social security and other financial assistance to them by 
formulating and implementing appropriate policies for their upliftment. Thus, it is our duty to 
work towards making our current and future generations more aware about our culture and 
tradition and help and empower the people from rural areas earning their livelihood as 
sculptors, artists and artisans. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI ; SHRIRANG APPA BARNE 
November 2, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 363 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Fund for the welfare of sculptors, 
artists and artisans of rural areas. Clause 4 provides for establishment of a Council to 
administer the Fund for the welfare of sculptors, artists and artisans in the rural areas. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may be 
involved as recurring expenditure per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one thousand crore may also involve 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


364 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 365 


BILL No. 284 of 2022 


A Bill to provide for reservation for sportspersons in national sports administration bodies 
in India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I.(/) This Act may be called the Sportspersons (Reservation in Sports bodies) Short title, 
Bill, 2022. extent and 


commencement. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 
(a) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(b) “sportsperson” means a person who has represented India as a member of 


Reservation in 
appointment 
in Sports 
bodies. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


366 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


the national team, or a member of the State or regional team, or has established himself 
as a sportsperson of international repute in chosen field of sport; and 


(c) “sports body” means— 
(i) the Indian Olympic Association; or 
(ii) Sports Authority of India; or 


(iii) a national sports federation recognized by the Ministry of Sports and 
Youth Affairs of the Central Government, and its affiliated federations; or 


(iv) national sports promotion organizations recognized by the Ministry 
of Sports and Youth Affairs of the Central Government; or 


(v) a federation recognized by the International Olympic Association; or 


(vi) a federation or a body which regulates sport at international level and 
its affiliated federations or bodies regulating sport in India. 


3.The Central Government shall reserve fifty percent of administrative posts for 
sportspersons in sports bodies in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that out of fifty percent reserved posts, twenty percent shall be reserved for 
women sportspersons. 


4. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


5. (3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule and every notification or order issued under this Act shall be laid, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in a such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 367 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Sports play a vital role in physical development of human body. It also plays an 


important role in psychological conditioning of human brain. Therefore, sports has occupied 
crucial place in Indian way of life and culture since ages. 


Given the wide variety of sports that are played in India, administering them has 
always been a challenge. India has successfully created various institutions for sports 
administration at State and National level. However, our sports administration has been 
many a times proved impediment in allowing emerging sportspersons to realize their full 
potential and leave a mark of India at international competition. 


This bill, seeks to attempt reforms in sports administration through reservation of 
seats for sportspersons in national sports administrative bodies. Within the seats reserved 
for sportsperson, 50 percent of the seats shall be reserved for women. 


The primary motive of this bill is to utilize the experience and perspective of sportsperson 
in making sports administration more effective and efficient. It will give a bird eye view to 
sports institutions regarding the actual needs of sportsperson and addressing them in best 
possible manner. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; PARVESH SAHIB SINGH 
November 2, 2022. 


368 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 


the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail, the delegation of legislative 
power is of a normal character. 


2 of 974. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 369 


Bit No. 52 oF 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, |973. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (2) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 267 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, |973 (hereinafter referred to as the 
Code), in sub-section (), for the words “before the court” wherever they occur, the words 
“ before the court physically or with the permission of the court through video conferencing” 
shall be substituted. 


3. In section 273 of the code, for the words “shall be taken in the presence of the 
accused”, the words “shall be taken in the presence of the accused in normal circumstances 
or with the permission of the court through video conferencing” shall be substituted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 
267. 


Amendment 
of section 
273. 


370 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The law must adapt to new advancements in science and other social trends as they 
occur. As a result, the Supreme Court correctly stated in the case of Som Prakash vs. State of 
Delhi that “in our technological age nothing more primitive can be conceived of than denying 
discoveries and nothing cruder can retard forensic efficiency than swearing by traditional 
oral evidence only thereby discouraging the liberal use of scientific aids to prove guilt”. 
Laws must be changed in order to deal with the investigators’ and judges’ excessive workloads 
and to more completely implement a problem-solving approach to criminal proceedings. The 
introduction of the idea of video conferencing in the Indian criminal justice system is one 
illustration of this kind of transformation. 


The idea of video conferencing has been used as a tool in two different ways, first for 
gathering evidence in unique situations and then for bringing the undertrials before the 
court from the prison itself for reasons of an extension of remand or other purposes. For 
video conferencing to be permitted, the courts in India similarly used a purposeful 
interpretation. 


By using the advance technologies Indian judicial system can increase its efficiency 
in delivering justice and giving important verdicts, in case of criminal cases courts can hold 
trial of dreaded gangsters through video conferencing from prison itself, so that cops don’t 
have to ferry them to courts. Presently it is the case that only remand hearings are conducted 
by video conference. Criminals find various ways to carry out crime or escape when they are 
brought to the court as there has been various Instances of undertrial convicts escaping 
which would also be reduced if all prisoners’ remand and trials were conducted by video 
conference. It also happens that during their presence in court for trial, criminals may threaten 
witnesses or plan to commit crimes with the assistance of their assistants. Video conferencing 
can help catch these actions. 


Video conferencing is greatly required since it enhances the administration of justice 
by saving both the Court and undertrials’ time. The concept’s introduction will make it 
possible to record evidence and eliminate the risk associated with transporting high-risk 
inmates who are being tried in various courts across the nation. This will also make it 
possible to record the testimony of foreign-based experts and witnesses without having to 
pay the exorbitant transportation costs to get them to the trial court. Modern times’ complexity 
necessitates that the law be updated at the same rate as technological advancements. 


Justice would undoubtedly benefit from the idea of video conferencing since it would 
enable judges to be as accurate as possible and comprehend the case with the aid of all 
video recordings. These cutting-edge techniques for connecting the prison and the court 
via video linkage will guarantee a quick trial and eliminate the difficulties of undertrials. 
Additionally, it should be remembered that the Law Courts would lag behind other industries 
if they did not accept technological advancement in court processes. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; PARVESH SAHIB SINGH 
January |7, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 283 


BILL No. 254 oF 2022 


A Bill to establish a Social Media and Over-The-Top Platform Regulatory Board to regulate 
the content shown by individuals, art, cultural organizations in social 
media in the name of creativity through art, music, films, cinema, OTT cinema, 
advertisement, standup comedy, poetry, social media, cultural staging, theatrical 
staging and for matters connected therewith. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Social Media and Over-The-Top Platform Regulatory 
Board Act, 2022. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


372 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “anarchy” means promotion of social and cultural malpractices in the country 
in the name of creativity, distortion of Indian culture, attack on the unity and integrity 
of the country, nurturing and support of terrorist and jihadi ideology, depiction and 
support of anti-national ideologies, staging mundanity against any particular religion 
out of prejudice, support and any other kind of creative activity which is against 
Indian culture, life values, spirit of public welfare, philanthropy, coexistence, harmony, 
the spirit of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam and world peace; 


(b) “creativity” means arts, literature, films, cinema, visual and audio poetry 
programmes presented through Over-the-Top media platform; 


(c) “Over-The-Top platform” means a media service that offer access to the film 
and television content provided over the internet connection at the request and to 
suit the requirement of individual consumer; 


(d) “media” means any data, text, sound, image, graphics, music, photography, 
advertisements, video, website and podcasts; 


(e) “Board” means the Social Media and OTT Regulation Board established 
under section 3; and 


(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


The Social 3. (J) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official gazette, constitute 
Media and a Board to be known as the Social Media and Over-The-Top Platform Regulatory Board for 


laud regulation of anarchy in the fields of film, cinema and Over-The-Top platform. 
Top Platform 


Sores (2) The headquarters of the Board shall be at Mahoba in the State of Uttar Pradesh. 
oard. 


(3) The Board shall consist of not less than seven members to be appointed by Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the Board shall consist of,— 


(a) one member each from North, South, East, West and Central India who have 
at least fifteen years of experience in the field of art and culture; and 


(b) two other members who have at least twenty years of experience in classical 
Indian literature or its staging. 


(4) The Chairperson of the Board shall be selected by consensus of the members of 
the Board. 


(5) The meeting of the Board shall be compulsorily held at least once every month and 
the Central Government may make such provisions as may be necessary for review of the 
work and coordination amongst the various Ministries. 


(6) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of services 
of members appointed under this section shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Functions of 4. The Board shall,— 


Board 
(a) inspect all cinema, art, cultural and communication mediums; 


(b) organize seminars, workshops, counselling sessions from time to time to 
understand the creation of cinema, motion picture in which persons and organizations 
who create anarchy in the name of creativity may also be invited; 


(c) from time to time, issue guidelines for regulation of anarchy; 


(d) motivate person and group of persons and institutions for creative 
development in accordance with Indian values; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 373 


(e) work as complementary arrangement with other commissions and boards of 
other art, culture, cinema under the Board for film certification constituted under the 
Cinematography Act, |952; and 


(f) such other function as may be prescribed. 


5. If any person publishes any social media content on the OTT or such other platform 
harming the unity and integrity of the country, hurting social harmony, acting with prejudice 
against a particular religion, supporting terrorist and jihadi ideology, he shall be liable for 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years and fine of rupees two 
crore. 


6. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by the Parliament in this 
regard provide the requisite funds from time to time for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


7. The Central Government, for the purpose of carrying out any of the provisions of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder, within the territorial jurisdiction of any State included 
under this Act, may give such directions to the Government of that State as may appear to it 
to be necessary. 


8. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or 
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 


Penalty. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Power to give 
directions. 


Power to 
make rules. 


374 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Indians have not only done subtle and extensive research on all the possible dimensions 
of life, but also created science and highly specialized techniques for this, based on the 
fundamental understanding of philosophy and towards this understanding, it has also been 
proved that there is no proven end of learning. The proof of this is obtained from the 
declaration “Ekam Sadvipra Bahudha Vadanti’, in which instead of curbing creative freedom, 
it was encouraged, but on this basis harmful freedom was also regulated, the basis of which 
was practical understanding with Indian cultural values. 


In the tradition of Indian thought, the first thinkers were called poets and the expression 
made by them was called poetry. And the Upanishads were revealed and the original thinkers 
were called Kavikritu, but with time they were called poets who depicted literature and art, 
which is acommon word for this in our language today. But in the development of literature 
and art, spirituality never lost its control over creativity, although morality, intellectualism 
and materialism were present in more and less form in many periods, but the controlling 
spirituality of all of them remained intact. Maharishi Valmiki ji created many classical works 
like moral oriented Ramayana, Ved Vyas ji intellectually oriented Mahabharata and Kalidas 
created many classical compositions like Abhijnanshakuntalam etc., after which the tradition 
of this type of creativity continued for a long time in India, which deviated in the medieval 
period and came till the British period. There were concerted state efforts to erase this 
tradition from public mind. But in the nineteenth century, at the individual level, creativity 
according to Indian values re-appeared in the society and this was possible only through the 
life force of the never-ending Indian culture. This change in the field of creation was so 
extensive that it not only influenced the genres of literature, art, poetry and drama but also 
jolted the political awareness and set patterns of leaders and legendary personalities etc. 


However, in the last few decades and especially in the last few years, there is again a 
deviation in the values of this creativity due to certain reasons. The main reason of the 
disinterest as well as ignorance from the excellent values of Indian poetry, art etc. of the 
creative workers engaged in the field of creativity is due to some specific reasons. While the 
creativity in respect of Indian values, the intimacy of human relations and the high materiality 
is also practiced by converting the same into spirituality, the proofs of which are found in 
abundance in crafts, architecture, scriptures, books, etc., these days the movies, OTT 
platforms, music albums, bring forth uncontrolled display of body and language which is 
definitely against artistic harmony and Indian values. It denotes ignorance about the creativity 
of art etc. This deviation can be checked by establishing constant communication slowly. 


The second major reason is very serious and that is due to anti-national ideology and 
religious frenzy. Presently, in the name of creativity, efforts are being made to nurture anarchy 
and hysteria in the society and the country, and support for terrorist and jihadi ideology 
whereas ridicule and hatred towards a particular religion are also being promoted. This is a 
big threat to the country and there is an urgent and imperative need to curb it rationally. 


Through this bill, the development of creative sense with lofty, rational, continuously 
active and spiritually controlled values of Indian culture in cinema, art etc. can be rapidly 
ensured. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL 
November 2, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 375 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Media and Over-The-Top 
Platform Regulatory Board. It further provides for appointment of members of the Board. 
Clause 6 provides for the Central Government to provide funds. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, 
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of 
about rupees ten crore per annum is likely to be involved. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved. 


376 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 377 


Bit No. 29 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


.(/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. Short title and 


: Ss . commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In article 72 of the Constitution, after clause (/), the following clause shall be added Amendment 
at the end, namely:— of article 72. 


“(IA) Nothing in this article shall apply to the punishment or sentence of any person 
convicted of rape and murder of a girl child. 


Explanation.— For the purpose of this clause ‘girl child’ means a girl upto the age of 
sixteen years.”. 


378 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

“Where Women are honored, Divinity blossoms there” such thinking is one of the 
prominent views of Indian culture. Mother is regarded a first guru not only in Indian society 
but in all societies across the world. Many philosophers and great souls including Swami 
Vivekanand have given highest priority to the honor of women. Despite of such sacrosanct 
thinking, some people in our society, who have distorted mentality, not only commit heinous 
crime such as rape against girls but they also kill those girls. In our country, many such cases 
have come to light and such distorted mentality can be seen in “Nirbhaya Case” as well. No 
society can accept this distorted mentality and drastic measures are required to be taken to 
protect girl child. 


Therefore, the provision of President’s discretionary power to grant pardon or suspend 
sentences pronounced by the Supreme Court should not be available to the persons 
convicted of rape and killing of girl child. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL 
November 2, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 379 


BiLt No. [] oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the constitution of a Board for prevention of man-animal conflicts in 
the country and for matters related therewith. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (2) This Act may be called the Man-Animal Conflict Prevention Board Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government” in the case of a State the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "Board" means the Man-Animal Conflict Prevention Board constituted under 
section 3; 


Short title, 
and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Constitution 
of Man- 
Animal 
Conflict 
Prevention 
Board. 


Secretary and 
other Officers. 


380 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(c) "experts" means persons having requisite qualification and experience in 
the field of prevention of man-animal conflicts; and 


(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. (7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette constitute, 
a Board, to be known as the Man-Animal Conflict Prevention Board in such manner as may 
be prescribed. 


(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to contract 
and shall, by the said name, sue and be sued. 


(3) The Board shall consist of such number of members, not exceeding ten, as may be 
prescribed, and unless the rules made in this behalf otherwise provide, the Board shall 
consist of the following members, namely:— 


(a) a Chairperson; 


(b) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of 
the People and one by the Council of States;5 


(c) four members to represent respectively by the Ministries of the Central 
Government dealing with— 


(i) Environment, Forest and Climate Change; 
(ii) Home Affairs; 
(iii) Railways; and20 
(iv) Jal Shakti. 
(d) two members to represent respectively dealing with— 
(i) National Board for Wildlife; and 


(ii) Wildlife Institute of India, to be appointed by the Central Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen 
as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliament. 


(5) The Salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of 
members shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(6) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board, 
exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the Board as may be delegated to him by 
the Board and such other powers and duties as may be prescribed. 


(7) The Board shall elect from amongst its members a Vice-Chairperson who shall 
exercise such powers and perform such functions of the Chairperson as may be prescribed 
or as may be delegated to him by the Chairperson. 


(8) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalidated merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; 

(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board; 

(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case. 


4. (/) The Board may appoint the Secretary and such other officers and employees as 
it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of 
the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be 
determined by regulations. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 36] 


5. (/) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Board may, from time to time, 
constitute such committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions. 


(2) Every committee constituted under sub-section (/) shall consist of such number 
of persons as the Board may deem fit. 


6. The Board may— 


(i) conduct seminars, classes, training or training camps to avoid and prevent 
man-animal conflicts in the country; 


(ii) create awareness for avoiding man-animal conflicts; 


(iii) assist and encourage studies and research for prevention of man-animal 
conflicts; 


(iv) strive towards achieving reduction in man-animal conflicts; 


(v) appoint experts to find out the reasons for man-animal conflicts and to make 
suggestions to prevent the same; 


(vi) suggest measures to control man-animal conflicts to all concerned; 

(vii) provide financial or other assistance for preventing man-animal conflicts; 
(viii) provide guidelines for training in prevention of man-animal conflicts; 
(ix) maintain register and record details of man-animal conflicts occurred; and 


(x) secure better working conditions for any and all people or officials involved 
in the task of reducing man-animal conflicts in the country. 
REGISTRATION OF INSTITUTION WORKING TOWARDS PREVENTION OF MAN- 
ANIMAL CONFLICTS 
7. (2) Every institution working towards prevention of man-animal conflicts, shall, 


register itself with the Board immediately after the commencement of this Act in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 


(2) The registration made under sub-section (/) shall continue to be in force until it is 
cancelled by the Board. 


8. (/) Every institution registered under section 7, shall furnish such details, including 
the number of persons involved in the cases dealt regarding man-animal conflicts to the 
Board on a quarterly basis in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Any person who fails to furnish any detail as required under sub-section (/) or 
furnishes any particular which is false and which he knows to be false or does not believe to 
be true shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 


(3) The Board may authorize an officer to visit any facility at any time to verify the 
accuracy of any detail made under this section or to ascertain the functioning of the institution 
registered. 


FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
9. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law, in 


this behalf, provides to the Board grants and loans of such sums of money as it may 
consider necessary. 


0. (7) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Man-Animal Conflicts 
Prevention Fund for carrying out the purpose of this Act to which shall be credited— 


(a) grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government; 


(b) fee levied and collected in respect of licenses granted under this Act; and 


Advisory 
Committee. 


Functions of 
the Board. 


Registration 
of Institution. 


Disclosure of 
information 
of registered 
owner. 


Grants and 
loans to the 
Board. 


Constitution 
of Man- 
Animal 
Conflict 
Prevention 
Fund. 


Budget. 


Annual 
Report. 


Accounts and 
Audits. 


Annual Report 
and auditors 
report to be 
laid before 
Parliament. 


Power to enter. 


Penalties for 
obstructing an 
officer or 
member of 
the Board in 
the discharge 
of his duties 
and for failure 
to produce 
books and 
records. 


Delegation. 


Member, 
Officers and 
employees of 
the Board to 
be public 
servant. 
Protection of 


Action taken 
in good faith. 


Power to 
make rules. 


382 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(c) sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be decided by 
the Central Government. 


Il. The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time, as may be prescribed, its 
budget for each financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Board 
and forward the same to the Central Government. 


2. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year, as may 
be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year, and submit the report to the Central Government. 


3. The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in such manner as may, 
in consultation with the Comptroller andAuditor-General of India, be prescribed and the 
Board shall furnish to the Central Government before such date, as may be prescribed, its 
audited copy of accounts together with the auditors, report thereon. 


4. The Central Government shall cause the annual report and auditor’s report to be 
laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament. 


5. Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person, generally or specially authorized 
by the Board in this behalf, may, whenever it is necessary so to do, for any of the purposes 
of this Act, at all reasonable times, enter upon any land or premises and make any inspection 
or inquiry or do such other Act or thing as may be prescribed: 


Provided that no such person shall enter any building or any enclosed courtyard or 
garden attached to a dwelling-house (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof) without 
previously giving such occupier at least twenty-four hours’ notice in writing of his intention 
to do so. 


6. Any person who— 


(a) obstructs any member authorized by the Chairperson in writing or any officer 
or other employee of the Board authorized by it in this behalf or any person authorized 
in this behalf by the Central Government or by the Board, in the exercise of any power 
conferred, or in the discharge of any duty imposed, on him by or under this Act; or 


(b) having control over or custody of any account book or other record, fails to 
produce such book or record when required to do so by or under this Act, 


shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 


7. The Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairperson 
or any other member or to any officer of the Board, subject to such conditions and limitations, 
if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act as it 
may deem necessary. 


8. All members, officers and other employees of the Board shall be deemed, when 
acting or purporting to Act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public 
servants within the meaning of section 2! of the Indian Penal Code, !860. 


9. No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government or the 
Board or any committee appointed by it, or any member of the Board or such committee, or 
any officer or employee of the Government or the Board or any other person authorised by 
the Government or the Board, for anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith 
under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder. 


20. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Officlal Gazette, make rules 
to carry out the purposes of this Act. 


45 of 860. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 383 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: 


(a) the constitution of committees under section 5; 


(b) the form of the application for registration, cancellation, fee payable, 
particulars to be included in such application, the procedure to be followed in granting 
registration under section 8; 


(c) the conditions and the restrictions with respect to the exercise of the power 
to enter under section 20; and 


(d) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be, or may be, made by rules. 


2. The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder 
to carry out the purposes of this Act. 


22. Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made under this 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should 
not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation. 


23. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament. 


Power to make 
regulations. 


Rules and 
regulations to 
be laid before 
Parliament. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


364 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The incidents of man-animal conflicts in the country are on the rise and many people 
have lost their lives, particularly during the year 202 when it was at its peak. The incidents 
of man-animal conflicts are reported from all parts of the country and no State is an exception. 
Law prevents killing animals such as tigers, elephants etc. and whereas the people are at the 
receiving end. 


The major reason for the increasing man-animal conflicts is the ever decreasing forest 
areas due to which the wild animals are forced to enter into human settlements in the search 
of water and food. Wild animals are being crowded out of their natural habitat due to 
encroachment or due to deforestation, and the animals are forced to look for food and water 
wherever they get. The people have seen tigers roaming on the streets. 


Together with the increase in the human population, we are also witnessing increase 
in the population of wild animals. The State of Kerala in particular has been facing this 
problem enormously, especially the elephants and wild boar and tigers coming out of forest, 
destroying crops and attacking humans. The State Government of Kerala has demanded to 
declare wild boar as vermin due to their increasing nuisance. 


Therefore, it is the need of the hour that we need to take some strict enforcement to 
prevent man-animal conflict. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; V.K. SREEKANDAN 
July 06, 2022. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 385 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Man-Animal Conflict Prevention 
Board. Clause 4 provides for appointment of secretary, offices and employees of the Board. 
Clause 5 provides for the constitution of a Advisory Committee by the Board. Clause 9 
provides for grants and loans by the Central Government for the Board. Clause 0 provides 
for constitution of Man-Animal Conflict Prevention Care Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, 
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about one hundred crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


386 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 20 of the Bill empower the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. Clause 2] provides for the Board to make regulations for carrying 


out the purpose of this Act. As the rules and regulations will relate to matters of detail only, 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


30 of 956. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 387 


Butt No. 35 or 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 956. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (2) This Act may be called Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 5 of the Hindu Succession Act, !956 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act),— 


(a) for sub-section (J), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(॥) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to 
the rules set out in section 6,— 


(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any 
predeceased sons or daughters or non-remarried daughters-in-law) and the 
husband; 


(b) secondly, upon the mother and father; 

(c) thirdly, upon the heirs of the mother; 

(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and 

(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the husband.”. 
(b) “in sub-section (2),— 


(i) in clause (a), for the words “including the children of any predeceased 
son or daughter’, the words “including the children of any predeceased sons or 
daughters or non-remarried daughters-in-law or the husband” shall be 
substituted; and 


(ii) in clause (b), for the words “including the children of any predeceased 
son or daughter’, the words “including the children of any predeceased sons or 
daughters or non-remarried daughters-in-law” shall be substituted.” 


3. In section |6 of the principal Act, Rule 3 shall be omitted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 5. 


Amendment of 
section l6. 


388 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


As on date many litigations pertaining to successions are pending in various courts in 
the country for many decades. In many cases, it has come to the notice that mothers are 
being neglected and even are not taken care of by their own sons and daughters. A 
considerable number of such mothers are on the roads or housed in old age homes due to no 
means for their livelihood. These non-remarried daughters-in-law after the demise of their 
husbands are deprived of their rights on the moveable and immovable properties left by their 
mothers-in-law. 


According to section 5 of the Hindu Succession Act, l956 only sons and daughters 
(including the children of any predeceased sons or daughters) are eligible for the succession 
of the property of a female Hindu dying intestate. However non-remarried daughters-in-law 
are deprived of such rights. In many cases, these non-remarried mothers after the death of 
their husbands were required to clear off the liabilities created by their husbands during their 
lift time for many reasons whatsoever. The question arises how they will do it, if they are not 
earning and their hope is on whatever the share they get from the said movable and immovable 
properties left by their mothers-in-law which is being deprived. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend section |5 of the Hindu Succession Act, |956 with 
a view to provide rights to daughters-in-law at par with sons and daughters (including the 
children of any predeceased sons or daughters) and the husband and reorder the succession 
rights on the property of a female Hindu dying intestate. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; V.K. SREEKANDAN 
February 6, 2023. 


57 of 955. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 389 


Bitt No. 36 oF 2023 
A BILL further to amend the Citizenship Act, |955. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (2) This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 8 of the Citizenship Act, 955, after sub-section (2), the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(2A) The Central Government shall, within six months from coming into force of 
this Act, frame rules under clause (eei) of sub-section (2): 


Provided that if the Central Government fails to frame rules within the said period of six 
months, the Central Government shall cause it to be laid a written statement before each 
Houses of Parliament the reasons for not framing the rules within the said period.”. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 8. 


390 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


The intention of giving assent after hours of debate in both the Houses of Parliament 
on any Bill(s) is to implement or promulgate the contents thereon. Therefore, no Bill has to be 
kept in abeyance merely due to not being able to frame rules and such action amounts to 
disrespect to our temple of democracy. 


The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 20l9 was passed in Lok Sabha on !0.2.209 and in 
Rajya Sabha on |.2.209. The President gave his assent to the Bill on !2.2.209 and has 
become an Act. However, the Act could not be implemented as rules under section 6B(I) 
relating to conditions, restrictions and manner for granting certificate of registration or 
certificate of naturalisation to a person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or 
Christian community from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan who entered India on or 
before 3.2.204 are yet to be framed, despite giving 7(seven) extensions in all these three 
years. This indicates there needs to be more study and debates before any such bills are 
passed and becoming Acts. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Citizenship Act, 955 with a view to provide that 
the Central Government shall frame rules relating to conditions, restrictions and manner for 
granting certificate of registration or certificate of naturalisation to a person belonging to 
Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian community from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or 
Pakistan who entered India on or before 3.2.204 as envisaged under section |8 within six 
months. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; V.K. SREEKANDAN 
January |9, 2023. 


45 of 860. 


2 of 974. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39] 


Bit No. 3 oF 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Indian Penal Code, \860 and the Code of Criminal Procedure 
Code, 973.2 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRILIMINARY 
I. (/) This Act may be called the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENT TO THE INDIAN PENAL CobE, |860 
2. In section !24A of the Indian Penal Code, 860, for the words "shall be punished 
with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment which may 
extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine", the words "shall be punished 
with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend upto 
rupees fifty thousand, or with both" shall be substituted. 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENT TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, |973 
3. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, under the heading 


"I - OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE", for the entries relating to section 
24A, thefollowing entries shall be substituted, namely:— 


i 2 3 4 5 6 
24A Sedition Imprisonment Non- Bailable Court 
which may Cognizable of Session. 
extend to 


3 years or with 
fine which may 
extend upto 
rupees fifty 
thousand or 
with both. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 
24A. 


Amendment 
of the first 
schedule. 


392 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In India, the first reference to sedition was made by Macaulay in the Draft Penal Code, 
837. Through an error of omission, the section on sedition was omitted from the Indian 
Penal Code, |860. The error, however, was rectified through a Special Act XVII, 870 and 


sedition was added as an offence under section !24A of IPC, !860. Thereafter, sedition has 
remained an offence on the Indian statute books. 


Post-independence, the Constituent Assembly vehemently opposed the inclusion of 
sedition under the list of reasonable restrictions to the" Right to Freedom" (Article 3 under 
the draft Constitution) and succeeded. Further our first Prime Minister, Shri Jawaharlal Nehru, 
when introducing the first amendment to the Constitution, referred to sedition and stated: 


"Now so far as I am concerned that particular section is highly objectionable and 
obnoxious and it should have no place both for practical and historical reasons, if you like, 
in any body of laws that we might pass. The sooner we get rid of it the better. We might deal 
with that matter in other ways, in more limited ways, as every other country does but that 
particular thing, as it is, should have no place, because all of us have had enough experience 
of it in a variety of ways and apart from the logic of the situation, our urges are against it." 


The Indian Penal Code, !860, apart from sedition under section |24A, has provisions 
enlisted in chapters VI, VII, VIII and others to check activities inciting war against India or 
causing disruption of public order. The objective of the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act 
(UAPA), !967 had been to enable the State authorities to deal with "activities directed 
against the integrity and sovereignty of India". In the light of this, sedition loses its relevance 
in the present day and context. Even the British abolished it from their statute books in 2009. 


Presently in India, the use of sedition has been on the rise. According to the Crime in 
India report, incidents of sedition have increased from 35 in 206 to 73 in 2020. However, the 
conviction rate under sedition is a meagre four per cent in 2020. The increasing trend of 
cases, as well as the negligible conviction rate, is a grave sign of misuse of the provision of 
sedition to curtail disapprobation and dissent against the Government. Given such a scenario, 
the end objective would be the abolition of sedition itself. Though abolition of sedition is 
desirable, it may not be currently feasible to achieve this. So, in the view of protecting the 
interests of a stable and healthy democracy, it is felt necessary to dilute the stringency of 
section |24A of the Indian Penal Code, |860 by making sedition a bailable and non-cognizable 
offence. Moreover, through this bill, it is also proposed to omit the provision of imprisonment 
for life under sedition. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SRINIVAS KESINENI 
November 26, 202. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 393 


Bitt No. 94 or 2022 


A Bill to bring about accountability and Parliamentary oversight to the legislative and 
policy-making process in the country and to improve the quality of expenditure 
made by the Union Government. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


. (7) This Act may be called the Government Legislative Proposals and Schemes 
(Impact Analysis and Post Implementation Assessment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Bill” means a Government Bill but does not include Finance Bill, Appropriation 
Bill and Bills of trivial or technical nature; 


(b) “Government”’ means the Central Government; 


(c) “major Scheme” means a Scheme that is likely to result in a recurring expenditure of 
rupees one thousand crores or above from the Consolidated Fund of India or a cumulative 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Conditions to 
be fulfilled for 
Bills and 
Schemes. 


394 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


expenditure of rupees one thousand crores or above within three years from the day of its 
implementation; 


(d) “major Bill” means a Bill which on enactment will— 


(i) involve an expenditure of rupees one thousand crores or above from 
the Consolidated Fund of India; or 


(ii) result in major increase in costs for consumers, individual industries, 
Union, State or local government, or geographic regions; or 


(iii) have significant adverse effects on competition, employment, 
investment, productivity, innovation or on the ability of India-based enterprises 
to compete with foreign-based enterprises in domestic or export markets; or 


(iv) regulate any item either under the Union or the Concurrent List of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution or any item in the State List that the 
Union Government seeks to regulate, 


and the expression “major Act’’ shall be construed accordingly; 


(e) “market failure” means the following situations which result in markets not 
allocating resources efficiently: — 


(i) market power where one party in the negotiation or a contract has little 
power and experiences a loss of choice including monopolies and oligopolies; 


(ii) asymmetric information where the process of negotiation works poorly 
as one party involved lacks information relative to the other; 


(iii) externalities where the consequences of the action of two negotiating 
parties are not negotiated which may lead to an effect on a third party; 


(iv) provision of public goods where goods that are being provided are 
non-rivalrous in that consumption of that good or service by one person doesn’t 
lead to lesser availability for another; and non-excludable in that consumption 
of a good or service by one person doesn’t exclude another person from 
consuming that good or service; 


(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 
(g) “Scheme” means a Government or Government sponsored Scheme. 
CHAPTER II 
PRE-LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENTS 


3. For every Bill proposed to be introduced in either House of Parliament and Scheme, 
that is to be implemented either by Central Government or by a State Government or jointly, 
the Ministry of the Government responsible for initiating the Bill or formulating the Scheme 
shall comply with the following conditions: 


(a) the Bill or the Scheme shall disclose the need for and consequences of the 
proposed Government action; 


(b) the Bill or the scheme shall not be undertaken unless its potential benefits 
outweigh its potential costs to the society; 


(c) objectives of the Bill or the scheme shall be clearly delineated and chosen so 
as to maximize the net benefits to society; 


(d) among alternative approaches to any objective being sought by the Bill or 
the scheme, the alternative involving the least net cost to society shall be chosen; and 


(e) Ministry responsible shall set regulatory priorities with the aim of maximizing 
the aggregate net benefits to society, taking into account the condition of the particular 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 395 


industries affected by regulations, the condition of the national economy and other 
regulatory actions contemplated for the future. 


4. (/) It shall be the duty of the Ministry of the Government, responsible for initiating 
a Bill or formulating or implementing a major scheme, to prepare and publish a document to 
be called the Legislation Impact Analysis or Scheme Impact Analysis. 


(2) Every Legislation Impact Analysis or Scheme Impact Analysis shall contain the 
following information— 


(a) the objectives and goals of the Bill or major Scheme to be achieved along 
with clear measurable or quantifiable outcomes that may be monitored: 


Provided that the requirement to list out clear measurable or quantifiable outcomes 
that may be monitored shall be applicable only to major Bills or to such Bills only for 
which it is possible to list out clear measurable or quantifiable outcomes; 


(b) the potential market failure(s) to be addressed by the Bill or the scheme; 


(c) studies that have examined the efficacy of the intervention of the Bill or the 
scheme to be undertaken, including international experiences in the implementation of 
a similar intervention; 


(d) a description of the potential benefits of the Bill or the scheme, including any 
beneficial effects that may not be quantified in monetary terms, and the identification 
of those likely to receive the benefits; 


(९) a description of the potential costs of the Bill or the scheme, including any 
adverse effects that cannot be quantified in monetary terms, and the identification of 
those likely to bear the costs; 


(f) acomprehensive analysis of all the stakeholders who are likely to be affected 
by the proposed intervention; 


(g) a determination of the potential net benefits of the Bill or the scheme including 
an evaluation of effects that may not be quantified in monetary terms; 


(h) a description of alternative approaches that may substantially achieve the 
objectives and goals as laid down in clause (a) at lower cost, together with an analysis 
of potential benefit and costs and a brief explanation, wherever required, of the legal 
reasons why such alternatives, if proposed, may not be adopted. 


5. (/) The Central Government shall, within sixty days from the date of commencement 
of thisAct, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a National Consultative 
Committee. 


(2) The National Consultative Committee shall consist of— 
(a) the Union Minister of Finance who shall be the Chairperson, ex-officio; 


(b) three members from the House of the People, to be nominated by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha—members ex-officio; 


(c) two members from the Council of the State, to be nominated by the Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha—members ex-officio; 


(d) six experts, two from the field of economics, two from the field of law, one 
from the field of public policy and one fromthe field of statistics, being an expert in 
survey design, to be nominated by the Governmentin such manner, as may be 
prescribed—members; and 


(e) the Chief Economic Adviser to the Government and one Officer from the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government or equivalent—ex-officio members. 


Impact 
analysis of the 
proposed Bill 
or scheme. 


Constitution 
of National 
Consultative 
Committee. 


Functions of 
the National 
Consultative 
Committee. 


Meetings of 
the National 
Consultative 
Committee. 


Laying of the 
legislation 
Impact 
Analysis and 
the Scheme 
Impact 
Analysis. 


Sunsetting 
provision for 
legislations 
and schemes. 


396 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(3) The term of the National Consultative Committee shall be three years. 


(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of services 
of members nominated under clause (d) of sub-section (/) shall be such, as may be prescribed. 


6. The National Consultative Committee shall— 


(a) specify the procedure and methodology, especially drawing upon 
international practices and emerging studies in the field of Cost-Benefit Analysis, 
which may serve as a guide for the preparation of the Legislation Impact Analysis or 
the Scheme Impact Analysis; 


(b) within eight months of the commencement of this Act, in consultation with 
experts, both national and international, publish a document, detailing the procedure 
and methodology to serve as a guide in preparation of the Legislation Impact Analysis 
or the Scheme Impact Analysis; 


(c) develop the methodology, procedure and guidelines for Post- Implementation 
Assessment Report referred to in section ll and release a document detailing the 
same within two years of the commencement of this Act; 


(d) from time-to-time, publish relevant documents and research papers in 
collaboration with higher educational institutions, highlighting the advances in the 
field which may serve as a guide to the ministries; 


(e) provide consultation to the ministry concerned for preparation of the 
Legislation Impact Analysis or the Scheme Impact Analysis or Post-Implementation 
Assessment Report, as the case may be; and 


(f) review such Legislation Impact Analysis or the Scheme Impact Analysis or 
the Post-Implementation Assessment Report, as it deems fit, and recommend 
appropriate changes that may need to be brought about. 


7. (2) The National Consultative Committee shall meet at least thrice in a year at such 
time and place and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of its 
business, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The National Consultative Committee may invite such other experts as it may 
consider appropriate for the discharge of its functions. 


8. (/) The Legislation Impact Analysis shall be laid before both the Houses of Parliament 
on the day the related Bill is proposed for introduction in the Parliament and shall be examined 
by the concerned Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee to recommend such 
changes to the Legislation Impact Analysis, as it deems appropriate. 


(2) The Scheme Impact Analysis shall be laid before both Houses of the Parliament in 
a session immediately following the date of release of the Scheme document. 


9. (/) Every Bill and scheme shall provide for a sunset provision declaring that the Act 
or the scheme shall cease to be operative after completion of the period specified in that 
sunset provision. 


(2) where the period specified in sunset provision is more than twenty years in case of 
an Act, and ten years in case of a scheme, the Bill or scheme shall provide for an explanation 
for exceeding the aforesaid time period: 


Provided that if any Bill or scheme is to be exempted from the sunset clause, the 
President shall after examining the explanation to that effect by the Government, recommend 
the introduction of the Bill or implementation of the scheme without sunset clause. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 397 


CHAPTER ता 
REVIEW COMMITTEE 


0. (2) The Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a 
Review Committee for every Ministry for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Review Committee shall consist of :— 
(a) the Minister responsible for the legislation or scheme, Chairperson ex-officio; 


(b) the Secretary of the Ministry responsible for the legislation or scheme, 
member ex-officio; 


(c) arepresentative from the Union Finance Ministry not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary, member ex-officio; 


(d) arepresentative from the Home Ministry not below the rank of Joint Secretary 
member ex-officio; 


(e) the Chief Economic Advisor to the Government, member ex-officio; and 


(f) two legal experts, two environmentalists or sustainability experts, two 
economists or statisticians or economy experts, two domain experts and one member 
from the civil society, to be appointed by the Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed, members. 


(3) The Review Committee may invite such other experts (including international 
experts) as it may consider appropriate for the discharge of its functions. 


(4) The members of the Review Committee, other than ex-officio members, shall have 
a term of three years and be eligible for re-nomination only for two consecutive terms. 


CHAPTER IV 
Ex-Post REVIEW 


l. (2) The Review Committee shall undertake Post-Implementation Assessment of 
every major Act and major scheme. 


(2) The Post-Implementation Assessment shall be conducted every three years after 
taking into consideration:— 


(i) Legislation Impact Analysis and Scheme Impact Analysis; 


(ii) Performance Measurement to assess the results against measurable outcomes 
entailed in the Legislative Impact Analysis or Scheme Impact Analysis; 


(iii) Impact Assessment Identify the ex-post impact of a major act or scheme, 
including the social, economic, environmental, legal and administrative impacts to 
evaluate the combined costs and benefits of a major act or scheme including the whole 
range of social, economic, environmental, legal and administrative considerations; 
and 


(iv) Perception Surveys Involve stakeholder consultation of the perceived impact, 
both benefits and costs, of the major acts and schemes under review. 


(3) The Review Committee shall complete the Post-Implementation Assessment Report 
within one hundred and twenty days from the start of the review process. 


(4) The Post-Implementation Assessment Report shall be laid before both the Houses 
of the Parliament in a session immediately following the date of its completion. 


Constitution 
of Review 
Committees. 


Post 
Implementation 
Assessment. 


Scheme 
Impact 
Analysis and 
Post- 
Implementation 
Assessment 

of the Major 
Schemes 
already in 
existence. 


Power to 
make rules. 


398 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
2. (/) For major schemes already in existence on the day this Act comes into force: — 


(a) the concerned ministry shall prepare a Scheme Impact Analysis within 
eighteen months from the day this Act comes into force; and 


(b) the Review Committee shall conduct a Post-Implementation Assessment 
after a period of three years from the day this Act comes into force. 


3. (/) The Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of 
this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 399 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

In a Presidential form of Government, the Legislature has ample freedom to initiate a 
legislative proposal and the Executive has a very limited role in this regard. Legislature 
therefore, in a Presidential System exercise a corresponding amount of check on the Executive 
which delivers a large degree of stability to the system. The Parliamentary form, on similar 
grounds, seeks more accountability from the Executive which is an integral part of the 
Legislature. Laws are a primary means by which the Executive runs about its agenda. However, 
many a time Bills are passed without adequate deliberation in the Houses. The Bill, firstly, 
seeks to devise a legislative check on the actions of the Government irrespective of whether 
a party holds a majority. 


Any expenditure incurred by the Government imposes a cost on the economy. Also 
known as marginal cost of public funds, it is an opportunity cost that could have been 
effectively utilized elsewhere by other agents in the economy. Empirical estimates put this 
figure to be around 3, implying that for every rupee spent by the Government, there is a cost 
of about three rupees to the economy. When multiplied by the volume of government 
spending in the economy, the impact is gigantic. Therefore, it is necessary to keep an 
accountability on such large expenditure — any spending which is not meeting its stated 
objectives must be discontinued. The field of cost-benefit analysis has been revolutionary 
in this regard. Such a system was kept in place as early as the 980s in the USA. Similarly, the 
OECD countries like Australia have a robust mechanism in place to assess the impact of 
every legislation once in place. 


The pace of change in today’s world is blinding. This fast-moving world demands an 
evolving and agile legislation landscape that caters to the everchanging needs of our society 
and economy. The nation cannot have an overhang of outdated legislations that do not 
improve governance outcomes, but instead contribute to increasing the legal and social 
costs to society. In this context, we require our laws and schemes to have expiry date (sunset 
clause). Such provision will ensure an opportunity re-make laws and schemes that will help 
our nation stay up to date on evolving situations of the world. 


The present Bill, inter-alia, provides for— 


(a) a pre-legislative mechanism to clearly set out objectives of the stated government 
intervention, careful consideration of costs and benefits to the society from the proposed 
legislation or scheme, all of which must be documented in an Impact Analysis report, and the 
insertion of sunset clauses in every scheme and legislation; 


(b) a post-implementation mechanism to check whether the government has met its 
stated objectives and measurable targets, and the impact the intervention has had on the 
society. Should the government fail to do so in the post-implementation assessment, the act 
or scheme shall stand repealed or revoked, respectively; 


(c) establishment of a National Consultative Committee which will guide the government 
in the technical details pertaining to the studies to be conducted for every legislation and 
scheme and the establishment of a Review Committee under every ministry to carry out the 
post-implementation assessment of the legislation and scheme. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; SRINIVAS KESINENI 
February 23, 2022. 


400 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Consultative Committee to 
assist the Government in the pre-legislative process of any legislation or scheme and in 
preparation of a guide for the Post-Implementation Assessment Report. It also provides for 
appointment of experts to the Committee. Clause |0 provides for the constitution of a Review 
Committee under each ministry to scrutinise the working of major legislations and schemes. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty-one crore per annum 
would be involved from Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two crore is likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (/) of clause [3 empowers the Central Government to make rules regarding 
the times and places of the meetings of the National Consultative Committee and the 
procedure to be followed at such meetings under sub-section (/) of section 7 and the 


expenditure incurred on the meetings of the National Committee under sub-section (3) of 
section 7. 


The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government are 
matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them 
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


2 of 974. 


25 of 9905 
78 of 956. 
25 of 986. 
4 of 869. 


43 of 2005. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 40l 


Bit No. 259 oF 2022 
A Bill to further amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, \973. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2022. 
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect. 


2. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, in section 25, after clause (2), the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 24 and 25 of the Hindu Marriage 
Act, 955, section |9 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, !956, The Muslim 
Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, |986, the Indian Divorce Act, |869:— 


(a) the Magistrate may award a lump sum amount for the maintenance as a one- 
time settlement in an order after due verification of the assets held by the husband, 
including the ascertainment of any immovable or movable property possessed by the 
husband; 


(b) in case the award is in the form of a monthly allowance, the order shall be 
duly notified to the employer of the person liable to pay the monthly allowance if the 
person is employed and the employers shall be directed to deduct from the salary of 
such person a sum equivalent to the amount of maintenance ordered by the court; 


Explanation.— The employer shall include Government entities under article |2 
of the Constitution and the private entities. 


(c) the retirement funds of the husband working in an organisation to which the 
preceding clause applies shall be used for the purposes of fulfilling the maintenance 
award and the employer after receipt of the order under sub-section (2) shall deposit in 
court the details regarding the retirement funds of the employee in question; and 


(d) any property, whether movable or immovable, built, bought, or constructed 
during the course of marriage shall be equally divided between the two parties to the 
divorce. 


(2B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (l), an aggrieved woman 
living in a shared household shall be entitled to interim maintenance without proof of 
marriage. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section,— 


(a) “aggrieved woman” and “shared household” shall have the same meaning 
as assigned to them in the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005; 
and 


(b) “interim maintenance” shall be calculated for the aggrieved woman and the 
minor children, if any with the help of maintenance professionals appointed on a 
contractual basis by the court from a pool of eligible professionals, experts in family 
law and finance in accordance with cost of living index: 


Provided that if the applicant has moved a petition to seek maintenance under different 
laws, the same information shall be communicated by the applicant to the relevant courts 
through an affidavit, within thirty days of the institution of the petition: Provided further 
that the Court shall adjust or setoff the amount awarded in the previous proceedings, while 
determining whether any further amount is to be awarded in the subsequent proceeding: 


Provided also that the order passed in the previous proceedings requires any 
modification or variation, such modification or variation shall be made in the same 
proceeding.”. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of Section 
I25. 


402 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Constitution makers had incorporated Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) 
with the vision to guide the law-making process in the country. Dr. B.R Ambedkar went on to 
state that the DPSP are the heart and soul of the Constitution. Article 39 states that “the state 
shall, in particular, direct its policies towards securing that the citizens, men and women 
equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood, that children are given opportunities 
and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and 
that childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral and material 
abandonment.” 


Further Article 39 reinforces Article 5(3) of the Constitution of India which provides 
that: “Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for 
women and children.” Together the two Articles uphold the rights and subsequent duties of 
the state towards the vulnerable sections of the society. 


Presently, a women can claim maintenance under various laws ranging from 
Section |25 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) and various sections of different personal 
laws. It is an established and widely acknowledged fact that economic prosperity and women 
empowerment go hand-in-hand. Moreover, a nation’s progress is judged as per its ability to 
enforce contracts. However, seven decades since independence, the women of our country 
still run from pillar to post to seek enforcement of their maintenance contracts. 


Across the globe, developed countries have formulated stringent guidelines to ensure 
the enforcement of maintenance contracts. For instance, in Australia, the contracts are 
registered with the child support register and the amount is automatically deducted from the 
income tax installment of the payer. Further in Finland, the maintenance amount is revised 
every year depending on the shift in the cost-of-living index. In India, this can be adopted in 
relation to a purchasing index in consonance with the trend of inflation. Therefore, ensuring 
that the maintenance contracts are enforced and ensure a sustainable amount to the aggrieved 
women. 


By virtue of judicial pronouncements and other steps, rights of women have been 
restored but it will become fruitful only when under lying thinking is changed and only if 
maintenance orders are properly enforced. It is imperative that the laws are framed to ensure 
the effective enforcement of the contracts, reduce burden of pending cases and ensure 
smooth procedure. Only when women, who are the first teachers of a child, get their due, the 
nation can realise the dream envisioned by the constitution makers, of a just and equitable 
society. 


Hence this Bill. 


New Delhi; SRINIVAS KESINENI 
November 2i, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 403 


BiLt No. 30 oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 985. 

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 

l. (7) This Act may be called the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic substances 
(Amendment) Act, 2023. 

(2) It shall come into force at once. 


6l of 985. 2. In section 3A of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 985,— 


(a) in the marginal heading the word “death”’ shall be omitted; and 


(b) in sub-section (/), the words “‘or with death” shall be omitted. 


Short title, 
and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 
3lA. 


404 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 3lA was inserted into the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances 


Act, 985 to provide for capital punishment or 30 years of jail for repeat offenders on the 
discretion of the judge. 


This section of the NDPS Act, 985 has been of intense inquiry. It places judicial 
discretion as the highest form of authority in determining the extent of crimes of repeated 
offenders of drug trafficking. Drug trafficking does not fall into the narrow category of 
heinous crimes as stated in Bachan Singh vs. State of Punjab when juxtaposed against 
murderers, and thus, capital punishment is constitutionally impermissible and against 
Article 2l of the Constitution of India. 


It positions India against the United Nation’s Convention on Psychotropic Substances 
of 97l, and United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances of !988. 


Research pertaining of implications of death penalty show no significant deterrence 
of crime/convicts. India has recorded 3,[72 cases of drug trafficking in 204-2022 as against 
,257 cases from 2006-203, thus the insertion of Section 3! A() has been unable to achieve 
the goal which it aimed to, deterring repeat offenders. 


This section is unconstitutional and against the Right to Life and Liberty, it adds 
unnecessary attention to India’s judicial system. 


Hence, this Bill. 


New DELHI; VISHNU DAYAL RAM 
January |6, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 405 


BiLt No. 59 oF 2023 


A Bill to lay down judicial standards and provide for accountability of Judges of the 
Supreme Court or a High Court or a District Court and, establish credible and 
expedient mechanism for investigating into individual complaints for misbehaviour 
or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court and to regulate the 
procedure for such investigation, and for the peresentation of an address by 
Parliament to the President for removal of a Judge and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of Indiaas 
follows:— 
I. (2) This Act may be called the Judicial Accountability Act, 2023. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint: 


Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as 
a reference to the coming into force of that provision. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 
(a) “Assets” includes immovable and movable property; 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause,— 


(i) “immovable property” includes the land and any building or other 


406 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


structure attached to the land, and tenancies, lease holds or any other interest 
in immovable property; 


(ii) “movable property” includes any other property which is not 
immovable property as also corporeal and incorporeal property of every 
description and household goods and personal effects of the value of each 
item of more than fifty thousand rupees; 


(b) “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Council of States; 
(c) “Competent Authority” means in relation to,— 


(i) a Metropolitan Magistrate, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate of that 
Court; 


(ii) a Judges of the District Court, the District Judge of that District Court; 
(iii) a District Judge of District Court, the Chief Justice of that High Court; 
(iv) a Judge of the High Court, the Chief Justice of that High Court; 

(v) the Chief Justice of the High Court, the Chief Justice of India; 

(vi) a Judge of the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice of India; 

(vii) the Chief Justice of India, the President of India; 


(d) “Incapacity” means physical or mental incapacity which is, or is likely to be, 
or a permanent character; 


(e) “investigation committee” means the investigation committee constituted 
under section 22; 


(f) “inquiry” means an inquiry for proof of misbehaviour or incapacity; 


(g) “Judge” means a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court or a judge of 
the District Court and includes the Chief Justice of India and the Chief Justice of a High 
Court; 


(h) “judicial standards” means the values of judicial life specified in section 3, 
and the Schedule; 


(i) “liabilities” includes financial guarantees given and all loans raised from any 
bank, financial institution or any other source; 


(j) “misbehaviour” means,— 

(i) conduct which brings dishonour or disrepute to the judiciary; or 

(ii) wilful or persistent failure to perform the duties of a Judge; or 

(iii) wilful abuse of judicial office; or 

(iv) corruption or lack of integrity which includes delivering judgments for 
collateral or extraneous reasons, making demands for consideration in cash or 


kind for giving judgments or any other action on the part of the Judge which has 
the effect of subverting the administration of justice; or 


(v) committing an offence involving moral turpitude; or 


(vi)failure to furnish the declaration of assets and liabilities in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act; or 


(vii) wilfully giving false information in the declaration of assets and 
liabilities under this Act; or 


(viii) wilful suppression of any material fact, whether such fact relates to 
a period before assumption of office, which would have bearing on his 
integrity; or 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 407 


(ix) wilful breach of judicial standards; 
(k) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 


(09 “Oversight Committee” means the National Judicial Oversight Committee 
established under section |7; 


(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(n) “Scrutiny Panel” means a panel constituted under sub-section (/) or 
sub-section (2) of section || for the scrutiny of complaints; 


(o) “Speaker” means the Speaker of the House of the People. 


3. (7) Every Judge shall continue to practice universally accepted values of judicial 
life as specified in the Schedule to this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, no 
Judge shall— 


(a) contest the election to any office of a club, society or other association or 
hold such elective office except in a society or association connected with the law or 
any court; 


(b) have close association or close social interaction with individual members 
of the Bar, particularly with those who practice in the same court in which he is a 
Judge; 


(c) permit any member of his immediate family (including spouse, son, daughter, 
30son-in-law or daughter-in-law or any other close relative), who is a member of the 
Bar, to appear before him or associated in any manner with a cause to be dealt with by 
him; 


(d) permit any member of his family, who is a member of the Bar, to use the 
residence in which the Judge actually resides or use other facilities provided to the 
Judge, for professional work of such member; 


(e) hear and decide a matter in which a member of his family, or his close relative 
or a friend is concerned; 


(f) enter into public debate or express his views in public on political matters or 
on matters which are pending or are likely to arise for judicial determination by him: 


Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to,— 


(i) the views expressed by a Judge in his individual capacity on issues of 
public interest (other than as a Judge) during discussion in private forum or 
academic forum so as not to affect his functioning as a Judge; 


(ii) the views expressed by a Judge relating to administration of court or 
its efficient functioning; 


(g) make unwarranted comments against conduct of any Constitutional or 
statutory authority or statutory bodies or statutory institutions or any chairperson or 
member or officer thereof, in general, or at the time of hearing matters pending or likely 
to arise for judicial determinations; 


(h) give interview, to the media in relation to any of his judgment delivered, or 
order made, or direction issued, by him, in any case adjudicated by him; 


(i) accept gifts or hospitality except from his relatives; 


(j) hear and decide a matter in which a company or society or trust in which he 
holds or any member of his family holds shares or interest, unless he has disclosed his 


Judicial 
standards. 


Declaration of 
assets and 
liabilities. 


408 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


such holding or interest, and no objection to his hearing and deciding the matter is 
raised; 


(k) speculate in securities or indulge in insider trading in securities; 


(9) engage, directly or indirectly, in trade or business, either by himself or in 
association with any other person: 


Provided that the publication of a legal treatise or any activity in the nature of a 
hobby shall not be construed as trade or business for the purpose of this clause; 


(m) seek any financial benefit in the form of a perquisite or privilege attached to 
his office unless it is clearly available or admissible; 


(n) hold membership in any organisation that practices invidious discrimination 
on the basis of religion or race or caste or sex or place of birth; 


(o) have bias in his judicial work or judgments on the basis of religion or race or 
caste or sex or place of birth. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “relative” means— 
(i) spouse of the Judge; 
(ii) brother or sister of the Judge; 
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse of the Judge; 
(iv) brother or sister of either of the parents of the Judge; 
(v) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the Judge; 


(vi) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the Judge; 
spouse of the person referred to in clauses (ii) to (vi). 


4. (/) Every Judge shall make a declaration of his assets and liabilities in the manner as 
provided by or under this Act. 


(2) A Judge shall, within thirty days from the date on which he makes and subscribes 
an oath or affirmation to enter upon his office, furnish to the competent authority the 
information relating to— 


(a) the assets of which he, his spouse, his blood relatives and dependent children 
are, jointly or severally, owners or beneficiaries; 


(b) his liabilities and that of his spouse, his blood relatives and dependent 
children. 


(3) A Judge holding his office as such, at the time of the commencement of this 
Act, shall furnish information relating to such assets and liabilities, as referred to in 
sub-section (2) to the competent authority within thirty days of the coming into force of this 
Act. 


(4) Every Judge shall file with the competent authority, on or before the 3Ist July of 
every year, an annual return of his assets and liabilities, as on the 3st March of that year as 
referred to in sub-section (2). 


(5) The information under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) and annual return under 
sub-section (4) shall be furnished in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, 


(a) “dependent children” means sons and daughters who have no separate 
means of earning and are wholly dependent on the Judge for their livelihood. 


(b) “blood relation” means all relatives which are related by full blood or half 
blood irrespective of the fact whether he or she have separate means of earning and 
are wholly independent on the Judge for their livelihood. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 409 


5. The competent authority shall exhibit the document or information in relation to a 
declaration of assets and liabilities of Judges,— 


(a) in the case of Metropolitan Magistrates and Judges of the District Courts, on 
the website of the District Court in which such Metropolitan Magistrates and Judges 
are serving; 


(b) in the case of Judges and Chief Justices of the High Courts, on the website 
of the High Court in which such Judges and Chief Justices are serving; 


(c) in the case of Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justice of India, on the 
website of the Supreme Court. 


6. The competent authority shall keep the documents or information forms containing 
the details of the assets and liabilities and other particulars in relation thereto filed by the 
Judges in its safe custody for such period as may be decided by the Oversight Committee. 


7. Any person making an allegation of misbehaviour or incapacity in respect of a Judge 
may file a complaint in this regard to the Oversight Committee. 


8. The complaint under section 7 shall— 
(a) be in such form and filed in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) set forth particulars of the misbehaviour or incapacity which is the subject 
matter of allegation; 


(c) be verified at the foot of the complaint by the complainant and shall specify, 
by reference to the numbered paragraphs of the complaint, what he verifies of his own 
knowledge and what he verifies upon information and shall refer to the source of the 
information. 


9. Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the Oversight Committee shall refer all 
such complaints to the appropriate Scrutiny Panel constituted under relevant sections of 
this act for scrutiny. 


0. There shall be constituted a panel to be called “Complaints Scrutiny Panel” in the 
Supreme Court and in every High Court to scrutinise the complaints received against a Judge 
under this Act. 


I. (/) The Scrutiny Panel in the Supreme Court shall consist of a former Chief Justice 
of India and two Judges of the Supreme Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India. 


(2) The Scrutiny Panel in every High Court shall consist of a former Chief Justice of 
that High Court and two Judges of that High Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of 
that High Court. 


2. (/) If the Scrutiny Panel, after scrutiny of the complaint referred to it for scrutiny 
under section 9, and after making scrutiny of the complaint, as it deems appropriate, is 
satisfied that— 


(a) there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the Judge, it shall, after 
recording reasons therefore, submit a report on its findings to the Oversight Committee 
for making inquiry against the Judge in accordance with the provisions |5 of this Act; 


(b) the complaint is frivolous or vexatious, or, is not made in good faith, or there 
are not sufficient grounds for inquiring into the complaint, or the complaint relates 
only to the merits of the judgment or a procedural order, and, then, it shall after recording 
reasons therefore submit a report on its findings to the Oversight Committee for not 
proceeding with the complaint and treating the matter as closed. 


(2) The scrutiny of complaints under this section by the Scrutiny Panel shall be held in 
camera. 


Making 
available 
document or 
information in 
relation to a 
declaration of 
assets and 
liabilities of 
Judges on 
website. 


Maintenance 
of records. 


Complaints. 


Manner of 
making of 
complaint. 


Reference to 
Scrutiny 
Panel. 


Constitution 
of Scrutiny 
panel. 


Composition 
of Scrutiny 
panel. 


Functions of 
Scrutiny 
panel. 


Procedure of 
Scrutiny 
panel. 


Power relating 
to scrutiny of 
complaints. 


Provision for 
officers and 
other 
employees for 
Scrutiny 
panel. 


Provision 
regarding 
frivolous and 
vexatious 
complaints. 


Establishment 
of Oversight 
Committee. 


Composition 
of Oversight 
Committee. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(3) The Scrutiny Panel shall submit its report under clause (a) or clause (b) of 
sub- section (), to the Oversight Committee in this behalf within a maximum period of three 
months from the date of receipt of the complaint from the Oversight Committee. 


3. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Scrutiny Panel shall have power to 
regulate its own procedure in scrutinising the complaints referred to it for scrutiny under 
section 9. 


4. The Scrutiny Panel shall, while scrutinising the complaints forwarded to it for 
scrutiny under section 9, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, |908 and in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of 
India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; 


(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or other documents; 
and 


(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 


5. (7) The Chief Justice of India shall, determine the nature and categories 
of the officers and other employees required to assist the Scrutiny Panel referred to in 
sub-section (/) of section | ] in the discharge of its functions andprovide the Scrutiny Panel 
with such officers and other employees as he may think fit. 


(2) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall, determine the nature and categories of 
the officers and other employees required to assist the Scrutiny Panel referred to in 
sub-section (2) of section | in the discharge of its functions and provide the Scrutiny Panel 
with such officers and other employees as he may think fit. 


6. If the Scrutiny Panel is of the opinion that a complaint was filed frivolously or 
vexatiously or only with a view to scandalise or intimidate a Judge, it may refer the case to 
the Oversight Committee for further action. 


7. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint, 
there shall be established a National Judicial Oversight Committee. 


8. (J) The National Judicial Oversight Committee shall consist of the following, 
namely:— 
(a) a retired Chief Justice of India appointed by the President after ascertaining 
the views of the Chief Justice of India—Chairperson 


(b) a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India— 
Member; 


(c) the Chief Justice of a High Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India— 
Member; 


(d) the Attorney-General for India — ex officio Member; 
(९) an eminent jurist nominated by the President—Member. 
Provided that— 


(i) where the allegations are against a Judge of the Supreme Court, who is 
a member of the Oversight Committee, then, the Chief Justice of India shall 
nominate another Judge of the Supreme Court in his place as a member of that 
committee; or 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4il 


(ii) where the allegations are against the Chief Justice of a High Court, 
who is a member of the Oversight Committee, then, the Chief Justice of India 
shall nominate a Chief Justice of another High Court in his place as a member of 
that committee. 


(2) After the commencement of the proceedings relating to a complaint against a 
Judge,— 


(a) if any change in the composition of the Oversight Committee arises due to 
elevation of a member of the Oversight Committee, as the Chief Justice of India or a 
Judge of the Supreme Court, as the case may be; or 


(b) if any change arises in the composition of the Oversight Committee due to 
refusal or retirement or resignation or any other reason, the proceedings of the Oversight 
Committee shall continue from the stage from which it was pending before such change 
and the Chairperson of the Oversight Committee shall make such incidental changes, 
as he deems necessary, to continue the proceedings. 


9. The Oversight Committee shall, within three months of the receipt of a complaint 
relating to misbehaviour of — 


(a) an individual Judge of the Supreme Court or Chief Justice of a High Court, 
refer the complaint, to the Scrutiny Panel of the Supreme Court to scrutinise and report 
thereon; 


(b) an individual Judge of a High Court, refer the complaint, to the Scrutiny 
Panel of the High Court in which such Judge is acting as such, to scrutinise and report 
thereon. 


20. The Oversight Committee shall maintain a record of the complaints referred to the 
Scrutiny Panel. 


2. A complaint against the Chief Justice of India shall not be referred to the Scrutiny 
Panel for scrutiny but shall be scrutinised by the Oversight Committee. 


22. (/) The Oversight Committee, shall for the purpose of inquiry for misbehaviour by 
a Judge, constitute an investigation committee (by whatever name called) to investigate into 
the complaint in respect of which the Scrutiny Panel has recommended in its report under 
clause (a) of sub-section (.) of section !2 for making inquiry against the Judge in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The composition and tenure of the investigation committee shall be such as may 
be decided by the Oversight Committee: 


Provided that the number of the investigation committees, in no case, at a time, shall 
exceed three: 


Provided further that the Oversight Committee may, having regard to the nature of 
misbehaviour of a Judge, may constitute different investigation committees for inquiry into 
different complaints. 


23. The Oversight Committee, shall, for the purpose of proceedings under this Act and 
the investigation committee, while conducting any investigation under this Chapter, have all 
the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 908 and in 
particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:— 


Forwarding of 
complaint 
relating to 
misbehaviour 
to Scrutiny 
Panel. 


Records of 
complaints 
forwarded to 
Scrutiny 
Panel. 


Certain 
complaints 
not to be 
forwarded to 
Scrutiny 
Panel. 


Investigation 
by 
investigation 
committee. 


Powers of 
Oversight 
Committee 
and 
investigation 
committee. 


Search and 
seizure by 
investigation 
committee. 


Assistance to 
investigation 
committee by 
Government 
agencies. 


Ex-parte 
Investigation 
in certain 
cases. 


Investigation 
into act or 
conduct of 
certain other 
persons in 
certain cases. 


Submission of 
report by 
investigation 
committee. 


Procedure in 
inquiries by 
investigation 
committee. 


4I2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of 
India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; 


(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or other documents; 
and 


(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 


24. (/) If the investigation committee has reason to believe that any documents which, 
in its opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any preliminary investigation or inquiry, are 
secreted in any place, it may request the oversight committee to authorise any officer 
subordinate to it, or any officer of an agency referred as provided in section 25, to search for 
and to seize such documents. 


(2) If the investigation committee is satisfied that any document seized under 
sub-section (J) would be evidence for the purpose of any investigation and that it would be 
necessary to retain the original document in its custody, it may so retain the said document 
till the completion of such investigation or retain a copy of such document, as it may deem fit. 


The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, |973, relating to searches shall, so 
far as may be, apply to searches under this section subject to the modification that 
sub-section (5) of section 65 of the said Code shall have effect as if, for the word “Magistrate”, 
wherever it occurs, the words “investigation”. 


25. The investigation committee shall be entitled to make a request to the Oversight 
Committee for assistance to it and the Oversight Committee may invoke its powers in this 
behalf under section 38 of this Act. 


26. If a Judge, to whom notice is issued by the investigation committee, referred to in 
section 22, refuses to appear before it or does not co-operate with it in conducting 
investigation, then, the investigation committee may proceed ex parte. 


27. The investigation committee may cause investigation into any act or conduct of 
any person, other than the Judge concerned, in so far as it considers necessary so to do for 
the purpose of its investigation into any allegations made against a Judge and shall give 
such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and to produce evidence in his defence. 


28. The investigation committee, after completion of the inquiry in respect of a 
complaint, shall submit its findings to the Oversight Committee. 


29. (/) The investigation committee shall frame definite charges against the Judge on 
the basis of which the inquiry is proposed to be held. 


(2) Every such inquiry shall be conducted in camera by the investigation committee. 


(3) Charges framed under sub-section (l) together with the statement of grounds on 
which each such charge is based shall be communicated to the Judge and he shall be given 
a reasonable opportunity of presenting a written statement of defence within such time as 
may be specified by the investigation committee. 


(4) The investigation committee shall hold every such inquiry as expeditiously as 
possible and in any case complete the inquiry within a period of six months from the date of 
receipt of the complaint: 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4i3 


Provided that the Oversight Committee, for reasons to be recorded in writing, may 
extend the period for completion of the inquiry by a further period of six months. 


30. Save as otherwise provided, the investigation committee shall have power to 
regulate its own procedure in making the inquiry and shall give reasonable opportunity to 
the Judge of cross examining witnesses, adducing evidence and of being heard in his defence. 


3. The Central Government may, if requested by the investigation committee, appoint 
an advocate to conduct the cases against the Judge. 


32. (/) The Oversight Committee shall, forthe purpose of performing its functions 
underthis Act, appoint a Secretary and such other officers and employees possessing such 
qualifications, as the Presidentmay determine, fromtime to time, in consultation with the 
Oversight Committee. 


(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary, officers and employees 
referred to in sub-section () shall be such as the President may determine, from time to time, 
in consultation with the Oversight Committee. 


(3) In the discharge of their functions under this Act, the Secretary, the officers and 
employees referred to in sub-section (l) shall be subject to the administrative control and 
direction of the Oversight Committee. 


(4) The Oversight Committee shall provide such number of its officers and other 
employees to assist the investigation committee as the Oversight Committee considers 
appropriate having regard to the nature of investigation in a case. 


33. During the pendency of the inquiry by the investigation committee, the Oversight 
Committee may recommend stoppage of assigning judicial work including cases assigned to 
the Judge concerned if it appears to the Oversight Committee that it is necessary in the 
interest of fair and impartial scrutiny of complaints or investigation or inquiry. 


34. (3) If the Oversight Committee on receipt of the report from the investigation 
committee is satisfied that— 


(a) no charges have been proved, it shall dismiss the complaint and matter be 
closed and no further action shall be taken against the Judge and the complainant 
shall be informed accordingly; 


(b) all or any of the charges have been proved but the Oversight Committee is 
of the opinion that the charges proved do not warrant removal of the Judge, it may, by 
order, issue advisories or warnings. 


(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (), if the Oversight 
Committee, on receipt of the report from the investigation committee is satisfied that there 
has been a prima facie commission of any offence under any law for the time being in force 
by a Judge, it may recommend to the Central Government for prosecution of the Judge in 
accordance with the law for the time being in force. 


(3) In a case where an inquiry or investigation against the Judge has been initiated 
and such Judge has demitted office during such inquiry or investigation, such inquiry or 
investigation may be continued if the Oversight Committee is of the opinion that the 
misbehaviour is serious in nature and requires to be inquired into or investigated and the 
Oversight Committee may after conclusion of inquiry forward its findings to the Central 
Government to take further action in the matter under relevant law for the time being in force. 


Investigation 
committee to 
have power to 
regulate its 
own 
procedure. 


Central 
Government 
to appoint an 
advocate to 
conduct cases 
against Judge. 


Staff of 
Oversight 
Committee. 


Stoppage of 
assigning 
judicial work 
in certain 
cases. 


Procedure on 
receipt of 
report of 
investigation 
committee. 


Advice to 
President for 
removal of 
Judge. 


Filing of 
complaint 
against 
complainant 
in certain 
cases. 


Proceedings 
before 
Oversight 
Committee to 
be judicial 
proceedings. 
Power to call 
for assistance. 


Confidentiality 
in complaint 
procedure. 


Keeping 
identity of 
complainant 
confidential. 


No action for 
contempt to 
lie in certain 
cases. 


Investigation 
and Inquiry by 
Oversight 
Committee 
not to affect 
criminal 
liability. 


All records, 
documents, 
etc., related 
to complaint, 
scrutiny, 
investigation 
and inquiry to 
be 
confidential. 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


35. If the Oversight Committee is satisfied that all or any of the charges of misbehaviour 
or incapacity of a Judge have been proved and that they are of serious nature warranting his 
removal, it shall request the judge to voluntarily resign. 


36. If the Scrutiny Panel refers a case to the Oversight Committee under section 6, 
the Oversight Committee shall consider the matter further and if it concurs with the conclusion 
of the Scrutiny Panel, it may authorise the filing of a criminal complaint against the original 
complainant before a competent court. 


37. All proceedings under this Act shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within 
the meaningof sections 93 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code, and the Oversight Committee 
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section l95 and Chapter XXVI of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure Act, 973. 


38. The Oversight Committee shall be entitled to take assistance of such officers of 
the Central Government or State Government or any agency thereof or authority as it deems 
fit. 


39. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
the complainant and every person who participates in the scrutiny or investigation or 
inquiry as a witness or as a legal practitioner or in any other capacity, whether or not he 
seeks confidentiality about his name, shall undertake to the Oversight Committee or Scrutiny 
Panel or investigation committee that he shall not reveal his own name, the name of the 
Judge complained against, the contents of the complaint or any of the documents or 
proceedings to anybody else including the media without the prior written approval of the 
Oversight Committee: 


Provided that the Oversight Committee may, if it considers appropriate, authorise any 
person to apprise the media or press in respect of matters relating to complaint, scrutiny or 
investigation or inquiry, as the case may be. 


40. The Oversight Committee or the Scrutiny Panel or investigation committee may, at 
the request of a complainant, direct that the complainant be accorded such protection, as it 
deems appropriate, including keeping his identity confidential, from every body and also 
the Judge against whom the complaint is made. 


4. After the commencement of scrutiny of complaints under this Act, no action for 
contempt of court shall lie or shall be proceeded with in respect of the allegations, which are 
the subject matter of the investigation or inquiry. 


42. Any scrutiny, investigation or inquiry pending before the Scrutiny Panel or 
investigation committee or Oversight Committee shall not affect the criminal liability in 
respect of such allegations which are the subject matter of the investigation or inquiry. 


43. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to Information Act, 2005 or any 
other law for the time being in force, all papers, documents and records of proceedings 
related to a complaint, preliminary investigation and inquiry shall be confidential and shall 
not be disclosed by any person in any proceeding except as directed by the Oversight 
Committee: 


Provided that the findings of the investigation committee and the orders passed by 
the Oversight Committee under clause (b) of sub-section (l) of section 34 shall be made 
public. 


2 of 974. 


22 of 2005. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4I5 


44. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Chairperson or 
any member of the Oversight Committee, Scrutiny Panel, investigation committee or against 
any officer or employee, agency or person engaged by such committees or panel for the 
purpose of conducting scrutiny or investigation or inquiry in respect of anything which is 
in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder. 


45. The President, on receipt of advice under section 35, shall cause the findings of 
the Oversight Committee along with the accompanying materials to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament. 


46. On laying of the advice of the Oversight Committee along with the accompanying 
material, the Central Government may move a motion in either House of Parliament for taking 
up the said advice for consideration by the House. 


47. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 45 or section 46, if notice is 
given of a motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the removal of a 
Judge signed,— 


(a) in the case of a notice given in the House of the People, by not less than one 
hundred members of that House; 


(b) in the case of a notice given in the Council of States, by not less than fifty 
members of that Council, then, the Speaker or, as the case maybe, the Chairman may, 
after consulting such persons, if any, as he thinks fit and after considering such 
materials, if any, as may be available to him, either admit the motion or refuse to admit 
the same. 


(2) If the motion referred to in sub-section (l) is admitted, the Speaker or, as the case 
may be, the Chairman shall keep the motion pending and the matter shall be referred to the 
Oversight Committee for constitution of an investigation committee under section 22. 


(3) The Oversight Committee, after receipt of reference under sub-section (2), constitute 
an investigation committee under section 22 and the investigation committee shall conduct 
an inquiry in accordance with the provisions contained under Chapter VI and submit its 
report to the Oversight Committee for being submitted to the Speaker or Chairman, as the 
case may be, for consideration. 


(4) Where it is alleged that a Judge is unable to discharge the duties of his office 
efficiently due to any physical or mental incapacity and the allegation is denied, the 
investigation committee may arrange for the medical examination of the Judge by such 
Medical Board as may be appointed for the purpose by the Speaker or, as the case may be, 
the Chairman. 


(5) The Medical Board shall undertake such medical examination of the Judge as may 
be considered necessary and submit a report to the investigation committee stating therein 
whether the incapacity is such as to render the Judge unfit to continue in office. 


(6) If the Judge refuses to undergo medical examination considered necessary by the 
Medical Board, the Board shall submit a report to the investigation committee stating 
therein the examination which the Judge has refused to undergo, and the investigation 
committee may, on receipt of such report, presume that the Judge suffers from such physical 
or mental incapacity as is alleged in the motion referred to in sub-section (). 


48. (/) If the report of the investigation committee contains a finding that the Judge is 
not guilty of any misbehaviour or does not suffer from any incapacity, then, no further steps 
shall be taken in either House of Parliament in relation to the report and the motion pending 
in the House or the Houses of Parliament shall not be proceeded with. 


(2) If the report of the investigation committee contains a finding that the Judge is 
guilty of any misbehaviour or suffers from any incapacity, then, the motion referred to in 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 


Laying of 
advice of 
Oversight 
Committee 
before 
Parliament. 


Motion for 
removal of a 
Judge. 


Investigation 
into 
misbehaviour 
or incapacity 
of Judge by 
investigation 
committee for 
removal of 
Judges. 


Consideration 
of report and 
procedure for 
presentation 
of an address 
for removal 
of Judge. 


Motion of 
removal of a 
Judge. 


Power of 
Joint 
Committee to 
make rules. 


Intentional 
insult or 
interruption to 
Over-sight 
Committee. 


Penalty for 
violation of 
confidentiality 
in complaint 
procedure. 


Power of 
Oversight 
Committee to 
try certain 
cases. 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


section 46 shall together with the report of the investigation committee, be taken up for 
consideration by the House or the Houses of Parliament in which it is pending. 


49. If the motion is adopted by each House of Parliament in accordance with the 
provisions of clause (4) of article 24 or, as the case may be, in accordance with that clause 
read with article 28 of the Constitution, then, the misbehaviour or incapacity of the Judge 
shall be deemed to have been proved and an address praying for the removal of the Judge 
shall be presented in the prescribed manner to the President by each House of Parliament in 
the same session in which the motion has been adopted. 


50. (/) There shall be constituted a Joint Committee of both Houses of Parliament in 
accordance with the provisions hereinafter contained for the purpose of making rules to 
carry out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Joint Committee shall consist of fifteen members of whom ten shall be 
nominated by the Speaker and five shall be nominated by the Chairman. 


(3) The Joint Committee shall elect its own Chairman and shall have power to regulate 
its own procedure. 


(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (), the Joint 
Committee may make rules to provide for the following, among other matters, namely:— 


(a) the manner of presentation of an address to the President for the removal of 
a Judge; 


(b) the manner of transmission of a motion adopted in one House to the other 
House of Parliament; 


(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to the members of the Joint 
Committee and the witnesses who may be required to attend such Committee; 


(d) the facilities which may be accorded to the Judge for defending himself; 


(e) any other matter which has to be, or may be, provided for by rules or in 
respect of which provision is, in the opinion of the Joint Committee, necessary. 


Any rules made under this section shall not take effect until they are approved by 
each House of Parliament and are published in the Official Gazette, and such publication of 
the rules shall be conclusive proof that they have been duly made. 


5. (J) Whoever intentionally insults, or causes any interruption, to the Scrutiny 
Panel or investigation committee or Oversight Committee while the Oversight Committee or 
Scrutiny Panel or investigation committee or any of their members is doing scrutiny or 
conducting any investigation or inquiry under this Act, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 


(2) The provisions of sub-section (2) of section 99 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, !973 shall apply in relation to an offence referred to in sub-section (/) as they 
apply in relation to an offence referred to in sub-section (2) of the said section 99, subject 
to the modification that no complaint in respect of such offence shall be made by the Public 
Prosecutor except with the previous sanction of the Oversight Committee. 


52. If any complainant or other person, who participates in the scrutiny or investigation 
or inquiry as a witness or as a lawyer or in any other capacity, contravenes the provisions of 
section 39 or section 40 or section 43, shall be liable for punishment with simple 
imprisonmentfor a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to 
five hundred rupees, or with both. 


53. When any such offence as is describedin sub-section () of section 5] is committed, 
in the view, or, in the presence, of the Oversight Committee, then the said Oversight 
Committee, may cause the offender to be detained in custody and may at any time on the 
same day take cognizance of the offence and after giving the offender a reasonable 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4I7 


opportunity of showing cause as to why he should not be punished under this section, try 
such offender summarily so far as may be in accordance with the procedure specified for 
summary trials under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, and sentence him to simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to 
five hundred rupees, or with both. 


54, (7) Any person who makes a complaint which is found, after following the 
procedure under this Act to be frivolous or vexatious or made with an intent to scandalise or 
intimidate the Judge against whom such complaint is filed, shall be punishable with simple 
imprisonment which may extend to one year and also with fine which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 


(2) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973. 


(a) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the complaint 
under this section in respect of anything which is done in good faith or intended to be 
done under this Act. 


55. (/) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every 
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, 
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 


Provided that where a company has different establishments or branches or different 
units in any establishment or branch, the concerned Head or the person in-charge of such 
establishment, branch or unit nominated by the company as responsible shall be liable for 
contravention in respect of such establishment, branch or unit: 


Provided further that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such 
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (l), where an offence under 
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, 
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, 
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,— 


(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and 


(b) ‘director’, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 


56. (/) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society or trust, 
every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the society or trust for the conduct of the business of the society or the trust, as well as 
the society or trust, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed 
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of 
such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where any offence under 
this Act has been committed by a society or trust and it is proved that the offence has been 


Punishment 
for frivolous 
and vexatious 
complaints. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Offences by 
societies or 
trusts. 


Appeal to 
Supreme 
Court. 


Power of 
Central 
Government 


to make rules. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal and 
saving. 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of 
any director, manager, secretary, trustee or other officer of the society or trust, such director, 
manager, secretary, trustee or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,— 


(a) “society” means any body corporate registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 860 and, “trust” means any body registered under the Indian Trusts 
Act, 882; 


(b) “director”, in relation to a society or trust, means a member of its governing 
board other than an ex officio member representing the interests of the Central or State 
Government or the appropriate statutory authority. 


57. Any person convicted on a trial held under sub-section (/) of section 54 may, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, appeal, 
within sixty days of order of such conviction, to the Supreme Court. 


58. The Central Government may make rules, in consultation with the Chief Justice of 
India, to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules 
made under this section may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the form and manner in which, information is to be furnished or, annual 
return to be filed, under section 4; 


(b) the form and manner in which complaint shall be filed under section 8; 


(c) other matters in respect of which the Scrutiny Panel shall, for the purpose of 
scrutiny of complaint, have powers of a civil court under section |4; 


(d) other matters in respect of which the Oversight Committee shall, for the 
purpose of inquiry or investigation of complaint have powers of a civil court under 
clause (f) of section 23; 


(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by rules or in 
respect of which provision is to be made by rules. 


(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
tule. 


59. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, by an order published in 
the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act 
as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be 
laid before each House of Parliament. 


60. (/) The Judges (Inquiry) Act, l968 is hereby repealed. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 968 (hereinafter referred 
to as the repealed Act) the rules made by the Joint Committee under section 7 of the repealed 
Act shall continue to be in force until rules are framed under section 49 of this Act. 


(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to 
have been done or taken including any order or notice made or issued or any inquiry 
initiated under the repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken or initiated under the corresponding 
provisions of this Act. 


(4) The mention of particular matters in sub-sections (2) and (3) shall not be held to 
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 897 with 
regard to the effect of repeal. 


420 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 3()] 
JUDICIAL STANDARDS 


Norms, including punctualityand commitment to work, guidelines and conventions 
essential for the conduct and behaviour of Judges, being pre-requisite for an 
independent, strong and respected judiciary, having integrity and detachment and 
impartial administration of justice as reflected in the Restatement of Values already 
adopted by the Conference of Chief Justices held in 999 shall be practised by 
every Judge. 


All times be conscious that he is under the public gaze and not do any act or 
omission which is unbecoming of the high office he occupies and the public esteem 
in which that office is held. 


A degree of aloofness consistent with the dignity of his office shall be practised by 
every Judge. 


Judgments should speak for themselves. 
A judge shall refer to all the points raised by counsel in the arguments. 


The judge shall correctly record on the docket what transpires in a proceeding on 
any given day. 


If anyone attempts to communicate with a judge regarding the merits of any matter 
that is pending before him when the court is not in session, the judge shall report it 
to the Competent Authority. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 42] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The judicial system in any country is an independent and impartial set up in any 
nation to remedy injustice. Justice is declared to be blind and therefore, it is on the judges to 
decide how to provide justice, keeping in mind that justice should be rendered to each and 
every citizen of the nation. Therefore, there comes the need to hold these judges to be 
accountable for their verdicts as it is the decision taken by the judges that decide the fate of 
the parties involved in a case being heard by the court. 


The Judges (Inquiry) Act, !968 was enacted with a view to lay down a procedure for 
removal, for proved misbehaviour or incapacity, of Judges of the High Courts and the 
Supreme Court by way of address of the Houses of Parliament to the President. There is, 
however, no legal provision at present for dealing with complaints filed by the public against 
Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court. The need for a statutory mechanism to 
address complaints of the public in this regard has been felt to bring greater transparency in 
the judiciary. 


The Full Court meeting of Supreme Court of India on 7 May, 997 had adopted “the 
Restatement of Values of Judicial Life”. The above Restatement lays down certain judicial 
standards which are to be followed by the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High 
Courts. However, this Restatement of Values of Judicial Life does not have any legal authority 
and cannot be enforced. There is also no legal provision at present that requires Judges of 
the Supreme Court and High Courts to declare their assets and liabilities. 


In the year 202, a Government Bill, namely, “The Judicial Standards and Accountability 
Bill, 200” as passed by Lok Sabha, sought to lay judicial standards and provide for 
accountability of judges, and establish credible and expedient mechanism for investigating 
into individual complaints for misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court 
or of a High Court. However, the Bill could not be taken up for discussion in the Rajya Sabha 
and the bill was lapsed. 


Accountability is declared to be the sine qua non of any democratic nation as it 
secures the rights provided to the citizens and delivers justice that is meant to be equal for 
all. It is true that the judiciary is an independent body and it does have the authority to 
decide on its own way over a case. But the decisions that are made subsequently affect the 
public at large and therefore the judges should be held accountable for the decisions they 
make. Therefore, in order to regulate its function and promote impartiality among the judges 
while making a decision, the judiciary must strike a balance. 


It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should enact the Judicial 
Accountability Bill and the proposed Bill would strengthen the institution of judiciary in 
India by making it more accountable thereby increasing the confidence of the public in the 
institution. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SUDHEER GUPTA 
December 23, 2023. 


422 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 7 of the Bill provides for establishment of National Judicial Oversight Committee 
comprising of a retired Chief Justice of India as the Chairperson, a Judge of the Supreme 
Court and the Chief Justice of a High Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India and 
the Attorney-General of India and an eminent person to be nominated by the President as 
members. 


Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, if requested by the investigation 
committee, to appoint an advocate to conduct the cases against the Judge. 


Clause 32 of the Bill provides for appointment of a Secretary and such other officers 
and employees as the President may determine, from time to time, in consultation with the 
Oversight Committee. 


The expenditure on account of the aforesaid provisions would be negligible. At this 
stage, it is not practicable to make an estimate of expenditure likely to be involved in the 
upcoming financial years, both recurring and non-recurring. However, the expenditure would 
be met from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Sub-clause () of clause 58 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules, 
in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, to carry out the provisions of the proposed 
legislation. 


Sub-clause (2) of clause 58 specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be 
made. These matters, inter alia, include: 


(i) the form in which the information relating to assets and liabilities is to be furnished 
by Judges and the form for filing annual return by Judges regarding their assets and 
liabilities; 

(ii) the form and manner in which a complaint is to be filed; 


(iii) other matters in respect of which the Scrutiny Panel and the Oversight Committee 
shall have powers of a civil court; and 


(iv) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed for the purposes of 
the proposed legislation. 


The rules made by the Central Government are to be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 


The matters in respect of which rules may be made in accordance with the aforesaid 
provisions of the Bill are matters of procedure and detail and it is not practicable to provide 
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 


27 of 2009. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 423 


BLL No. 76 oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious Diseases 
in Animals Act, 2009. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious 
Diseases in Animals (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. After section 9 of the Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious Diseases 
in Animals Act, 2009, the following sections shall be inserted, namely,— 


“I9A. (L) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish 
a National Board for Prevention and Control of Lumpy Skin Diseases in such manner as may 
be prescribed. 


Short title 
and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new sections 
l9A and l9B. 


424 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(2) The composition of the National Board for Prevention and Control of Lumpy Skin 
Diseases and salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of 
members of the National Board for Prevention and Control of Lumpy Skin Disease shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 


l9B. The National Board for Prevention and Control of Lumpy Skin Diseases established 
under sub-section (/) shall recommend the measures to be taken by the State Government 
for the prevention and control of lumpy skin disease.”. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 425 


The problem of Lumpy Skin Disease in the cattle rearing witnessed in various States of 
the country. This Lumpy Skin Disease is an infectious disease which is spreading at a rapid 
pace due to which various animals have died in the States of Rajasthan, Gujarat and other 
States. Out of the animals who have died majority are cows. Lumpy Skin Disease is an 
infectious disease which communicates rapidly in form of virus and affects the immunity of 
animals against the disease. 


Lumpy Skin Disease is a serious health hazard for the cattle in India. It is the collective 
responsibility of the Government and all other agencies to prevent and control such infectious 
diseases. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; MANOJ RAJORIA 
February 28, 2023. 


426 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section I9A provides for the establishment of a 
National Board for Prevention and Control of Lumpy Skin Disease. It also provides for 
appointment of members to the National Board for Prevention and Control of Lumpy Skin 
Disease. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore per annum may involve as 
recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 427 


BiLt No. 84 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for compulsory teaching of lifestyle environment education in all 
educational institutions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Whereas India has made significant commitment in the UN Climate Change Conference 
(UNFCCC COP26) in Glasgow on Ist November 202 regarding the concept of Lifestyle for 
the Environment (Life) calling upon the global community of individuals and institutions to 
drive Life as an international mass movement towards “mindful and deliberate utilisation, 
instead of mindless and destructive consumption” to protect and preserve the environment. 


Anp Whereas need is to encourage a lifestyle that focuses on mindful and deliberate 
utilization of resources and aims to change the present ‘use and dispose of consumption 
habits and encourage individuals to adopt simple changes in their daily life that may contribute 
to climate change. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the the Compulsory Teaching of Lifestyle for Environment 
Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Compulsory 
teching of 
lifestyle 
environment 
education in 
educational 
institutions. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to issue 
directions for 
compulsory 
teaching of 
lifestyle 
environment 
education in 
educational 
institutions. 


Appointment 
of teachers. 


Constitutions 
of National 
Centre for 
Promotion 
and Teaching 
of Lifestyle 
Environment 
Education. 


Functions of 
National 
Centre for 
Promotion 
and Teaching 
of Lifestyle 
Environment 
Education. 


428 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “National Centre” means the National Research Centre for Promotion and 
Teaching of Lifestyle Environment Education constituted under section 6; 


(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(c) “educational institution” means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a 
senior secondary level school or a University or College imparting education to 
children, by whatever name such institution is called but does not include a minority 
educational institution; 


(d) “environment” includes water, both surface and underground, air and land 
including the surface of the earth, subsoil and the forests (the flora and the fauna) and 
the inter-relationship which exists amongst and between water, air and land, and human 
beings, other living creatures and plants; 


(e) “lifestyle” means way of living; 


(f) “lifestyle environment education” means education creating awareness of 
environment and to encourage a lifestyle that focuses on mindful utilization of resources 
and to nudge individual and community to preserve the environment; and 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette specify, the lifestyle environment education shall be taught as a compulsory subject 
in all educational institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central 
Government on the recommendation of the National Centre. 


4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification 
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of lifestyle environment education 
in educational institutions from such class onwards as it may determine, within its jurisdiction. 


5. Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall 
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified, 
for teaching lifestyle environment education in all educational institutions. 


6. (/) The Central Government shall, within six months of the coming into force of the 
Compulsory Teaching of Lifestyle for Environment Act, 2023, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a National Centre to be known as the National Centre for Promotion and 
Teaching of Lifestyle Environment Education. 


(2) The National Centre shall consist of such number of persons, having special 
knowledge or experience in the teaching of lifestyle environment education, as the Central 
Government may deem fit. 


7. The National Centre shall perform the following functions, namely:— 


(a) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards the 
lifestyle environment education shall be taught in educational institutions; 


(b) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to 
be appointed in educational institutions for teaching lifestyle environment education; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 429 


(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be 
given recognition for training teachers in lifestyle environment education for the purpose 
of their appointment in educational institutions; 


(d) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the school authorities 
with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


8. The appropriate Government shall derecognize educational institutions, which does 
not comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institution a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 


9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act. 


0. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


Il. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Derecognition 
of educational 
institutions 
for non- 
compliance of 
the provisions 
of the Act. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
fund. 


Overriding 
effect of the 
Act. 


Power to 
make rules. 


430 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Environmental degradation and climate change are global phenomena where actions 
in one part of the world impact ecosystems and populations across the globe. Estimates 
suggest that if requisite action is not taken against the changing environment, approximately 
three billion people globally could experience chronic water scarcity. The global economy 
could lose up to eighteen per cent. of GDP by the year 2050. 


Over the last two decades, several macro measures have been implemented globally to 
address environmental degradation and climate change, including policy reforms, economic 
incentives and regulations. Despite their enormous potential, actions required at the level of 
individuals, communities and institutions have received limited attention. 


Changing individual and community behaviour alone can make a significant dent in 
the environmental and climate crises. According to the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP), if one billion people out of the global population of eight billion adopt 
environment-friendly behaviours in their daily lives, global carbon emissions could drop by 
approximately twenty per cent. 


In this context, the concept of 'Lifestyle for the Environment (LiFE)' was introduced by 
Hon'ble Prime Minister at COP26 in Glasgow on Ist November 202], calling upon the global 
community of individuals and institutions to drive LiFE as an international mass movement 
towards “mindful and deliberate utilisation, instead of mindless and destructive consumption” 
to protect and preserve the environment. 


The idea behind the LiFE intiative is to put individual and collective duty on everyone 
to live a life that is in tune with Earth and does not harm it. This initiative encourages a 
lifestyle that focuses on mindful and deliberate utilization of resources and aims to change 
the present ‘use and dispose of’ consumption habits. The idea behind is to encourage 
individuals to adopt simple changes in their daily life that can contribute to climate change. 


Another part of the LiFE mission is to use the strength of social networks to bring a 
change in the climate landscape. The mission also plans to create a global army of environment 
enthusiasts who shall be known as 'Pro-Planet People’, committed to adopting and promoting 
environment-friendly lifestyles. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for compulsory teaching of lifestyle environment 
education in all educational institutions statutory on the lines of the LiFE Mission to 
encourage individuals to adopt simple changes in their daily life that may contribute to 
climate change. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; MANOJ RAJORIA 
March 28, 2023. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers for teaching lifestyle 
environment education in all educational institutions. Clause 6 provides for constitution of 
National Centre for Promotion and Teaching of Lifestyle Environment Education by the 
Central Government. Clause 9 provides for payment of adequate funds to the States for 
carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about 
rupees one thousand crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred and fifty crore is also likely 
to be involved. 


432 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |! of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 433 


Bit No. 296 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In article 5 of the Constitution, in clause 6, in sub-clause (9), for the words “such 
special provisions related to”, the words “Such special provisions including age relaxation 
as is being provided for the socially and educationally backward classes of citizen regarding” 
shall be substituted. 


3. In article l6 of the Constitution, in clause (6), for the words “any provision for the 
reservation of” the words “any provision for reservation, including age relaxation as is 
being provided for the socially and educationally backward class of citizens, in” shall be 
substituted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of article 5. 


Amendment 
of article 6. 


434 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


In pursuance of the Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 209, 
special provisions were made for the reservation in appointments or posts in favour of 
Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) of citizens. The said reservation has been given to the 
persons other than the backward class, mentioned in clauses (4) and (5) of article 5 and 
clause (4) of article 6, in addition to the existing reservation, and subject to a maximum of ten 
per cent. of the posts in each category. In past, the EWS citizens had largely remained 
excluded from attending the higher educational institutions and public employment on account 
of their financial incapacity to compete with the persons who are economically more privileged. 


In recent times, it has also been observed that certain States like Telangana, Uttar 
Pradesh, Rajasthan etc., have made suitable provisions to extend the desirable benefits of 
age relaxation to the candidates from EWS category at par with Other Backward Classes 
candidates. However, the said age relaxation related benefits are not extended by most of the 
States and Central Government, till date. Therefore, such an anomalous state of affairs and 
half measures existing about reservation to EWS warrants not only an expeditious review 
but an amendment to Constitution itself so that Economically Weaker Sections of citizens 
could get a fair chance of receiving higher education as well as appropriate participation in 
employment in the services of the State across India. To achieve this objective, it would be 
highly essential to grant them the ‘Age Relaxation’ akin to their counterparts from Other 
Backward Classes category by means of carrying out an amendment in the Constitution of 
India. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SANJAY BHATIA 
July , 2022. 


59 of 988. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 435 


Bill No. 287 of 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, /968 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (72) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 4 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 988, in sub-section (l), after second 
proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:— 


"Provided also that no registration of new motor vehicle shall be made unless 
the applicant possess the requisite and valid driving license: 


Provided also that if the applicant does not possess requisite and valid driving 
license, he may apply jointly either with his spouse or a family member possessing the 
requisite and valid driving license and such applicant shall be deemed to be joint 
owner of the said motor vehicle: 


Provided also that an applicant whose license has been suspended may also be 
permitted to apply for registration of a new motor vehicle if the State in which the 
applicant intends to register permits the same: 


Provided also that if the dealer registers the new motor vehicle without the 
requisite and valid driving license of the applicant, such dealer shall be liable to 
imprisonment for three months and fine as may be prescribed: 


Provided also that an applicant possessing a learners license may apply for 
registration of a motor vehicle of upto 50 cc capacity.". 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 4]. 


436 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


As per section 8 of the Motor Vehicles Act, l988 a driving license can be issued to 
such persons who clear the driving test. License is required to drive a vehicle, which means 
no person can take a vehicle for a drive without a valid license. Therefore, under section l8] 
of the Motor Vehicles Act, |988, it is a punishable offence to drive a vehicle without a 
license. 


The Bill proposes that every vehicle dealer shall check every prospective buyer for a 
valid driving license for registration of new car and those dealers who violate this rule and 
register vehicles in the name of those persons without a valid driving license, they shall be 
punished with an imprisonment of three months or fine shall be imposed on them. 


The Bill also seeks to include an amendment making it possible for a person not 
having driving license, to register a motor vehicle in co-ownership with spouse, close relative, 
or family member etc. Such vehicles which are registered in co- ownership, cannot be sold or 
transferred without the agreement of both the parties and it means it would be illegal to sale 
the vehicle without consent of other partner. 


Insurance companies follow the guidelines of Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority of India (IRDAI). According to the guidelines a valid driving license is mandatory 
for the vehicle driver. Therefore, if a driver does not have the driving license at the time of 
accident, the Insurance Company can reject the claim. 


Valid driving license is necessary for the registration and without it one may face 
problem at the time of insurance and registration. A valid driving license is mandatory to 
avail the full coverage of insurance. Hence having a valid driving license is a necessity. 


The Bill also provides for registration of vehicle with a suspended license but it 
depends on the policy of concerned State in this regard. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SANJAY BHATIA 
November 2, 2022 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 437 


BILL No. 285 oF 20l9 


A Bill to provide for a framework to enable India to ban plastic manufacturing to safeguard 
the environment 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 


I. (3) This Act may be called the Plastic Manufacturing (Regulation) Act, 209. Short title, 
extent and 
(2) It extends to whole of India. commencement. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "fund" means the Extended Producer Responsibility Fund constituted under 
section 6; 


(c) "plastic" means material which contains as an essential ingredient a high 
polymer such as polyethylene terephthalate, high density polyethylene, Vinyl, low 
density polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene resins or multimaterials like 
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene, polyphenylene oxide, polycarbonate or polybutylene 
terephthalate; 


438 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(d) "plastic packaging" means all products which are— 


(i) used for the containment, protection, handling, delivery and 
presentation of goods; and 


(ii) partly or wholly composed of plastic; 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(f) "single-use plastic" means any disposable plastic item which is designed to 
be used only once before it is thrown out or recycled and includes plastic forks and 
knives, plastic shopping bags, plastic coffee cup, lids, plastic water bottles, styrofoam, 
plastic take out containers and plastic straws. 


Plastic target 3. The Central Government shall, within three months from the commencement of this 
setting. Act,— 


(a) prescribe a target of complete elimination of plastic waste by the year 2050 in 
accordance with international obligations, if any, agreed to by India: 


(b) specify the year 2022 as target year to implement a complete ban on single- 
use plastic and the proportion of reduction of single-use plastic during each year 
following the date of fixing of target year 2022; and 


(c) formulate and implement a National Plastic Control Strategy for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. 


Phasing out of 4. The appropriate Government shall take measures to ensure— 
existent 
plastic. (a) elimination of the production and use of plastics including plastic packaging 


single-use plastic. 
(b) increase in recycling, reuse and other forms of waste recovery in relation to 


plastics; and 


(c) removing plastics already in the environment for the purpose of recycling, 
reusing or applying another form of waste recovery to the plastics. 


Ban on single 5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no 
sas puss person shall, after the target year 2022, use, stock, distribute, manufacture, sell or trade in any 
items. . oe 

single-use plastic item. 


Constitution 6. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
of oe a Fund to be called the Extended Producer Responsibility Fund for improving the plastic 
Producer 

Responebility waste treatment system. 

Fund. (2) There shall be credited to the fund— 


(a) any grants and loans made by the Central Government or any State 
Government; 


(b) any voluntary donations or contributions, whether or not for any specific 
purpose as may be decided upon by the Central Government; 


(c) any fine recovered as penalty for the commission of an offence punishable 
under this Act; 


(d) portion of the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) fund received from any 
company as notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette; and 


(e) such other sums as may be received. 


(3) The Extended Producer Responsibility Fund shall be utilized under this Act by the 
Central Government for— 


(i) funding of any national or State level research study or project for development 
of innovative and efficient methods of treatment of plastic waste; 


4 of 974. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 439 


(ii) raising awareness regarding the impact of plastic waste and the benefits of 
recycling plastic waste and its substitution with bio-degradable alternatives; 


(iii) funding of small scale recyling or waste to energy plants on a district level; 
and 


(iv) any other activity that may be required for effective implementation of this 
Act. 


7. (2) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers with such 
designation as it deems fit for the purpose of this Act and may entrust to them such powers 
and functions under this Act as may be prescribed. 


(2) Any person who is appointed as an officer under sub-section (l) and is empowered 
by the Central Government in this behalf, if he has reason to believe that plastic packaging 
or plastic items as stated under section are being manufactured, stored, transported or 
distributed in any premises contrary to section 4, may enter into and search such place, 
premise or vehicle. 


(3) Where, as a result of the search made under sub-section (2), any plastic packaging 
item in contravention of section 4 are found, the authorized officer may seize such item and 
any other item which he may consider necessary under the provisions of this Act. 


(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, relating to searches and 
seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this section. 


8. Whoever violates the provision of this Act shall be punished with a fine which shall 
not be less than rupees one lakh but which may extend upto rupees five lakhs. 


9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


0. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Central 
Government 
to appoint 
Officer and 
Staff. 


Penalty. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
requisite funds. 


Power to 
make rules. 


440 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Plastic waste is not managed effectively in the world and especially in India. Further 
only nine per cent of nine billion metric tons of plastic ever produced has been recycled and 
that most plastic ends its life in landfills, dumps and the environment. If current patterns of 
consumption and waste management practices are not altered, by 2050 there will approximately 
2 billion metric ton of plastic litter in the environment. India's .3 billion population currently 
produces 25,940 metric tonnes of plastic waste per day. 


While plastic plays an important role in the economy, plastic packaging accounts for 
about half the plastic waste in the world, and that the poor management of that waste affects 
the environment. The serious environmental, social and economic impact of plastic waste 
and pollution including the clogging of sewers and blocking of waterways, leading to breeding 
of mosquitoes and other pests and the blocking of airways and stomachs of animals. This 
makes plastic waste management absolutely essential. 


India thus needs to develop and implement national or regional actions, as appropriate, 
to address the environmental impacts of single-use plastic products. We also need to promote 
the identification and development of environmentally friendly alternatives to single-use 
plastic products, after taking into account the full life-cycle implications of those alternatives. 
It is essential to promote improved waste management that will contribute to reducing the 
discharge of plastic waste into the environment. We also need to work together with industries 
to encourage the private sector to innovate and find affordable and environmentally friendly 
alternatives to single-use plastic products and to promote business models that take into 
account the full environmental impact of their products. The Government and the private 
sector together must promote the more resource-efficient design, production, and use and 
sound management of plastic across their life cycle. 


Hence this Bill. 


New Delhi; JASBIR SINGH GILL 
October 3i, 209. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 44] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall take measures to 
increase in recycling, reuse and other forms of waste recovery in relation to plastics. Clause 
6 provides for constitution of an Extended Producer Responsibility Fund for improving the 
plastic waste treatment system in the country. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government 
shall provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an 
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred and fifty crores would involve 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty crores is also likely to be involved. 


442 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause L0 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 


the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 443 


Bitt No. 34 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for compulsory teaching of moral ethics in all educational institutions 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows :— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Moral Ethics in Educational Short title and 
Institutions Act, 2023. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) “Advisory Council” means the Advisory Council for Teaching Moral Ethics 
constituted under section 6; 


(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


Compulsory 
teaching of 
moral ethics 
in educational 
institutions. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to issue 
directions for 
compulsory 
teaching of 
moral ethics 
in educational 
instituions. 


Appointment 
of teachers. 


Constitution 
of Advisory 
Council for 
Teaching 
Moral Ethics. 


Functions of 
Advisory 
Council for 
Teaching 
Moral Ethics. 


Derecognition 
of educational 
institutions 
for non- 
compliance of 
the provisions 
of the Act. 


444 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(c) “educational institution” means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a 
senior secondary level school or an University or College imparting education to 
children, by whatever name such institution is called but does not include a minority 
educational institution; 


(d) “moral ethics” means philosophy based on teaching of good principles and 
values cherished for years including regard and respect for elders, parents, teachers 
and guardians and setting reasonable standards of virtues and reinforcing discipline 
among students with a view to enable them to distinguish between right and wrong; 
and 


(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette specify, moral ethics shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all educational 
institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central Government on 
the recommendation of the Advisory Council. 


4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification 
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of moral ethics in educational 
institutions within its jurisdiction. 


5. Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall 
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified, 
for teaching moral ethics in all educational institutions. 


6. (/) The Central Government shall, within six months of the coming into force of the 
Compulsory Teaching Moral Ethics in Educational Institutions Act, 2023, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for Teaching Moral Ethics. 


(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such number of persons, having special 
knowledge or experience in the teaching of moral ethics, as the Central Government may 
deem fit. 


7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:— 


(a) recommend to the Central Government the class from which moral ethics 
shall be taught in educational institutions; 


(b) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to 
be appointed in educational institutions for teaching moral ethics; 


(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be 
given recognition for training teachers in moral ethics for the purpose of their 
appointment in educational institutions; 


(d) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the school authorities 
with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


8. The appropriate Government shall derecognize educational institutions, which does 
not comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institution a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 445 


9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act. 


0. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


Il. (2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
fund. 


Overriding 
effect of the 
Act. 


Power to 
make rules. 


446 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


A child learns from whatever he observes around and, therefore, society, parents and 
the State owe a duty to create an atmosphere in which children may have all round 
development. It has been generally believed among different sections of the society that 
morality and respect to moral values is the fulcrum of any society. 


Morality plays a vital role in our daily life. It is very necessary for every person to have 
certain basic knowledge of moral values and ethics. 


It has been said that “Knowledge is the Power”, and indeed it is not wrong. It is 
responsibility of our education system to make a common man morally sound. Current 
education system in educational institutions lays emphasis on imparting quality education. 
However, it is missing out on imparting teaching of the moral ethics and values and is, 
therefore, incomplete without it. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for teaching moral ethics compulsory in all 
educational institutions to make every students who are the future of the country to grow 
mature and easily distinguish between the right and the wrong. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; RAVI KISHAN 
January 24, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 447 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers for teaching moral ethics in all 
educational institutions. Clause 6 provides for constitution of Advisory Council for Teaching 
Moral Ethics by the Central Government. Clause 9 provides for payment of adequate funds 
to the States for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore will be involved per annum from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


448 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause |! of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 


the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 449 


Bit No. 48 oF 2023 
A Bill to amend the Central Sanskrit Universities Act, 2020. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Central Sanskrit Universities (Amendment) Short title, 
Act, 2023. and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


450 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Amendment 2. In the First Schedule to the Central Sanskrit Universities Act, 2020, in entry 2, 
: its i under the heading “Name of the Campus”, after item (b), the followinig item shall be inserted, 
chedule 
’ namely:— 


“(c) Gorakhpur Campus”. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Sanskrit language represents the soul of India. It has been the vehicle of Indian 
thoughts for millions. Sanskrit contains literature of exemplary value and the finest Indian 


minds found the expression in it. Sanskrit is not only mother of different Indian languages 
but also of some foreign languages. 


In a situation where the new generation is running away from its own roots and has 
developed contempt for the cultural traditions of our country, the importance of teaching 
Sanskrit becomes crucial. The time has come when we must make sincere efforts to make the 
new generation aware of the great traditions and thoughts of India. It is important to highlight 
here that relation between Sanskrit language and Indian scheduled and non-scheduled 
languages are symbiotic in nature and as a result, development of Sanskrit means development 
of other languages also. 


The Government has enacted the Central Sanskrit Universities Act, 2020 to establish 
and incorporate Universities for teaching and research in Sanskrit and develop all-inclusive 
Sanskrit promotional activities. Under the said Act, the Lucknow Campus and the Ganganath 
Jha campus of the Central Sanskrit University has been established in respect of the State of 
Uttar Pradesh. However, the need has been felt to establish the campus in Gorakhpur district 
to enable the propagation and teaching of Sanskrit in the Gorakhpur and nearby districts of 
the State of Uttar Pradesh. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Central Sanskrit Universities Act, 2020 with a 
view to establish a campus of the Central Sanskrit University at Gorakhpur in the State of 
Uttar Pradesh. 


Hence this Bill. 


New Delhi; RAVI KISHAN 
January 24, 2023. 


452 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to establish a campus of the Central Sanskrit University at 
Gorakhpur in the State of Uttar Pradesh. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure 
of about rupees two hundred crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 453 


BiLt No. 28 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for protection of traditional fishermen in the country and for welfare 
measures including life insurance coverage, healthcare, educational facilities to 
the children of traditional fishermen and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (7) This Act may be called the Traditional Fishermen (Protection and Welfare) 
Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notificatioinn the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: — 


(a) "accident" means an accident caused during the course of fishing activity 
including drowning; 


Short title, and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


National 
Policy for the 
welfare of 
traditional 
fishermen. 


Constitution 
of the 
National 
Traditional 
Fishermen 
Welfare 
Authority. 


454 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(c) "Authority" means the National Traditional Fishermen Welfare Authority 
constituted under section 4; 


(d) "traditional fisherman" means a person who generation by generation earns 
his livelihood by catching fish from the fisheries and whose only source of income is 
the money he earns from selling such fish; 


(e) “fisheries” which includes the management, catching, processing and 
marketing of fish; and 


(f) "Fund" means the Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund constituted under 
section 6; and 


(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year from the 
commencement of this Act, formulate, in consultation with the Government of the States 
having substantial population of fishermen, a national policy for the welfare of traditional 
fishermen and their families and protect their fishing rights and interests. 


4. (7) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in Official 
Gazette, constitute an Authority to be known as the National Traditional Fishermen Welfare 
Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both 
movable and immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


(3) The Authority shall consist of— 


(a) a Chairperson having adequate knowledge and professional experience in 
fisheries sector to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 


(b) a Deputy Chairperson with such qualification, to be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(c) three members to represent traditional fishermen to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) four members to represent the Union Ministries of Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry & Dairying (Department of Fisheries), Finance, Planning and 
Labour and Employment, to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner 
as may be prescribed; 


(e) five members of Parliament, of whom three shall be from the House of the 
People and two shall be from the Council of States, to be nominated by the Presiding 
Officers of the respective Houses; and 


(f) four members to be nominated by the Government of the States on rotation 
basis in alphabetical order. 

(4) The term of Office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the 
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 

(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the 
service of the Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 

(6) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Gorakhpur in the State of 
Uttar Pradesh. 


(7) The Authority may establish its offices at such other places, as it may deem 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 455 


(8) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such Officers and members of staff and 
with such terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed. 


5. (/) The Authority shall, subject to guidelines issued by the Central Government in 
this regard, in coordination with the State Governments take, steps for the overall welfare of 
traditional fishermen including, removal of poverty and indebtedness, raising the standard 
of living and making easy availability of market for selling fish. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority 
shall,— 


(a) implement the national policy for the traditional fishermen formulated under 
section 3; 


(b) maintain records of traditional fishermen in all villages and districts 
throughout the country; 


(c) maintain a district-wise register of traditional fishermen with such particulars 
and in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) provide modern tools and techniques for fishing to the traditional fishermen; 


(e) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to traditional fishermen 
cooperatives; 


(f) organize exhibitions, melas and such other activities to promote fisheries in 
different parts of the country; 


(g) make suitable arrangements for purchase of fishes by Government agencies 
on cash and carry basis; 


(h) encourage export of fish; and 


(i) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central 
Government from time to time. 


6. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
a Fund to be known as the Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund with a corpus of rupees five 
thousand crore. 


(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund 
in such ratio as may be prescribed. 


(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received by 
way of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise from individuals, body corporates, 
financial institutions, firms and partnerships. 


(4) The Fund shall be administered by a Board of Trustees, which shall be constituted 
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Fund shall be utilized for:— 
(a) interest free loans to traditional fishermen for purchasing of boats, nets and 
life boat; 


(b) making ex-gratia payments at prescribed rates to each of the bereaved 
families of traditional fishermen who die in accident; 


(c) life insurance cover to the traditional fishermen and their families; 


(d) healthcare facilities to the traditional fishermen and their dependent family 
members; 


(e) financial assistance to the traditional fishermen for the purchase and repair 
of fishing nets, boats and other equipments required for fishing; 


(f) unemployment allowance during illness or financial crisis during lean periods; 


Functions of 
the Authority. 


Constitution 
of the 
Traditional 
Fishermen 
Welfare Fund. 


Miscellaneous 
Provisions. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
Funds. 


Annual 
Report. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law 
for time being 
in force. 


Power to 
make rules. 


456 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(g) providing educational facilities and vocational training to the wards of 
traditional fishermen; and 


(h) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed. 
7. The appropriate Government shall,— 


(a) establish adequate number of schools and vocational training institutes and 
healthcare centres in and around the areas inhabitated by traditional fishermen for 
their benefit including their families and children; 


(b) protect the fishing rights and interests of the traditional fishermen; and 


(c) take such other measures as it may deem necessary for the protection and 
welfare of traditional fishermen. 


8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide to the Authority such sums as may consider necessary for the efficient 
functioning of the Authority. 


9. (/) The Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, an 
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and 
submit it to the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall cause the report submitted to it under 
sub-section (/) to be laid before each House of Parliament. 


0. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the date of the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be 
laid before each House of Parliament. 


Il. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act. 


2. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
tule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 457 


There are millions of traditional fishermen spread across various parts of our country. 
In the State of Uttar Pradesh the traditional fishermen are termed as ‘nishad’ or ‘mallah’. 
Their main occupation and means of livelihood is catching fish and selling it in the market 
and they are doing this for generations. However, the fishermen and their families live in 
abject poverty nearly hand to mouth. There are many problems experienced by traditional 
fishermen, including a lack of skills, limited facilities, and extreme competition. 


For most of the traditional fishermen, it is their family profession which passes on from 
one generation to other and their entire families are involved in this profession. For them, 
fishing is the only source of their livelihood and prosperity. 


Since the poor fishermen are part and parcel of our society and ours being a welfare 
State, it is necessary that the fishermen too are provided with adequate insurance cover 
against accidents, healthcare, financial assistance in case of need, educational, vocational 
facilities for their children, etc. 


Urgent remedial measures have to be taken for the welfare and protection of traditional 
fishermen. It has, therefore, been proposed to establish the National Traditional Fishermen 
Authority and also the Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund to improve the lot of traditional 
fishermen and save them from starvation in various parts of our nation. 


Hence this Bill. 


New Delhi; RAVI KISHAN 
January 23, 2023. 


458 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to constitute the National Traditional Fishermen Welfare 
Authority. Clause 5 provides for certain steps to be taken by the Authority for welfare of 
traditional fishermen. Clause 6 provides for the constitution of the Traditional Fishermen 
Welfare Fund. Clause 7 provides for the appropriate Government to establish adequate 
number of schools and vocational training institutes and healthcare centres in and around 
the areas inhabitated by traditional fishermen for their benefit including their families. Clause 
8 provides that the Central Government shall provide Funds to the Authority. The Bill, 
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is 
estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure per 
annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be incurred. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 459 


Butt No. 22 or 2023 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force such date, as the Central Government may, by notification Short title and 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. commencement. 


2. In Part IV of the Constitution, after article 48A, the following article shall be inserted, Insertion of 


namely:— new article 
48B. 


"48B. The State shall endeavour to reduce emissions and eventually realize the goalof Achieving net 
net zero emission for a clean sustainable and habitable environment which shall provide for 280 emissions 


; ; : ३2४ for a 
a inclusive posterity, for all citizens." : 
sustainable 


future. 


460 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Climate change and its allied issues are a pressing contemporary concern which 
transcend political borders and impact people across nationalities. The challenge to mitigate, 
sustain and adapt climate change though enormous, also brings up a historic and unparalleled 
opportunity for the human race to collectively work for the future of its existence. In such a 
scenario, India joined other responsible nations with the declaration of its pledge of net zero 


emissions by 2070 and further released its long-term strategy of achieving net zero emissions 
by 2070 at the recent 27th Conference of Parties (COP-27) in Egypt’s Sharm el-Sheikh. 


In such a state of affairs, it is imperative that federal polity of the country should work 
cohesively to contrive a path of national development which is distinctive yet at the same 
time serves balance between economic growth and climate sustainability. The state policy 
considerations demand inclusion of net zero emission targets to make long-term low emission 
development strategy a success, for the world to witness. 


Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) under Part IV of the Constitution have 
played a pivotal role in guiding the policies in India. They have been amended periodically 
as per the dynamic situations. Therefore in the light of contemporary exigencies, insertion of 
this new article is imperative. 


This amendment will provide a mandate which has also become necessary to fulfil and 
implement other existing elements of DPSP such as in articles 38, 47, 48A, 49 and 5]. It also 
includes the expression “inclusive” to ensure participation, balancing livelihood and growth 
of all the citizens of our nation in this new phase of developmental journey. 


Hence this Bill. 


New Delhi; SUNITA DUGGAL 
November 24, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 46] 


Bill No. 59 of 2020 


A Bill to prevent wasteful expenditure on special occasions such as weddings and festivals 
with a view to bring positive changes in the lives of the underprivileged and the 
destitute and for matter connected therewith. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Prevention of Wasteful Expenditure on Special Short title, 


Occasions Act, 2020. extent and 
commencement. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "designated Authority" means an authority or an officer designated for the 
purpose of registration of marriages under this Act; 


(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(d) "special occasion" means any event worth celebrating and includes 
weddings, festivals, and such other occasions; and 


(e) “supporting organization" means the any organisation engaged in creating 
awareness among public for prevention of wasteful expenditure on special occasions 
and encouraging people to donate for charity on such occasions. 


462 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part पी. 


Prevention of 3. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force 
wastage or of any custom or ritual, all special occasions shall be conducted in a simple manner 
during : 5 है fi हे f ; : 
गवाह without incurring extravagant or wasteful expenditure, show of wealth or lavish spending. 
23 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision contained in sub-section (/), 


on the occasion of solemnization of marriage— 
(a) not more than one hundred guests shall be invited; 
(b) not more than ten number of dishes shall be served; 


(c) the value of gifts given during invitation card distribution shall not exceed 
rupees twenty-five hundred; and 


(d) practice of donation to poor, needy, orphans or weaker sections of the 
society or to non-Governmental organisations working for charity shall be encouraged 
instead of extravagant gifts: 


Provided that donations and gifts may be combined if amount of gift is less than the 
prescribed limit as specified in clause(c). 


(3) The appropriate Government shall prescribe necessary guidelines to be followed 
for effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


Encouragement 4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or 


to Supporting वा any custom or usage to the contrary,— 
Organizations. 


(a) supporting organizations shall be encouraged to create awareness among 
public about the importance of practice of minimum expenditure on special occasions 
and disseminate the provisions of this Act, and 


(b) practice of donating for charity purpose on special occasions shall be 
encouraged. 


Penalty. 5. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and also with fine which may extend 
to fifty thousand rupees; 


Power to 6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
ada Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
ifficulties. 


inconsistent with the provisions of this act, as it appears to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


Act to have 7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
हब therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 

effect. 

Act not in 8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
derogation law for the time being applicable to marriages. 

of other 

law. 

Power to 9. () The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
make rules. for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 463 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
These days, it has become fashionable to spend like feudals on special occasions 
such as marriages and festivals. The guest list is very long and the food menu layout is vast 
which leads to lot of wastage. Not only this, a lot of wastage occurs at the time of distribution 
of marriage cards or post-wedding gifts. Similarly, a lot of wastage occurs on festivals due to 
practices of exchanging gifts. That also deserves significant attention. 


On weddings, practice of a vast food layout, decoration, bands, music and number of 
guests invited has become a status symbol and a symbol of show-off. Analogously, on 
festivals thoughtless exchange of gifts is very wasteful. Festivals must be a time to remember 
the almighty and do good to society. But often, the core concept of festivals get lost in the 
show-off that many do, by exchanging fancy gifts. That money could instead be donated 
and smaller gifts distributed. 


In fact, on special occasions, food waste and loss has been rapidly increasing in India. 
According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), every year 
around |.7 billion tonnes, or almost one third of food produced for human consumption, is 
lost or wasted globally. 


As per the Global Hunger Index, 209 India has a rank of 02 out of l7 countries. The 
NFHS4 (20I5 &6) estimated 46.8 million under five children in India are stunted and this 
represents one-third of total stunted children across the globe. Food loss or waste also 
amount to a major squandering of resources, including water, land, energy, labour and capital 
and it also needlessly produce greenhouse gas emissions, contributing to global warming 
and climate change. 


It is high time for our country to stand up against this unmeaningful and wasteful 
expenditure. So we should decide that not more than one hundred guests and not more than 
ten dishes should be allowed. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; JASBIR SINGH GILL 
January 22,2020. 


464 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 


the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only the delegation of 
legislative power is of normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 465 


Butt No. 90 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy—third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


34 of 2006. 2. In section 3 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Act), in sub-section (),— 
"(a) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(ca) "child" means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of sixteen 
years;"; 
(b) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(ha) "diabetes" means a non-communicable disease that occurs either 
when pancreas does not produce sufficient insulin or when the body becomes 


resistant to insulin and leads to serious damage to the heart, blood vessels, 
eyes, kidneys and nerves;"; and 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 3. 


Insertion of 
new Chapter 
IIA. 


Labelling of 
soft drinks. 


Prohibition of 
sale of soft 
drinks to 
child. 


Prohibition on 
advertising of 
labelled soft 
drink. 


Imposition of 
sugar tax for 
sale of labelled 
soft drink. 


Punishment for 
advertisement 
of labelled soft 
drink. 


466 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(c) after clause (zs), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(zsa) "soft drink" means water based flavored drink usually with added 
carbon dioxide and natural or synthetic sweeteners used interchangeably with 
carbonated drinks or aerated drinks or sweetened beverages and includes,— 


(i) soda; 

(ii) cola; 

(iii) carbonated water; 

(iv) juice; 

(vy) nectar; 

(vi) syrup; 

(vit) still drinks; 

(viii) ready to drink caffeine containing beverages; 
(ix) sports drinks; and 

(x) energy drinks; 


3. After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections thereunder 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


"CHAPTER ITA 
REGULATION OF SALE OF Sort DRINKS CAUSING DIABETES AMONGST CHILDREN 


7A. The soft drink containing high sugar, calories, saturated fat or any other ingredient 
beyond limits stipulated and detrimental to health and causing diabetes of children shall bear 
label warning about the presence of excess ingredient in black bold letters. 


7B. The sale of soft drinks as labelled under I7A to any child shall be prohibited. 


7C. All soft drink labelled under section 7A shall not be advertised in print, television 
or any other form targetting children below the age of sixteen years. 


7D. Whoever sells a labelled soft drink in contravention of the provisions of this 
Chapter shall be imposed such rate of sugar tax as the Central Government may, in consultation 
with State Governments specify. 


I7E. Whoever advertises a labelled soft drink in contravention of provisions of this 
Chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto Six months 
and fine which may extend upto rupees twenty-five thousand .". 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 467 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

In the recent past Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI) an United States 
based health advocacy group in its report titled "Carbonating the World" says "producers 
of sugar—sweetened beverages are investing heavily in low and middle income countries in 
the wake of declining sales in wealth and developed countries". As various laws of the land 
ensures freedom to conduct business and trade but it has to come up with reasonable 
restriction. The point which pricks the conscience is that always developing countries has 
been seen as dumping yard for goods which did not sell properly in those countries and shift 
to low and middle income countries. The same happened when cigarette sales sagged in the 
United States where companies were swiftly shifting to developing countries. Specifically 
the multinational companies spend several billion dollars in the country such as Brazil, 
China, India and Mexico in the entire process of soft drinks making and advertize their 
product to maximize the sales. Indian soft drinks industry has an annual sale of more than US 
$ 0 billion and about to grow six to seven per cent. annually. 


India is experiencing increased consumption of sugar-sweetened carbonated drinks 
as recent statistics released by International Diabetes Federation (IDF) shows that 77 million 
adults living with diabetes. In past edition of same IDF has estimated that |,28,500 children 
and adolescents with diabetes in India. According to a study published in the Indian Journal 
of Endocrinology and Metabolism it has estimated that India is home to about 97,700 children 
with Type-! diabetes mellitus. If we consider under-reporting or not reporting the actual 
figures may be higher. Type-| diabetes in the children means is that their body no longer 
produces insulin which needed to regulate blood sugar. Usually Type-| diabetes occur at 
adolescence age precisely at l4-6 years of age. 


Consuming sugar-sweetened carbonated drinks is major reason for Type-2 diabetes 
among overweight or obese children. Quoting from WHO e-LENA by Director of Policy, 
World Obesity Federation, London UK "... consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages has 
been suggested as a contributory factor to the rising levels of childhood obesity or 
overweight..." which in turn result in cause of Type-2 diabetes a case where body produces 
insulin but not able to use it or often called as insulin resistance. Drinking sugar-sweetened 
beverages contribute to increase weight gain. WHO recommends 6 teaspoon of sugar a day 
which is approximately 25 g of sugar. A half litre of sugary carbonated drinks contributes 
about 80% of recommended added sugars to be consumed in a day. Consumption rapidly 
increases blood sugar levels and this can lead to tiredness and increased hunger even in 
people without diabetes, so it has to be looked in a comprehensive way that restrict the sales 
of soft drinks for reducing the risk of Type-| diabetes of all type. 


The proposed Bill foresees two pronged approach in restricting the sales of soft 
drinks. Firstly, applying sugary tax in India as is being followed in more than fifty countries. 
As India also has high tax on aerated beverages as high as twenty-eight per cent. GST but 
the need is to tax all type of soft drinks and spend the amount received from tax on health and 
nutritional aspect. Secondly, restricting the advertisement of soft drinks targeting children 
and adolescence, who may not be aware of persuasive intent. There is evidence that restriction 
of child—focused advertisement on sugary sweetened beverages improved child dietary 
habits and decrease soft drink consumption. The consumption of soft drinks or sugar- 
sweetened beverages or carbonated or aerated drinks among children who may not have 
the awareness to know the persuading intent is often resulting in regular consumption of 
soft drinks among children below sixteen years has to be restricted by keeping their health 
potential and reduce the risk of diabetes among them. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; DNV SENTHIL KUMAR S. 
November 26, 202. 


468 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 7(/) AND 274(/) OFTHE 
CONSTITUTION 
[Copy of letter No. P.l5025/I59/202I—FR dated 22 September, 2022 from 


Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya, Minister of Health and Family Welfare and Chemicals and Fertilizers 
to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha]. 


The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Food Safety 
and Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2022 (Amendment of Section 3, etc.) by Dr. DNV 
Senthilkumar S., Member of Parliament, has recommended for introduction of the Bill under 
articles |!7(/) and 274(/) of the Constitution in Lok Sabha. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 469 


Butt No. 95 or 2022 


A Bill to provide for equal compensation to victims of accidents by the Government and 
for matters connected therewith and incidental _ thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Act, 2022. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 

(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect. 

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "accident" means an unexpected and undesirable incident resulting in injury 
or death of a person during travel by road, railway or air or due to natural disasters, or 
terrorist or extremists activities or stampede; 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Equal 
compensation 
to victims 

of accidents. 


Constitution 
of Victims of 
Accident 
Compensation 
Fund. 


State 
Government 
to furnish 
statistical 
information. 


470 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases the Central Government; 


(c) "compensation" means financial assistance provided by the Central 
Government to the victim or his dependent; 


(d) "dependent" means the parents, spouse, children or siblings of the victim; 


(e) "Fund" means the Victims of Accident Compensation Fund constituted under 
section 4; 


(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(g) "qualified medical practitioner" means any person declared by the appropriate 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a qualified medical practitioner 
for the purposes of this Act; and 


(A) "victim" means a person killed or injured in any accident. 


3. (/) The Central Government shall after taking into consideration the loss or injury 


sustained, pay equal amount of compensation to every victimin such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) The amount of compensation shall be as follows:— 


(i) where death results from the accident, the dependents of the victim shall be 
paid rupees twenty lakhs; 


(ii) where permanent disability results from the accident, the victim shall be 
paid rupees ten lakh; 


(iii) where temporary disability results from the accident, the victim shall be 
paid rupees four lakh; and 


(iv) where ordinary injury results from the accident, the victim shall be paid 
rupees one lakh. 


(3) The nature of injury suffered by a victim shall be examined and reported by a 


qualified medical practitioner, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The compensation amount shall be disbursed to the victimor to his dependent 


within one week from the date of receipt of report of the qualified medical practitioner under 
sub-section (3). 


4. (/) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Victims of 


Accident Compensation Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in such proportion as may be 


prescribed. 


(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation or contribution both from 


domestic and international institutions shall also be credited to the Fund. 


(4) The Fund shall be administered by a Board to be known as the Victims of Accident 


Compensation Board, consisting of:— 


(i) the Prime Minister—ex-officio Chairperson; 


(ii) the Chief Ministers of every State and Lieutenant Governor or Chief 
Administrators of Union territories—ex-officio; and 


(iii) ten retired judges of High Court to be appointed by the Central Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed as members. 


5. The Central Government may require a State Government to furnish such statistical 


and other information as may be necessary for implementation of the provisions of this Act, 
in such form and within such period as may be prescribed. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47] 


6. (/) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Special Team to effectively 
implement the provisions of this Act within their jurisdiction. 


(2) The Special Team shall consist of ten members of which five shall be appointed by 
the Central Government and five by the State Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Special Team shall— 
(i) visit the accident site and collect information relating to the victims; 


(ii) submit the accident related information to the Victims of Accident 
Compensation Board; 


(iii) ensure that the victims receive the compensation within the time limit 
prescribed under this Act; and 


(iv) undertake any other work that may be assigned by the Board. 


(v) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of 
service of members of the special Team appointed under sub-section (2) shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 


7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act. 


8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt within this Act. 


9. (/) The Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Constitution 
of 

a special team 
by the 
appropriate 
Government. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
adequate 
funds. 


Savings. 


Power to 
make rules. 


472 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Constitution provides right to equality to every citizen as a Fundamental Right. 
There is a provision for equality and non-discrimination before law under articles 4 to l6 
and for social equality under articles [7 and 8 of the Constitution. The right to equality 
provided by the Constitution provides that all persons within the territories of India should 
get equal protection under the law and should be treated equally in similar situations. In case 
of accident financial assistance is provided as compensation to affected persons. However 
in case of death of the accident affected person the relatives of the deceased have to go to 
court for justice which is unfortunate. Thousands of suits are filed in courts for similar 
compensation in similar situations. In many cases, courts have also given decisions to 
provide for equal amounts. Despite this, there is no clear policy of the Government. Everything 
depends on the administrative decision. Now, the time has come to formulate a law providing 
for payment of fixed amounts as compensation to the next kin of deceased and to the injured 
in accidents. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH 
March 7, 2022 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 473 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for equal compensation to accident affected persons. 
Clause 4 provides for constitution of a Victims of Accident Compensation Fund. Clause 6 
provides for the appropriate Government to constitute Special Team to implement the 
provisions of this Act. It also provides for appointment of five members to each special Team 
by the Central Government. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide 
adequate funds to carry out provisions of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure 
of rupees twenty five thousand crore per annum will be involved. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be involved. 


474 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 475 


Butt No. l!7 oF 2022 


A Bill to provide for the use of official language in the proceedings of High Courts and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy—third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the High Courts (Use of Official Languages) Act, 2022. 
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appointed day" means the date as may be notified by the appropriate 
Government for the purposes of this Act; 


(b) "appropriate Government" means,— 


(i) in relation to the High Court for a State, the Government of that State; 
and 


(ii) in relation to other High Courts, the Central Government; 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Right of the 
party to 
prefer official 
language in 
conduct of 
proceedings. 


Conduct of 
proceedings in 
High Court. 


Measures by 
appropriate 
Government. 


476 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(c) "documents" means documents as defined in section 3 of the Indian Evidence 
Act, 872; 


(व) "High Court" means any Court as defined in clause (4) of article 366, or 
established under article 23[ of the Constitution and includes its Benches; 


(e) "official language" means the official language of the Union under article 343 
of the Constitution and includes the language in use for official purposes in any State 
in which the High Court for that State is located; 


(f) "party" includes any person authorized by the party to the matter or an 
advocate for the party; and 


(g) "proceedings" includes pleadings, petition, application, appeal, reference, 
revision, review, affidavit, counter affidavit, other documents filed or received during 
course of conduct of the matter, appearance, leading of arguments, during hearing in 
any matter, judgement, decree or order and such other matters as may be prescribed by 
the High Court. 


3. (7) From the appointed day any party to the proceedings before a High Court shall 
have the right to prefer the official language in conduct of _ such proceedings in that High 
Court. 


(2) The party to the proceedings shall make an application to the High Court for the 
conduct of the proceedings in the official language in such manner as may be laid down by 
that High Court under section 4. 


4. (/) Where any party to the proceedings has made preference for the conduct of 
proceedings in official language, the High Court shall conduct proceedings before it in the 
official language. 


(2) The High Court may lay down by rules the procedure for conduct of proceedings 
in the official language: 


Provided that such procedure shall not entail any additional expense on any party to 
the case for conducting such proceedings in the official language. 


5. The appropriate Government shall take such measures as may be necessary to 
ensure availability of requisite infrastructure in the concerned High Court within its 
jurisdiction for conduct of proceedings in the official language in that High Court from the 
appointed day. 


Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, requisite infrastructure includes 
appropriate translation and typing facility in the official language and such other facilities as 
may be necessary for conduct of the proceedings in the official languages. 


lof 872. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 477 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 348 of the Constitution of India envisages law by Parliament that may prescribe 
a language other than English for the proceedings of the High Courts. The right to fair 
hearing cannot be done until the litigant understands the language of the hearing. There 
is a legal maxim that justice should not only be done but the same should also appear to 
have been done. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH 
March 7, 2022. 


478 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 provides that the appropriate Government shall take such measures as may 
be necessary to ensure availability of requisite infrastructure to the concerned High Court 
within its jurisdiction for conduct of proceedings in the official language in that High Court 
from the appointed day. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the exact amount of 
recurring and non-recurring expenditure to be involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 479 


Bit No. 29 07 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Railways Act, |989. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


24 of 989. 2. After section 24 of the Railways Act, 989, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"24A. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 22, 23 and 24 of the Act, 
the Central Government may, by notification, sanction the running or extension or 
diversion of super fast trains via Thawe junction in the State of Bihar by approving 
the proposal received from the Railway Division of the North-Eastern Region and 
extension of train No. 224/2242 (Arunachal Express) via route Siwan-Thawe- 
Kaptanganj- Gorakhpur.". 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new section 
24A. 


Special 
Provisions of 
railway at 
Thawe 
junction in the 
State of Bihar. 


480 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The section of Varanasi division of North-Eastern Railway which comprises Thawe- 
Gopalganj junction is facing number of challenges and disadvantage due to non—availability 
of superfast trains for various metropolitan cities of the country. To overcome such difficulties 
and to make railway connectivity from this neglected section by providing the train facilities 
would certainly provide ample revenue to railways. 


At Thawe junction in the Thawe-Gopalganj section, there is one of the most 
important and reverable religious peeth. Seeing the rush of pilgrims during normal days and 
huge rush during auspicious days, and considering the fact that this area is the native to 
lakhs of migrant labours who are working in different parts of country, especially, NCR 
and the States of Haryana, Punjab, J&K. Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Karnataka, 
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, West Bengal, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh etc., the train facilities to this 
junction is must. Apart from the above, people of this area depends on bigger cities of 
country for any specialized medical facilities and education too. This section/area does not 
have any direct train for Delhi or any other metropolitan cities. 


The Bill, therefore seeks to amend the Railways Act, | 989 with a view to implement the 
proposal of North-Eastern Railway once received for approval without any further delay to 
augment the train services to cater the need of the neglected Thawe Junction which is a long 
awaited demand of lakhs of people of the various districts of the State of Uttar Pradesh and 
Bihar. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; ALOK KUMAR SUMAN 
July , 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 48] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 24A seeks to provide diversion or extension 
of the superfast trains via Thawe junction by giving the approval of the proposal received 
from the railway division of the North-Eastern Region. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual 
recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of 
india. 

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


482 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Butt No. 57 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 
Short title. l. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) 

Act, 2022. 
Amendment 2.In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950, in Part ०0.0. 22. 
of the XIV,—Tamil Nadu, after entry 8, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— 


Schedule. 
"|66. "Lambadi". 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 483 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Tribal communities of this country have undergone many sufferings due to historical 
reasons like socio-economic exploitation, deprivation, isolation, inequalities and discrimination 
which pushed them backward and vulnerable. Citing historical injustice, our forefathers of 
the Constitution incorporated several provisions which aspired to promote education and 
economic interest of weaker sections particularly the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes. 

Article 366(25) of the Constitution defines Scheduled Tribes (ST) as those tribes or 
tribal communities who are scheduled under article 342. To carry out social justice 
measures for the tribal communities, the list for the Scheduled Tribe was notified by the 
President vide the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, !950. Many communities are 
demanding inclusion in the Scheduled Tribe list which mainly falls in three categories such 
as (i) new entry, (ii) sub-tribes/sections, synonyms and (iii) phonetic variations. 


The demand of "Lambadi Community" of Tamil Nadu, to be included in Scheduled 
Tribe List, is long pending. Lambadis in Tamil Nadu are notified as Backward Class but they 
are in Scheduled list in neighbouring States namely Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. In 
Tamil Nadu their total population is about 2 lakhs. In Dharmapuri alone, about 50,000 Lambadis 
are living in Harur (Sittlingi Thanda, Sittlingi panchayat), Pennagaram and Dharmapuri taluks 
and in Mettur Taluk (Lakkampatti). The State Government of Tamil Nadu has recommended 
for inclusion of Lambadis in the Scheduled Tribe (ST) list and had forwarded the same to 
Union Government in 2009. In 994, a high level committee constituted by the National 
Commission for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes had recommended the 
same. 


In order to render the social justice and affirmative action without further loss of time, 
the amendment in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, !950 is much needed. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950 
with a view to include "Lambadi community" in the list of Scheduled Tribes in respect of the 
State of Tamil Nadu. 


Newe DELHI; DNV SENTHIL KUMAR S. 
July |, 2022. 


484 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill seeks to include Lambadi to the list of Scheduled Tribes with respect to the 
State of Tamil Nadu by way of amending the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 950. 
The Bill, if enacted, would involve recurring and non-recurring expenditure on account of the 
benefits to be given under the schemes and programmes of the Government meant for social, 
educational and economic development of the scheduled tribes. At this stage, it is not 
possible to mention the exact amount which may be incurred on this account. However, it is 
estimated that a sum of approximately rupees thirty-five crore is likely to be involved as a 
recurring expenditure per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seventy crore is also likely to be involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 485 


Bit No. 99 oF 2022 


A Bill to provide for regularisation of the services of nursing and conferring the status of 
not less than those of Group 'C' employee of the Central Government on such nursing 
Services. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
l. (7) This Act may be called the Nursing Services (Regularisation of Service and Short title, 
Welfare) Act, 2022. extent and 
commencement. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Office Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 
(a) "National Health Mission" means National Rural Health Mission and National 


Urban Health Mission started by the Central Government to implement the health 
system at all levels; 


Regularisation 
of services of 
Nursing 
Services. 


Savings. 


Power to 
make rules. 


486 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) "nursing services" means any person working as a nursing staff including 
Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA), Auxiliary Nursing Midwifery (ANM), General 
Nursing Midwifery (GNM) and others on regular or contract or daily wages basis 
under the National Health Mission; and 


(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. (7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, take all such 
steps as may be necessary to regularize the services of nursing and confer the status of not 
less than those of Group 'C' employees of the Central Government on all such nursing 
services. 


(2) The Central Government shall also provide such wages and welfare facilities as are 
available to, or not less than, Group 'C' employees of the Central Government. 


4. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 


5. (7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out all purposes of this Act ensuring the service status and welfare of the 
nursing services. 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions aforesaid both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity or anything previously done under that rule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 487 


National Health Mission was started by the Central Government to implement the 
decentralized model of health system at all levels in the country. It includes ambitious projects 
to provide equitable, affordable and quality health care for rural areas under the ‘National 
Rural Health Mission’ and for urban areas under the ‘National Urban Health Mission’. The 
contribution of nursing services are remarkable and has become an integral and essential 
part of life for better health ecosystem in rural and urban areas. The nursing services under 
national health mission are first promoters and on ground implement warriors of schemes of 
the Central and State Governments. The duties and service rendered by the nurses are very 
important for the protection of the health and welfare of women, children, poor, disabled, old 
age people and vulnerable sections. The nursing services do not have job security and the 
honorarium given to them are not sufficient to meet their immediate basic requirements. This 
may adversely affect the working and motto of the National Health Mission. 


The nursing services such as ASHA, ANMs, GNMs and others are the main links 
between Government and general public. They are helping the Government for the effective 
implementation of health scheme and due to their dedicated services popularly known as 
‘Corona warriors' during the pandemic of COVID-l9. Considering the importance of their 
duties and service it is highly necessary to protect their service and welfare. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; RITESH PANDEY 
July 6, 2022. 


488 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for regularization of the services of nursing and confer the 
status not less than those of Group 'C' employees of the Central Government on all such 
nursing services. It also provides for such wages and welfare measures as are available to or 
not less than Group 'C' employees of the Central Government to nursing services. The Bill, 
therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore is likely to be involved per 
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislation powers is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 489 


Bit No. 208 oF 2022 


A Bill to ensure proper rehabilitation and relief to victims of acid attacks and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PERLIMINARY 


l. (/) This Act may be called the Prevention of Acid Attacks, Rehabilitation, Support 
and Healthcare Act, 2022. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "acid attack" means the act of throwing acid, or causing to or using it in any 
form on a person with the intent to cause grievous harm or with the knowledge that 
such use may lead to permanent or partial disability or deformity or disfiguration of 
any part of the body; 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Central 
Victims of 
Acid Attack 
Rehabilitation 
Authority. 


490 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(b) "acid" means any substance with particular chemical properties and having 
PH of less than 7 of corrosive character or burning nature that is capable of causing 
bodily injury leading to scars or disfigurement, or both or temporary or permanent 
disability; 

(c) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(d) "Authority" means the Central Victims of Acid Attack Rehabilitation Authority 
constituted under sub-section (/) of section 3; 


(e) "compensation" means compensation as provided for by this Act; 
(f) "family" includes a person, spouse and dependent children and minor siblings: 


Provided that surviving spouses, divorcees and persons deserted by families 
shall be considered spate families. 


Explanation.—An adult person with or without spouse or children or 
dependents shall be considered as a separate family for the purposes of this Act; 


(g) "Fund" means the Acid Attack Rehabilitation and Support Fund established 
under section |4; 


(A) "guardian" means a person who is responsible for the care of a minor or a 
disabled person; 


(i) "medical treatment" means medical, surgical or rehabilitative treatment 
(including any corrective surgeries, psychological counselling or diet or other regimens); 


(7) "notification" means a notification published in the official gazette by the 
appropriate Government; 


(k) "person" includes any company or association or body of persons, whether 
incorporated or not; 


(J) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this act; 


(m) "rehabilitation" includes medical and psychological care as well as legal 
and social services with the intent to enable victims to attain as well as maintain 
optimalphysical, sensory, intellectual, psychological environmental and social function 
levels; 


(n) "State Authority" means the State Victims of Acid Attack Rehabilitation 
Authority established under sub-section (/) of section 9; 


(०) "victim" means a person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by acid 
attack and includes the guardian or legal heir; and 


(p) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the 
Indian Penal Code, !860 or Code of Criminal Procedure, !973 shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in those Acts provided that they shall be applied in a 
gender-neutral manner. 


CHAPTER II 
CENTRAL VICTIMS OF ACID ATTACK REHABILITATION AUTHORITY 


3. (7) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority to be known 
as the Central Victims of Acid Attack Rehabilitation Authority. 


(2) The Authority shall consist of,— 


(a) the Union Minister of State, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment as 
the ex-officio Chairperson; 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49] 


(b) the Union Minister of State, Ministry of Home Affairs as the ex-officio 
Co-Chairperson; 


(c) the Union Minister of State, Ministry of Women and Child Development as 
the ex-officio Vice-Chairperson; 


(d) the Union Minister of State, Ministry of Law and Justice as the ex-officio 
Vice-Chairperson; 


(e) the Chairperson of National Commission for Women, as the ex-officio 
member; 


(f) the Chairperson of National Human Rights Commission, as the ex-officio 
member; 


(g) the Director, National Legal Services Authority as the ex-officio member; 


(h) two retired High Court judges to be appointed by the Central Government as 
members; 


(i) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst 
persons having knowledge of, or practical experience in, matters relating to providing 
assistance to victims of acid attack: 


Provided that at least two of the members shall be women or non-binary persons; 
and 


(j) such other representatives of the Ministries or Departments of the Government 
of India or experts representing different States or Union Territories, as may be 
prescribed as members. 


(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it 
considers necessary for the functioning of the Authority. 


(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of services 
of officers and staff of the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed. 


4. (/) The Authority shall take all such steps as it may think fit, to ensure planned and 
coordinated rehabilitation of victims of acid attack and for the purposes of performing its 
functions under this Act. 


(2) Without prejudice to anything contained in sub-section (7), the Authority 
shall:— 


(a) facilitate and ensure full and proper implementation of all provisions of this 
Act, including those pertaining to rehabilitation and relief services, including but not 
limited to compensation, reintegration to the victims, safety, care, protection and 
dignity of victims including prevention of re-traumatisation of victims, or recurrence 
of any acid attack against victims, in coordination with the concerned Ministries, 
Departments, prescribed authorities, statutory bodies; 


(b) ensure effective coordination between the concerned authorities involved 
in the process of rehabilitation and support; 


(c) coordinate with the appropriate Governments and other concerned authorities 
to maintain an updated national database of the victims under this Act for the sole 
purpose of providing relief and support; 


(d) oversee the disbursement of funds allocated for the assistance of the 
victims; 


(e) make recommendations to the appropriate Government regarding regulation 
and control of import, production, transportation, hoarding, sale, distribution of acid; 


492 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(f) make recommendations to the appropriate Government for efficacious 
implementation of various programmes for victim rehabilitation and also for 
preventing acid attacks; 


(g) make rules for disbursement of funds; 


(h) enhance public awareness about the provisions of this Act and its rules and 
regulations and also create a national toll-free helpline to aid the victims and or their 
family; 

(i) perform such other functions as may be prescribed as considered necessary 
by the Authority for effective discharge of the provisions of this Act; and 


(j) perform such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the Central 
Government. 


Terms of 5. (/) The Chairperson, Co-chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Authority shall 


office and hold office till the time they discharge the functions of their incumbent office; 
conditions of 


service. (2) The conditions of service of the Chairperson, the Co-Chairperson, the 
Vice-Chairperson, and the members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed; 


(3) The term of office of the members appointed by the Central Government shall be 
four years, or till they complete the age of sixty years or till fresh appointments are made, 
whichever is earlier, and other conditions of service of such members shall be such as may be 
prescribed; 


(4) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Authority, 
exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the Authority as may be delegated to them 
by the Authority and such other powers and duties as may be prescribed; 


(5) The Vice-Chairpersons shall perform such functions as may be assigned to them by 
the Chairperson from time to time. 


Disqualification 6. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member if he or she: — 
for office of 
members. (a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence, which, in 


the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or 


(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a 
body corporate owned or controlled by the Government; or 


(e) has in the opinion of the Central Government such financial or other interest 
in the Authority as is likely to prejudicially affect the discharge by them of their 
functions as a member. 

Vacation of 7. The Central Government shall remove a member if he:— 
office of 
member. (a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 6; 


(b) refuses to act or become incapable of acting; or 


(c) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused their position so as 
to render his or her continuance in office detrimental to the public interest: 


Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause unless he or she has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 


Procedure of 8. (J) The Authority shall regulate its own business. 
business. 


(2) The Authority shall meet at such time and place, and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, including the quorum at 
such meetings, as may be provided by regulations: 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 493 


Provided that the Authority shall meet at least once in three months. 


(3) The Chairperson, and in the absence of the Chairperson, the Co-Chairperson shall 
preside at the meetings of the Authority. 


(4) If for any reason the Chairperson and the Co-Chairperson both are unable to attend 
any meeting of the Authority, any one of the Vice-Chairperson present at the meeting shall 
preside at that meeting. 


CHAPTER III 
STATE VICTIMS OF ACID-ATTACK REHABILITATION AUTHORITY 


9. (J) Every State Government shall establish a State Authority to be known as the 
State Victims of Acid Attack Rehabilitation Authority for ensuring overall effective 
implementation of the provisions of this Act within the State. 


(2) The State Authority shall consist of,— 
(a) the Chief Secretary—ex-officio Chairperson; 
(b) the Secretary, Social Justice Department—ex-officio member; 
(c) the Principal Secretary, Home Department—ex-officio member; 
(d) the Secretary, Department of Women and Child—ex-officio member; 
(e) the Secretary, Labour Department—ex-officio member; 
(f) the Secretary, Health Department—ex-officio member; 
(g) the Secretary, State Legal Services Authority—ex-officio member; 
(h) the Secretary, Law Department—ex-officio member; 


(7) an officer of the State Police Department, not below the rank of Inspector 
General of Police to be appointed by the appropriate Government—member; 


(j) two social workers or representatives of civil society organisations or 
non-governmental organisations working in the area of providing aid to the victims of 
acid-attacks and related matters to be appointed by the appropriate Government, out 
of which at least one shall be a woman or non-binary person—members; and 


(k) such other persons to be appointed by the appropriate Government as may 
be prescribed—members. 


(3) The terms of office and condition of service of the Chairperson and other members 
of the State Authority will be the same as that of the Authority as may be prescribed under 
section 3. 


0. The State Authority shall:— 


(a) act as the nodal agency at State level for the compensation of victims of acid 
attack and to create a single window for compensation of victims under all the 
applicable schemes already in place; 


(9) facilitate and ensure full and proper implementation of all provisions of this 
Act, including those pertaining to rehabilitation and relief services including 
compensation, reintegration to the victims, safety, care, protection, and dignity of 
victims including prevention of re-traumatisation of victims, or recurrence of any acid 
attack against victims, in coordination with the concerned ministries, departments, 
prescribed authorities, statutory bodies; 


(c) ensure effective coordination between the concerned authorities involved 
in the process of rehabilitation and support; 


State Victims 
of Acid Attack 
Rehabilitation 
Authority. 


Providing 
monetary 
assistance. 


494 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(d) inquire into and constitute fact-finding teams to inquire into incidents of 
acid violence; 


(e) monitor the allocation and utilization of the funds allocated by the 
Authority; 


(f) coordinate with District Legal Service Authority and State Legal Service 
Authority to provide appropriate legal aid to the victims; 


(g) recommend the appropriate Government to notify medical facilities and other 
services including psychological help and other needs of the victims; 


(h) make recommendations to the respective State Government regarding 
strategies to regulate and control the import, production, transportation, hoarding, 
sale, distribution of acid; 


(i) make recommendations to the State Governments for efficacious 
implementation of various programmes for victim rehabilitation and also for 
preventing acid-attacks; 


(j) arrange for appropriate training and sensitisation of functionaries and 
governmental and non-governmental personnel; 


(k) develop effective networking and linkages with governmental and non- 
governmental organisations for specialised services and technical assistance like 
vocational training, education, healthcare, nutrition, mental health intervention, 
and legal aid services; 


(J) enhance public awareness about the provisions of this Act and its rules; and 


(m) perform such other functions as may be prescribed as considered necessary 
by the Authority. 


CHAPTER IV 
REHABILTATION AND SUPPORT OF VICTIMS 


Il. (/) Upon registration of a First Information Report of an offence of acid attack, the 
Investigating Officer shall forward a copy of the same to the State Authority and the District 
Legal Services Authority, which shall provide immediate relief to the victim and dependent, 
if any, including aid and assistance for medical and rehabilitation needs, as may be 
required after due assessment, in such manner as may be prescribed, within seven days of 
the receipt of the same, as the case may be. 


(2) The State Authority shall award interim relief to a victim or any dependent within a 
period of thirty days of an application submitted by or on behalf of them in this regard, after 
due assessment, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The State Authority shall ensure that all measures have been taken for relief and 
rehabilitation of the victim and dependent, if any, including for his safety and relocation, at 
the earliest after registration of the first information report under this Act, and within thirty 
days of an application having been made in this regard by or on behalf of the victim: 


Provided that, in case appropriate relief is not awarded, or has not been awarded within 
thirty days from the application, the victim shall approach the Central Victims of Acid Attack 
Rehabilitation Authority as per the provisions of section I5. 


(4) The relief and compensation, including those provided under sub-section (/), shall 
be in addition to any other compensation including any amount or benefit payable by way of 
any damages or under any scheme of the appropriate Government or pursuant to any order 
of the court under any law for the time being in force. 


(5) The Authority shall frame rules for the effective implementation of the provisions 
of sub-section (/) and (2) and disbursement of monetary assistance within one month from 
the commencement of this Act. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 495 


(6) The designated court may order, where applicable, any back wages due to the 
victim to be paid to them, in addition to any relief extended to the victim under this section. 


(7) In case of the death of the victim caused by or as a consequence of the acid attack 
the children or any other dependent of the victim may apply to the State Authority for relief 
in accordance with the rules notified under this Act. 


2. (/) The appropriate Government shall provide— 


(a) free medical treatment including life-long care to the victim at all the private, 
government and municipal corporation hospitals, as may be notified; and 


(b) free psychological help to the victim and their family for such period as the 
concerned psychologist deems fit. 


(2) The Authority shall provide funds for any elective surgery opted for, by a victim, to 
alleviate the harm caused by or as a consequence of the acid attack which may include skin 
grafting or plastic surgery as per the rules prescribed: 


Provided that no fund shall be provided for elective surgery unless in the opinion of 
the operating surgeon and one other surgeon, the procedure does not cause substantial risk 
to the victim. 


(3) The treating doctor shall inform the nearest police station in case of an acid attack 
and it shall be the duty of the police officer in charge of the station to inform the District Legal 
Services Authority as well as the State Authority in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) On receipt of such information, the District Legal Services Authority, shall 5 along 
with a representative send a mental trauma team to provide psychological and mental relief to 
the victim and their family. 


(5) The State Authority along with either District Legal Services Authority or State 
Legal Services Authority shall ensure that the victim is provided free counseling at a medical 
facility or a doctor of their choice and under circumstances where the victim is unable to 
choose, a psychologist may be appointed as may deem necessary. 


(6) The State Authority shall mandate the creation of skin banks at the medical facilities 
to be notified under the Act and ensure that there is at least one skin bank in every district. 


(7) The State Authority shall, through either District Legal Services Authority or State 
Legal Services Authority provide free legal aid and support through all the stages of the trial 
and also in case if the victim wants to initiate civil action for claiming damages against 
material and non-material sufferings caused by any offence under this Act. 


3. (a) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official gazette, set 
up skill development institutes to provide skill training opportunities for those acid 
attack victims seeking educational resources in order to re-integrate themselves into 
society. 


(b) The appropriate Governments shall contribute to the funding of the unit set up 
under sub-section (/) in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(c) The appropriate Government shall encourage private firms to set up 
enterprise-based training institutes as a part of corporate social responsibility for imparting 
high-quality job-oriented training to youth and ensure sufficient opportunities for employment 
to acid attack victims on completion of training. 


4. (/) The Central Government shall, within one month of the commencement of 
this Act, establish and maintain a Fund to be called the Acid Attack Rehabilitation and 
Support Fund, for the relief and rehabilitation of acid attack victims. 


(2) The Central Government, after receiving due reports from the Authority, shall 
provide adequate funds, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, for 
the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


Medical and 
legal 
assistance. 


Setting up of 
skill 
development 
institutes. 


Acid attack 
Rehabilitation 
and Support 
Fund. 


Appellate 
Authority. 


Delegation of 
Powers and 
functions. 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 


Direction by 
the Central 
Government. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Provision not 
in derogation 
of any other 

law. 


Power to 
make rules and 
regulations. 


496 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(3) Allmoneys belonging to the fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested 
in such manner as may be decided by the Authority. 


(4) The Authority may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions 
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the fund of the 
Authority. 


CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 


5. (/) In case the State Authority rejects or fails to provide compensation or relief, 
either immediate or interim, or any further compensation within the prescribed period then 
such victim may apply to the Control Authority, for compensation or relief in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(2) In case of applications received under sub-section (/), the Central Authority shall 
ensure disbursal of funds in a time-bound manner, not later than fifteen days after receiving 
the application. 


6.The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the 
Chairperson or any other member or any officer of the State Authority, subject to such 
conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and 
functions under this Act, as it may deem necessary. 


7. No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, 
the Authority or any State Authority, or any member of the authority or any officer or 
employee of the Central Government or the Authority or any other person authorised by 
that Government or the Authority, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder. 


8. (J) The Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act 
be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in 
writing to it from time to time. 


(2) The decision of the Central Government as to whether a question is one of policy 
or not shall be final. 


9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the official gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


20. The provisions of this Act, shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any inconsistency, the 
provisions of this Act shall have an overriding effect on the provisions of any such law to 
the extent of the inconsistency. 


2. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette of India, make rules 
and regulations for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 


(2) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule and regulation or both 
the Houses agree that the rule and regulation should not be made, the rule and regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule and regulation. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 497 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The report of National Crime Records Bureau published in 2020 indicates that there 
has been no decline in the number of acid attack victims even after amending the criminal 
laws to curtail such abhorring attacks. There is an impending need to support these victims 
as they have suffered enough and alleviation of the suffering of victims of such horrendous 
crimes is the duty of the state. International Human Rights law requires Governments to act 
affirmatively and with due diligence to protect human rights and adequately respond to 
human rights violations. Due diligence imposes upon Governments the obligations to enact 
legislation designed to combat acid attack violence, ensure effective implementation of laws, 
and provide redress to victims. 


Although the Government has recognized the need for the formulation of a 
compensation scheme for victims of acid attacks, it has come up with a scheme that is too 
complicated for a victim who has already suffered enough. Many victims have reported that 
they have not received the compensation in full or there have been arbitrary cuts. Although, 
certain States have been efficaciously disbursing relief funds, there is a need to address the 
issue with a central legislation. This legislation aims to create a single window for compensation 
for the victims of acid attack so as to alleviate their suffering. The legislation mandates the 
creation of skin banks and also provides necessary measures to deal with psychological 
trauma as well. Many acid attack survivors must undergo numerous complicated surgical 
procedures. These medical procedures are very costly and require specialized expertise and 
facilities. Thus the Bill provides medical treatment and elective surgeries to be conducted 
free of cost. 


Further, as a result of disfigurement, victims are either temporarily or permanently 
incapacitated and are forced to give up their lives, their livelihood, and their education. In 
this regard, compensation to cover vital surgeries for victims who can no longer support 
themselves becomes imperative. There is also a need to prevent the supply of such corrosive 
acids in the ordinary consumer market. Hence, the Authority under this Bill shall also aid in 
the creation of policy to prevent acid attacks and shall also formulate rules for the import or 
production of acid. There is a need for comprehensive legislation which provides holistic 
relief to victims of acid attacks and does so in a gender-neutral manner. Under the current 
laws, there are barriers to access to relief and rehabilitation for male, transgender and non- 
binary persons. 


New DELHI; DILESHWAR KAMAIT 
July 8, 2022. 


498 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Central Victims of Acid Attack 
Rehabilitation Authority. Clause 9 provides for constitution of a State Victims of Acid Attack 
Rehabilitation Authority. Clause ll provides for monetary assistance.Clause |2 provides for 
free medical and legal assistance for the victims. Clause 3 provides for setting up of skill 
development institutes for the victims and clause 4 provides for Acid Attack Rehabilitation 
and Support Fund to be established for the relief and rehabilitation of acid attack victims. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, at this stage, it is not possible to give an estimate of recurring or non-recurring 
expenditure involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 2! of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules and regulations 
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the matters in respect of which rules may be made 
are matters of procedure and details only and it is not practicable to provide for them in the 
Bill itself the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 499 


Bit No. 203 of 2022 


A Bill to provide for the welfare measures for the employees who have been terminated dy 
the employers and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Terminated Employees (Welfare) Act, 2022. Short title and 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall not apply employee who has been aa 
terminated for any of the following reasons:— 
(a) proven misconduct; 
(b) cheating; 


(c) indulging in fraudulent means or misappropriation of money; or 


(d) having been found guilty by a criminal court of justice. 


500 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) ‘employer’ means the owner or the director of any establishment or any 
organization which is not owned by the Central Government or a State Government or 
which is not the undertaking of or controlled by the Central Government ora State 
Government or funded by the Central Government or a State Government but 
includes the owner or director of a private establishment where not less than ten 
persons are employed; 


(b) "fund" means the Corpus Fund established under section 4; 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(d) "terminated employee" means any employee who was employed by any 
employer, whether regular or temporary or casual or on contract and whose services 
have been terminated by the employer. 


Benefits to 3. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, every 
ac employee whose employment has been terminated by the employer for the reasons of the 
employees. 


winding up of the organization or the establishment due to:— 
(i) economic slowdown; or 
(ii) change in technology in the respective field; or 


(iii) the owner or director managing the affairs of the establishment becoming 
insolvent; or 


(iv) the orders of any court; or 
(०) incurring losses making it unviable to carry on the business; or 
(vi) the change in Government policy; 


shall be entitled to such unemployment compensation, health insurance benefits or 
any other benefits as may be prescribed if such benefits are not part of the employee- 
employer agreement, for a period of nine months or till the time he gets employed elsewhere, 
whichever is earlier. 


Explanation I.—The period of nine months shall include the notice period to be 
served by the employer before termination. 


Explanation II.—The unemployment compensation shall be admissible if the employer 
does not provide any severance package to the terminated employee or the severance 
package is less than the compensation provided under this Act. 


(2) The unemployment compensation under sub-section (/) shall not be less than 
sixty per cent. of the gross salary of the terminated employee or as per the terms of the 
employee-employer agreement, whichever is higher and it shall be borne by the employer. 


(3) The health insurance benefit shall continue till the period as specified in sub- 
section (/) with the same terms and conditions which prevailed during his employment. 


(4) A terminated employee shall also be entitled to such terminal benefits which would 
have been available to him on the cessation of employment including provident fund, gratuity 
and leave encashment. 


(5) The benefits notified under sub-section (/) shall be paid to the terminated employee 
from the month following the month on which termination notice is communicated to the 
employee or on completion of the notice period, if any: 


Provided that if due to any reason, the employer is not able to pay the benefits within 
one month from the date of the termination of the employment, the employer shall pay to the 
terminated employee an interest at the rate of twelve per cent. per month for such delay. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 50] 


(6) Nothing in this Act shall apply to any terminated employee if benefits admissible 
under the employee-employer agreement, are higher than the benefits prescribed under this 
Act. 


4. (J) Every employer shall create a corpus fund to which at least five per cent. of the 
net profit of the organization shall be credited, which shall be used for the welfare of terminated 
employees under this Act. 


(2) Every employer shall be entitled to solicit contribution from any organization, 
individual or trust for the purpose of maintaining the fund, in such manner as may be, 
prescribed. 


(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision contained in sub-section (/) 
the fund shall also be utilized for the following purposes, namely:— 


(a) payment of expenditure in connection with the education of the children of 
the terminated employees; and 


(b) medical facilities, free of cost, in such a manner as may be prescribed. 


5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


6. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
Parliament agrees in making any modification in the rule or Parliament agrees that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Corpus fund 
for welfare of 
terminated 
employees. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Power to 
make rules. 


502 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

In an era, when the space for Public Sector has substantially shrunk and role of Private 
Sector has expanded, many questions relating to the welfare of employees attached to 
Private Sector and employer-employee relations have become significant. It has been observed 
that employees face undiminished threat of losing jobs and live in a climate of uncertainty. 
Things become worse when they are relieved from jobs without any substantive 
compensation. Hundreds and thousands of people in their midage with family responsibilities 
and economic liabilities face unprecedented challenges to survive. It not only affect their 
lives but also the social and cultural process too. Moreover, laying off due to change in 
management policies or the Government policies or due to the losses incurred due to inefficient 
management are all the events where the employee doesn't have much control but is the one 
who suffers the most. 


Neo liberalisation has increased the uncertainties in the lives of people. It also justifies 
inequality to an extent on the one hand and indoctrinates the employers to become insensitive 
to their employees. In fact, it has revived the rejected doctrine 'survival of the fittest’. This 
concern needs to be essentially addressed. Any welfare State cannot give primacy to profit 
making. Indian Constitution aspires, idealizes and also inspires to make endeavour to achieve 
equality. This cannot be treated as dead ideal. The State has to strive for it. No economic 
system can endure or can yield greater good of greater number and protect the interests of 
working people if it follows the blind path of development and allows the concentration of 
wealth. The goal of New India is to maximise egalitarianism and to minimise inequality. In this 
context protection of economic interests and dignity of employees of private sector is both 
moral and constitutional duty of the Indian State. 


At present there is no law to ensure that the employers provide terminal benefits in 
time and which makes provision for education, medical facilities etc., to the families of employees 
who have been terminated. The Bill provides for minimum nine months of assured income 
including medical benefits to the terminated employees which will give them enough time to 
reassign themselves to new employment without disturbing the existing set up of their 
family. After employment a person often takes few loans to meet his need, gets their children 
admitted at a certain level of school. All this cannot come to a halt without any of his fault. 
The family of the employee should not suffer because of such events. The Bill seeks to 
achieve the above objective. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; DILESHWAR KAMAIT 
July 8, 2022. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 503 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide funds for 
carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Itis likely to involve a recurring expenditure 
of about rupees ten thousand crore per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be involved. 


504 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 6 of the Billempowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 505 


Butt No. 280 or 2022 


A Bill to provide for the prevention of violence against healthcare professionals and 
clinical establishments and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Prevention of Violence Against Healthcare Professionals 
and Clinical Establishments Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "clinical establishment" means the clinical establishment as defined under 


clause (c) of section 2 of the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) 
23 of 20I0. Act, 200; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Prohibition of 
violence. 


Cognizance of 
offence. 


Penalties. 


Information 
of offence. 


506 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) "healthcare professionals" includes,— 


(i) a registered medical practitioner, possessing a recognised medical 
qualification under National Medical Commission Act, 209; 


(ii) a medical practictioner registered for practicing in any other system of 
medicine which is recognised under any law for the time being in force; 


(iii) a mental health professionals under the Mental Healthcare Act, 207; 


(iv) a registered dentist, registered dental hygienist and registered dental 
mechanic as defined in the Dentist's Act, 948; 


(v) aregistered nurse, midwife, auxiliary nurse-midwife and health visitor 
who is registered under Indian Nursing Council Act, 947; 


(vi) occupational therapist, speech therapists, nutritionists, seeking or 
imparting medical education, pharmacists and para—medical staff who provide 
healthcare service in clinical establishments; 


(vii) a medical or a nursing student who is undergoing education or 
training in any system of medicine recognised by any law for the time being in 
force; and 


(viii) a person who interacts with the families of patients to facilitate 
treatment in hospitals such as social worker, bereavement counselors, transplant 
coordinators and Arogya Mitra appointed under PM—JAY Scheme; 


(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(d) "property" means any property movable or immovable, medical equipment or 
machinery; owned by or in possession of or under the control of any healthcare 
professionals or clinical establishment; and 


(e) "violence" means an act which causes or may cause any harm, injury or 
endanger of the life of or intimidation, obstruction or hindrance to any healthcare 
professional in discharge of his duties or causes any damage or loss to the property or 
reputation of a healthcare professional or a clinical establishment. 


3. Any act of violence and targeted violence based on caste, gender, religion, language, 
place of birth against a healthcare professional or a clinical establishment shall be prohibited 
and mitigated at all levels. 


4. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, any 
offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and non—bailable and triable by the 
Court of Judicial Magistrate of the First Class. 


5. (J) Whoever, commits or attempts to commit or abets or incites the commission of 
any act of violence in infringement of the provisions of section 3, shall be punished with 
imprisonment which shall not be less than six months but which may extend up—to five 
years and with fine which shall not be less than rupees five thousand but which may extend 
upto rupees five lakh. 


(2) Whoever, while committing an act of violence cause grievous hurt as defined under 
section 320 of the Indian Penal Code, 860 to any healthcare professionals, he shall upon 
conviction be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three 
years, but which may extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be less than two lakh 
rupees but which may extend to ten lakh. 


6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, the 
aggrieved healthcare professional inform the officer-in-charge of concerned police station of 
the commission of an offence under this act and if he so desires request the support of the 
head of the clinical establishment for making complaints in such manner as may be prescribed. 


30 of 209. 


0 of 20I7. 


l6 of 948. 


48 of 947. 


5 of 974. 


45 of 860. 


2 of 974. 


2 of 974. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 507 


7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 973, any 


Investigation 


case registered under this Act shall be investigated by a police officer not below the rank of °f offence. 


Deputy Superintendent of Police. 


8. (/) For acts of violence punishable under this Act, in addition to the punishment 
provided for the offences under section 5, the convicted person shall be liable to pay by way 
of compensation an amount equivalent to twice the amount of fair market value of the 
damaged property or the loss caused as may be determined by the competent court. 


(2) The compensation for causing hurt or grievous hurt to healthcare professionals 
and damage cause to clinical establishments shall be as per degree of harm inflicted as may 
be decided by competent court. 


(3) If the convicted person fails to pay the compensation under sub-section (/) the 
said sum shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue under the Revenue Recovery Act, 
890 in such manner as may be prescribed. 


9. It shall be the responsibility of every healthcare professional or clinical establishment, 
as the case may be to,— 


(a) ensure that patients do not wait for long duration for their treatment or 
consultation; 


(b) ensure that all information about patients and their medical records are 
available to the family members and the patient or their family members shall be 
entitled to obtain second opinion; 


(c) ensure that there is no information asymmetry to patients; 
(d) establish appropriate grievance redressal system in clinical establishments; 
(e) strengthen hospital security including interlocking with nearby police station; 


(f) ensure transparency on rates of consultation, investigations, rents and other 
expenses of hospitals; 


(g) ensure mandatory reporting of the violence against healthcare professionals 
and the clinical establishment including creating a panel to investigate cases of violence 
against healthcare professionals; 


(h) display the constraints under which most healthcare professionals operate 
and sensitise the public visiting clinical establishments; and 


(i) change the curriculum of the medical education and include the concurrence 
of cognitive skills, psychomotor skills and empathic skills. 


0. (2) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish 
a District Committee or for such area as may be specified in such notification to hear 
appeals and grievances of the victims of medical negligence or mismanagement under this 
Act and to aid and advice such victims for taking recourse to an appropriate forum for a 
suitable relief including dealing with issues in insurance claiming by the patients. 


(2) The District Committee shall convene every month. 
(3) The District Committee shall provide suitable relief to the parties within two sittings. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything prescribed in this Act, the deliberations made hereto 
may be held by a court of law of competent jurisdiction within the territories of the country. 


(5) The Committee established under sub-section (/) shall consist of— 


(a) the Member of Parliament of the respective constituency who shall be the 
Chairperson of the District Committee; and 


Compensation. 


Establishment 
of District 
Committee. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 


requisite funds. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


508 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(b) one expert each from the field of medicine, law, consumer movement, health 
management and human rights to be appointed by the Central Government in such 
manneras may be prescribed. 


(6) Any appeals, arguments or rebuttals presented to this effect by either of the 
parties shall be kept transparent and open for media and public scrutiny without any 
prejudices. 


(7) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of 
experts mentioned in the sub-section (4), and the procedure to be followed by the committee 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 


l. The Central Government shall provide after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, necessary requisite funds, from time to time, for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 


2. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


3. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 509 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The violence against healthcare service personnel is not only endemic to India but 
also in western countries where over the years the violence against them has been reduced 
in western countries due to increase spending in healthcare and deterrent act which tends to 
prevent the violence against healthcare workers. 


According to a study made by the Indian Medical Association, more than 75 per cent. 
of the doctors have faced some form of violence while on duty. The violence is not just 
physical they also face verbal abuse almost every day. Many states have enacted laws to 
prevent violence against healthcare professionals and damage to hospital property. 


However, various lacuna exists in the State acts. The need is to focus on both positive 
deterrence and negative deterrence. 


As already mentioned there are acts to prevent the violence but excessive focus on 
increasing punishment and penalties is simply not working unless the underlying cause of 
violence is addressed. The need is also to consider the most significant aspect which is the 
conduct or state of mind that specifically focus on targeted violence. The important dimension 
which lead to violence against healthcare service workers in the government and private 
hospitals is long waiting period, patients relatives feel that the doctors are not giving enough 
attention, trust deficiency etc. The need is to provide a mechanism to act as positive deterrence, 
to state a few, optimizing the long waiting period, a good grievance addressal and redressal 
mechanism, displaying the constraints under which healthcare service personnel works, etc. 
which will sensitize the public visiting hospitals. The change in medical education curriculum 
is one such measure in this regard where Medical Council of India has proposed new teaching 
learning approaches which includes structural longitudinal programme on "AETCOM". The 
grief counseling should be the essential part of medical training. The need is also to establish 
a committee chaired by the Member of Parliament which will hear the appeals and grievances 
of the victims of medical negligence or mismanagement and to aid and advice such victims. 
It is also required that an investigation panel be created by the clinical establishment to 
investigate the case of violence against the healthcare workers. The mere increase of 
punishment does not serve the deterrence purposes whereas the same act has to better 
enforced or which increase the likelihood of being caught and ensuring speedier consequences. 
The present Bill not only merely focuses on punishment but also address the other parameters 
which lead to violence. It will ensure that all the healthcare service personnel have the right 
to work in a safe and secure work place which is free of violence and also secure the rights of 
patients. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DEL; DNV SENTHILKUMARS. 
August 8, 2022. 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 0 of the Bill provides for establishment of district-wise Committee to provide 
timely assistance to the victims of medical negligence. It also provides for appointment of 
experts to the Committee. Clause | l provides for the Central Government to provide adequate 
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought 
into operation, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated 
that a sum of rupees fifty crore of recurring expenditure per annum would involve from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5il 


Britt No. 269 of 2022 


A Bill to provide for the construction and management of a National Memorial to perpetuate 
the memory of the farmers who died or were wounded on 28 January 7694 at 
Patharughat in the State of Assam. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Patharughat National Farmers Memorial Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "Memorial" means the National Memorial to perpetuate the memory of the farmers 
who died or were injured on 28 January !894 at Patharughat in Darrang District of the State 
of Assam; 


(b) "Trust" means the Trust for the construction and management of the Memorial; 
and 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Objects of the 
Trust. 


Trustees of 
the Memorial. 


Term of office 
of nominated 
trustees. 


Property 
vested with 
the trustees. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Power of 
trustees to 
appoint 
management 
committee. 


Power to 
approve 
audited 
accounts. 


Validity of the 
acts of trustees 
not to be 

questioned due 


to vacancy etc. 


5i2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(c) "Trustee" 
Patharughat. 


means the Trustee of the Martyr Farmers National Memorial, 


3. The objects of the Trust shall be— 


(a) to construct and maintain suitable buildings, structures and parks at the site 
or in the surrounding area in order to perpetuate the memory of the farmers who died 
or were injured on the 28th day of January, 894, at Patharughat in the State of Assam; 


(b) to acquire land, buildings and other properties for the trust; and 
(c) to raise and receive funds for the purposes of the Memorial. 
4. (/) The trustees of the memorial shall be following, namely:— 
(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson, 
(b) the Union Minister-in-charge of Culture; 


(c) the Leader recognized as leader of opposition in the House of the People or 
where there is no leader of opposition, then leader of the largest party in opposition in 
the House; 


(d) the Governor of the State of Assam; 
(e) the Chief Minister of the State of Assam; and 
(f) three eminent persons nominated by the Central Government. 


(2) The trustees shall be body corporate by the name of "Trustee of the Martyr 
Farmers National Memorial Patharughat" for the purposes of this Act shall have perpetual 
succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued and shall be 
entitled to contract for the acquisition and holding of property. 


5. The trustees nominated under clause (f) of sub-section (/) of section 4 shall continue 
to be trustees for a period of five years and shall be eligible for re-nomination. 


6. All funds and property, whether movable or immovable, which may go to it, 
bequeathed or otherwise be transferred for the purpose of the Memorial or shall be acquired 
for the said purpose, shall vest with the Trust. 


7. The Central Government may, after appropriation made by Parliament by law in this 
behalf, grant to the Trust such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for 
the purposes of this Act. 


8. (/) For the purposes of managing the affairs of the Trust, the Trustees may, by a 
resolution passed in the meeting, appoint a Management Committee and assign to it such 
powers, duties and functions subject to such directions and limitations as may be defined in 
such resolution. 


(2) The trustees may appoint any persons, whether such persons are trustees or not, 
as members of the management committee and may, from time to time, vary or rescind any 
resolution passed by it under this section. 


9. The Trust shall meet at least once in a year for approving the audited accounts of the 
Trust and shall transact such other business as may be deemed necessary. 


0. No act of the trustees shall be deemed to be invalid by reason of any vacancy in the 
body of the trustees or any defect in its constitution. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


Il. (/) The accounts of the trust shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and the expenses in connection 
with such audit shall be payable by the trust to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him under this 
act in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Trust shall have generally the usual 
rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General has in case of audit of the Government accounts and shall have rights in particular 
for demanding the presentation of books, accounts, related vouchers and other documents 
and to inspect any of the offices of the trust. 


(3) The audit report and account report of the trust as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or by any other person appointed by him in this matter shall be forwarded to 
Central Government every year and the Central Government shall lay the reports as soon as 
possible on the table of both houses of the Parliament. 


2. (J) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules shall have power to make rules for— 


(a) the manner in which the funds of the Memorial shall be kept, deposited or 
invested; 


(b) the manner of authentication of orders for the payment of money by the 
Trustees; 


(c) the form in which accounts shall be maintained by the trustees and the audit 
of such accounts and their publication; 


(d) the layout, construction, improvement, preservation and management of the 
monument; 


(e) the conditions on which the public shall have access to the monument or 
particular parts thereof and the regulation of the conduct of persons entering the 
monument; and 


(f) the preservation of any property vested in the Trustee, and the prevention of 
damage to, or interference with, that property and restriction of persons trespassing 
on any particular part of the monument. 


(3) Arule made under this section may provide that a breach of any rule made under 
clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (2) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees. 


3. The Trustees may make such regulations as may be relevant to this Act for all or 
any of the following purposes: 


(a) the manner in which meetings of the Trustees shall be called, the quorum for 
the transaction of business at such meetings and the procedure to be followed at such 
meetings; 


(9) the manner in which the decision of the majority of the Trustees, the matter in 
respect of which the decision shall be obtained by circulation to the required Trustees, 
the power of the Trustees to make regulations; 


(c) the term of office of the members of the management committee, their powers 
and duties and the circumstances in which, and the conditions subject to which, such 
powers and duties may be exercised; and 


(d) the appointment of such officers and servants as may be deemed necessary for the 
purposes of the trust, and the terms and conditions of their service. 


Accounts and 
Audit. 


Power to 
make rules. 


Power to 
trustees to 
make 
regulations. 


Laying of 
rules and 
regulations 
before 
Parliament. 


5i4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


4. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or 
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5i5 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The pages of the history of independent India are full of incidents that unfold stories 
of bravery, sacrifice and patriotism. In India's freedom struggle against the British hegemony, 
countless people from different parts of India fought for the freedom of their motherland 
against the British rule and sacrificed their lives. The people of Assam had bravely participated 
in the freedom movement against the exploitation, discrimination and tyranny of the British. 
One such incident is the historical revolt of the Patharughat farmers of Darrang district of 
Assam against the increasing rate of land tax by the British. Patharughat is a small village in 
Darrang district of Assam, situated approximately 60 kilometers north-east of Guwahati. 


25 years before the Jallianwala Bagh massacre, on January 28, 894, more than 00 
farmers were shot dead by the British. This incident took place in Patharughat, Assam. After 
the occupation of Assam by the British in l826, the survey of the vast land of this state 
started. On the basis of such surveys, the British started levying land tax, due to which the 
discontent spread among the farmers. In |893, the British Government decided to increase 
the agricultural land tax to 80 percent. On this day the farmers were protesting against the 
British. British soldiers were ordered to shoot these farmers, due to which more than 00 
farmers had to lose their lives. 


This incident gave a new direction to India's freedom movement. The deaths of many 
innocent farmers further strengthened the freedom struggle against the British. The martyrs 
of Patharughat are always remembered in the golden pages of history for their bravery and 
sacrifice for their motherland. 


Therefore, there is a need that a museum should be declared as a national memorial to 
perpetuate the memory of farmers who died or were injured on January 28, [894, at Patharughat 
in the State of Assam. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; DILIP SAIKIA 
November 2\, 2022. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the construction and maintenance of suitable buildings, 
structures and gardens around the National Memorial Patharughat by the trust and acquisition 
of land, buildings and other properties for the purpose of the trust and raising and receiving 
funds for the purpose of the memorial. Clause 7 provides for grants to be given to the Trust 
by the Central Government after due appropriation done by parliament by law in this behalf 
for the purposes of the Act. 


Therefore, on enactment of this Bill, both recurring and non-recurring expenditure are 
likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is difficult to estimate 
the amount required for this purpose as it will depend on the decisions of the Trust. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. Clause 3 provides for power of trustees to make such regulations 
as may be relevant to this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative powers is of normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5|7 


Bit No. 9 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the constitution of a Board for regulation of private coaching centres 
and for matters connected therewith. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Private Coaching Centres Regulatory Board Act, 2023. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "Board" means the Private Coaching Centers Regulatory Board constituted 
under section 3; 


(b) "private coaching centre" means an institution imparting— 


(i) pre-admission coaching to students for admission into any medical, 
engineering or any other professional course; or 


(ii) pre-examination coaching for securing Government or private job 
through written or oral examination conducted by any agency of the Government 
or a private establishment; or 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Constitution 
of Private 
Coaching 
Centres 
Regulatory 
Board. 


Functions of 
the Board. 


Power to make 
rules. 


58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(iii) coaching of any subject taught at secondary or senior secondary 
school examination level; and 


(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. (/) The Central Government shall constitute a Board to be known as the Private 
Coaching Centres Regulatory Board for the purpose of regulating the functioning of private 
coaching centres in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Board shall have its office in every State and Union territory. 


(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and employees as it 
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board. 


(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of 
the officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 


4. The Board shall— 


(a) give recognition to private coaching centres on such conditions, as may be 
prescribed; 


(b) specify, from time to time, the fee to be charged by coaching centres from 
students; 


(c) formulate a refund policy for the students who leave coaching midway or 
before completion; 


(d) specify modes of payment of fee in lump sum and in installments by the 
students; 


(e) specify the number of holidays including weekly holiday on Sundays to be 
observed by coaching centres per week; 


(f) lay down the minimum qualifications for teachers to be appointed in coaching 
centres; 


(g) determine, in respect of coaching centres, the minimum number of teachers 
and the student-teacher ratio in the classes; 


(A) ensure the appointment of counselor, psychiatrist and physiologist in every 
coaching centre for counseling of students; 


(i) suggest steps to be taken by every coaching centre for reducing psychological 
pressure on students; 


(/) ensure that the yoga classes and sports activities are being provided by the 
coaching centres; 


(k) fix the timings of the coaching centres; and 
(J) specify the level of basic facilities to be provided in every coaching centre. 


5. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5i9 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The dependence on coaching for preparation of entrance exams for IIT and Medical is 
growing very fast all over the country. These coaching institutes claim to improve the future 
of the students of the country and give guarantee of their selection in IIT and medical 
entrance exams. While lakhs of students appear in the exams in the country, the seats are 
only in thousands. Classes in such institutes run seven days a week. Sometimes there are 
more than L00 students per class in these coaching institutes.Too much pressure is put on 
the students to score good marks and rank in the examination as a result of which the 
children become victim of depression. Excessive pressure on children for study in these 
institutes is proving to be fatal. According to a data, 6 students commit suicide every day in 
the country coming under pressure of examinations. According to crime record bureau, 
0335 students committed suicide in 209, !2526 in 2020 and 3089 in 202] which is almost 
63.3 percent more in comparison to the figures in 203. According to the bureau, 40.7 
percent of those committing suicide are youths below 30 years out of which 7.2 percent are 
girls below the age of 30 years. So, there is an urgent need to enact a legislation to regulate 
the functioning of such private coaching centres in the country. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; DILIP SAIKIA 
December 6, 2022 


520 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of Private Coaching Centre 
Regulatory Board for regulating the functioning of private coaching centres. The Bill, therefore, 
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated 
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore will be involved per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 


the purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
Legislative Power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 52] 


Bit No. 46 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for compulsory teaching of ill-effects of drug addiction in schools 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Ill-effects of Drug Addiction 
in Schools Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "Advisory Council" means the Advisory Council for teaching ill-effects of 
Drug Addiction constituted under section 6; 


(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government 
of State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


(d) "School" means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a senior secondary 
level school imparting education to children, by whatever name such institution is 
called. 


3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette specify, that ill-effects of drug addiction shall be taught as a compulsory subject in 
all schools from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central Government on the 
recommendation of Advisory Council constituted under section 6. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Compulsory 
teaching of 
ill-effects of 
Drug 
Addiction in 
schools. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to issue 
directions for 
compulsory 
teaching of 
ill-effects of 
drug addiction 
in schools. 


Appointment 
of Teachers. 


Constitution 
of Advisory 
Council. 


Functions of 
Advisory 
Council 
teaching ill- 
effects of drug 
addiction. 


Derecognition 
of schools for 
non-compliance 
of the 
provisions of 
the Act. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Overriding 
effects of the 
Act. 


Power to 
make rules. 


522 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


4. The appropriate Government shall immediately after issuance of the notification 
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching about the ill-effects of drug addiction 
in schools within its jurisdiction. 


5. Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall 
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified, 
for teaching about the ill-effects of drug addiction in schools. 


6. (/) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of 
this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for teaching 
ill-effects of drug addiction. 


(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such number of persons, having special 
knowledge or practical experience in the field of dealing with drug addiction or narcotics, as 
the Central Government may deem fit. 


7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:— 


(a) recommend to the Central Government the syllabus for teaching about the ill- 
effects of drug addiction for each class; 


(b) recommend to the Central Government the class from which the subject of 
the ill-effects of drug addiction is to be taught in schools; 


(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers 
to be appointed in schools for teaching the subject of ill-effects of drug addiction; 


(d) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be 
given recognition for training of teachers teaching ill-effects of drug addiction for the 
purpose of their appointment in schools; and 


(e) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the school authorities with 
a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


8. The appropriate Government shall derecognize such schools, which do not comply 
with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institutions a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard. 


9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purpose of this act. 


0. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


Il. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 523 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The increasing drug addiction among children has become a serious problem in the 
country. These days even small children are falling in the trap of drugs. Till now it was 
believed that the children of the poor sections who do not go to school, usually the children 
who lead a nomadic life in railway stations, bus stops or other places get addicted to drugs 
but now even the children of elite families are also vulnerable. Sometimes due to craze of 
fashion and some other time on the instigation of friends, these innocent children get 
trapped in the vortex of drug substances. According to a survey by the Government of India, 
about |.8 crore children and adolescents in the age group of l0 to l7 years, consume a 
variety of intoxicants including alcohol, opium, cocaine, cannabis (bhang). Financially 
prosperous children are consuming heroin, opium, cocaine, brown sugar etc. On the other 
hand, poor children starting from beedi, liquor, cigarette go on to consume charas, ganja, 
cannabis (bhang), opium, cough syrup etc. 


No one in the society respects the person who is a drug-addict. Drug-addict person 
quarrels with his family members after getting intoxicated, due to which the atmosphere of 
the house becomes vitiated. Its biggest impact is seen on the education of children. 


Therefore, children should be specially taught in schools about the bad consequences 
of drugs by including these in the curriculum so that they can keep themselves aloof from the 
bad addiction of drugs. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; DILIP SAIKIA 
January 9, 2023 


524 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers in all schools. Clause 6 
provides for constitution of Advisory Council for teaching ill-effects of drug addiction by 
the Central Government. Clause 9 provides for payment of adequate funds to the State for 
carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of 
about rupees one hundred crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |! of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 525 


Bit No. 223 oF 2022 


A Bill to provide for compulsory teaching and practice of Bhagavad Gita in 
educational institutions and for matters connected therewith. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching and Practice of Bhagavad Gita Short title and 
in Educational Institutions Act, 2022. commencement. 


(2) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Compulsory 
Teaching and 
practice of 
Bhagavad Gita 
in educational 
institutions. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to appoint 
teachers for 
teaching and 
practice of 
Bhagavad Gita 
in educational 
institutions. 


Derecognition 
of schools 

for non- 
compliance of 
the provisions 
of the Act. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
fund to the 
State 
Governments. 


Application 
of Act on 
minority 
educational 
institutions in 
certain 
situation. 


Overriding 
effect of the 
Act. 


526 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and 


(b) "educational institution" means any school, by whatever name called, 
imparting education up to senior secondary level. 


3. Every educational institution shall compulsorily teach and practice the Bhagavad 
Gita as a moral education text book. 


4. The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of teachers, as it may deem 
necessary with such qualifications, as may be specified by the Central Government, for 
teaching and practice of Bhagavad Gita as a moral education text book in every educational 
institution. 


5. The appropriated Government shall derecognise a school, which does not comply 
with the provisions of section 3: 


Provided that a school shall be given reasonable opportunity of being heard before 
any decision on its derecognition is taken. 


6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


7. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act, shall 
apply to minority institutions only if the management of such institutions convey to the 
appropriate Governments their willingness to include the teaching and practice of Bhagavad 
Gita as a moral education text book in their school curriculum. 


8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 527 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Shrimad Bhagavad Gita is a spiritual discourse delivered by Lord Krishna in the 
middle of the battlefield. It contains 8 chapters, which deal with a variety of subjects such 
as the nature of the self, the need to restrain the mind and the senses, withdrawing them from 
the sense objects through the practice of yoga, performing desireless actions, the vision of 
the Universal Self, the qualities of Nature, incarnation of God and reincarnation of individual 
souls, devotion to God, liberation and so on. 


Shrimad Bhagavad Gita is the greatest book on the moral and value education. It not 
only holds holy significance to the people of India but also guides the moral and value 
thinking in the time of depravity and chaos. It contains the teaching ranging from spiritual 
awakening to leadership and management. Teachings of Gita are teaching of humanity and 
brotherhood. Many great thinkers from our time such as Swami Vivekananda, Sri Aurobindo, 
Albert Einstein, Mahatma Gandhi as well as Ramanuja, from bygone ages, have all deliberated 
upon its timeless teachings. 


Mahatma Gandhi has also said "When doubts haunt me, when disappointments stare 
me in the face, and I see not one ray of hope on the horizon, I turn to Bhagavad Gita. Let the 
Gita be to you a mine of diamonds, as it has been to me; let it be your constant guide and 
friend on life's way". 


It is highly deplorable that such vast literature containing infinite teachings for all age 
groups is neglected by our educational institutions. It is high time to make sincere effort to 
spread the teachings to our children and grownups. Teaching and daily practice of Bhagavad 
Gita in educational institutions will enable the younger generation to enrich their knowledge 
and skills and shine the personality in the light of noble traditions and thoughts of 
Bhagavad Gita, become sensible and responsible citizens. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELH BHOLA SINGH 
November 22, 2022. 


528 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint teachers 
for compulsory teaching and daily practice of Bhagavad Gita in every educational institution. 
Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State 
Governments carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, if enacted, would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring 
expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore will be involved from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 529 


Bit No. 277 oF 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 7860 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
4993. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2022. Short title and 


पु डक : commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL Cope, |860 


2. In the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter this Chapter referred to as the Penal Code), Insertion of 


after section 304B, the following section shall be inserted, namely— Sr ae 


"304C. Whoever, being a registered medical practitioner, causes the death of any Causing death 
person doing the cause of medical treatment due to any medical negligence shall be by medical 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two 58 03; 
years, or with fine, or with both: 


Insertion of 
new section 
327A. 


Violence 
against health 
care service 
personnel and 
damage to 
property. 


Amendment 
of First 
Schedule. 


530 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Provided that causing the death of a person during medical treatment or 
intervention done with consent in accordance with the proviso to section 88 of this 
Code shall not be considered as medical negligence, unless the contrary is proved 
supported by a team of medical experts or a medical Board. 


Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, registered medical practitioner 
means a person who possesses recognised medical qualification and registered under 
the provisions of the National Medical Commission Act, 209 (30 of 209).". 


3. After section 327 of the Penal Code the following section shall be inserted, namely— 


"327A. Whoever,— 


(i) commits or abets the commission of an act of violence against an healthcare 
service personnel; or 


(ii) abets or causes damage or loss to any property of a healthcare service 
personnel, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
three months, but which may extend to five years, and with fine, which shall not be less 
than fifty thousand rupees, but which may extend to two lakh rupees: 


Provided that while committing an act of violence against a healthcare service 
personnel if a person causes grievous hurt as defined in section 320 to healthcare 
service personnel, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than six months, but which may extend to seven years and with fine, which 
shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to five lakh rupees.". 

CHAPTER Il 
AMENDMENT TO THE CODE ON CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, |973 


4. In the First Schedule to the Criminal Code, under the heading "I.- OFFENCES UNDER 
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE", — 


(a) after the entries relating to section 304B, the following entry shall be inserted, 


namely:— 
[ 2. 3; 4. 5. 6. 
304C Causing Simple Non- Bailable Any 
death by imprisonment cognizable Magistrate 
medical of two years 
negligence or fine or both 


(0) after the entries relating to section 327, the following entry shall be inserted, 


namely:— 
L. 2. 3; 4. 5. 6. 

327A Violence Imprisonment — cognizable Non- Court of 
against which shall bailable Session 

Healthcare not be less 

service than three 

professionals months but 

which may 


extend upto 
five years and 
fine, which 
shall not be 
less than fifty 
thousand but 
which may 
extend. 


2 of 974. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Our Constitution guarantees to all persons the right to life and personal liberty and the 
equal protection of laws to all classes of citizens. It is deemed necessary and expedient to 
enact legislation for the protection of these rights guaranteed by the Constitution. In this 
regard, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Jacob Mathew vs. State of Punjab 
AIR2005SC380; (2005)6SCCI had afforded necessary guidelines and procedures, to be 


adopted by the Central and State Government for proceeding against a medical professional 
to be held responsible under Section 304A of Indian Penal Code, 973. 


The Ethics and Medical Registration Board of the National Medical Commission [Letter 
No. NMC/MCI/EMRB/C- 205/0023/202 I/ETHICS/ 022426 dated-29/09/202 in compliance 
with the mandamus issued by the Apex Court (vide supra) has framed specific guidelines 
needed for prosecution of doctors for causing death of innocent patients due to 'gross' 
medical negligence. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgment (vide supra) had 
coined a few terms to deal with the cases of death due to medical negligence. Since the 
provisions available under section 304 AIPC is generic in nature and as such insufficient to 
deal with the professional medical negligence, which is more complex where the help of 
medical experts become necessary. The constitution bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
the matter of Lalita Kumari vs. State of U.P. & OR's,[2 SCC I| : (204) I SCC (Cri) 524] vide 
Judgment dated 2.!.203 (and partially modified on 05.03.204) held that while ensuring 
and protecting the rights of the accused and the complainant, a preliminary inquiry (in medical 
negligence cases) should be made time bound and in any case it should not exceed 7 days. 
The fact of such delay and the causes of it must be reflected in the General Diary entry. 


The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Jacob Mathew vs. State of Punjab opined 
that to prosecute a medical professional for negligence under criminal law it must be shown 
that the accused did something or failed to do something which in the given facts and 
circumstances no medical professional in his ordinary senses and prudence would have 
done or failed to do. The hazard taken by the accused doctor should be of such a nature that 
the injury which resulted was most likely imminent. Negligence to be established by 
prosecution must be culpable or gross and not the negligence merely base upon an error of 
judgment. And death should have been the direct cause. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the 
case of Jacob Mathew vs. State of Punjab observed that the word ‘gross’ has not been used 
in section 304A of Indian Penal Code, 973, yet it is settled that in criminal law negligence or 
recklessness, to be so held, must be of such a high degree as to be 'gross'. The expression 
‘rash or negligent act' as occurring in Section 304A of the IPC has to be read as qualified by 
the word ‘grossly’. 


To cope with the difficulty of unjust litigations against doctors, the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court in the case of Jacob Mathew vs. State of Punjab issued some guidelines for proper 
investigations. But almost sixteen years have passed by and in the absence of a clear cut 
section in IPC, our police responsible to register an FIR , is still groping in the dark to find out 
a suitable Section of law to proceed with case of death due to medical negligence cases, 
resulting thereby, such cases are registered ‘usually' under Section 304 IPC, ‘occasionally’ 
under Section 304 AIPC or 'sometimes even' under Section 302 IPC. This mix up has made the 
life of both the complainant and the accused miserable. The accused is harassed by the 
police and invariably the FIR is quashed by the Hon'ble courts for want of proper 
investigations and as such justice is eluded for both. This frustrates the general public and 
now-a-days, the hapless people, in case of any eventuality, resort to violence to press for 
unjust compensation on the spot. 


However, in the EPIDEMIC DISEASES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020, some specific 
Sections to deal with the cases of violence have been added. Since the incidence of violence 
is not limited to epidemic period only, the same provisions are required to be added in 
criminal laws to deal with the cases of violence during the time of peace. The Hon'ble 
Supreme Court in the case of Jacob Mathew vs. State of Punjab quoted that 'Medical 
Professionals in Criminal Law—The criminal law has invariably placed the medical 


332 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


professionals on a pedestal different from ordinary mortals. The Indian Penal Code enacted 
as far back as in the year 860 sets out a few vocal examples. Section 88 in the Chapter on 
General Exceptions provides exemption for acts not intended to cause death, done by consent 
in good faith for person's benefit. Section 92 provides for exemption for acts done in good 
faith for the benefit of a person without his consent though the acts cause harm to a person 
and that person has not consented to suffer such harm. There are four exceptions listed in 
the Section which is not necessary in this context to deal with. Section 93 saves from 
criminality certain communications made in good faith. The present day scenario demands 
some new sections in criminal law to deal with the prevailing situation properly. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; ALOK KUMAR SUMAN 
November, 22, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 533 


Butt No. 224 or 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Companies Act, 203. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2022. Short title and 


: ops डे commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 


in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 35 of the Companies Act,— Amendment 


of section 
(a) in sub-section (/), for the words "three or more directors", the words "three 35. 


or more directors and a Corporate Social Responsibility professional" shall be 
substituted; and 


(b) in sub-section (5), for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


"Provided that it shall be mandatory for the company to give preference 
to the local area and areas around it where it operates, for spending the amount 
earmarked for Corporate Social Responsibility activities." 


534 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The last two decades have seen significant economic growth and integration into the 
global economy, resulting in several changes in the business landscape. The role of 
businesses within the larger society has come under intense scrutiny by several stakeholders. 
Governments across the world have been using different forms of regulation to shape 
corporate behaviour with calls for increased accountability, disclosures and actions from 
them. India's progress on corporate governance and the Companies Act, 203 (Act) needs to 
be viewed within this larger discourse. 


The primary objective of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) was not to mobilize 
resources for Government to bridge resource gap in meeting Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs). The primary objective is to promote responsible and sustainable business philosophy 
at a broad level and encourage companies to come up with innovative ideas and robust 
management systems to address social and environmental concerns of the local area and 
other needy areas in the country. 


However, even after the mandatory provision in the act various companies failed to 
perform their prescribed duty. The Government has sanctioned prosecution proceedings 
against 284 companies and sent 5,382 notices to companies that have not fulfilled the 
mandatory CSR expenditure norms. Thus in order to robust the mechanism a High Level 
Committee (HLC) was incorporated by the Government to suggest substantial changes to 
get rid of any lacuna under the act. In furtherance to that, the Committee has noted that 
HLC-205 suggested that CSR provisions also be made applicable to profit making entities 
not incorporated under Company Law, but operating under other specific statutes on 
mutatis mutandis basis. The Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility and Sustainability 
for Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) issued by the Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE) in October 204, also prescribed/advised that CPSEs which are statutory corporations 
also comply with CSR provisions. 


An analysis of the CSR data from FY 204-I5 to FY 207-8, reveals an acute 
concentration of CSR funds in a few geographical areas to the exclusion of the rest. There is 
a skew in favour of industrialised States such that the least developed States receive the 
least funds. This skew may have been caused, inter alia, by the clause on local area preference. 
Not only that, upon a bare perusal of Section I35, at the first blush it may seem that by 
incorporating the term "shall" before the terms, "preference" and "local areas", the Act 
intended that it is mandatory to comply with CSR obligations within a geographical/territorial 
area limitation. 


Further, the amendment also seek to the presence of a CSR professional in the CSR 
committee because it is often seen that the committee are not at par with the practicality and 
not at the centre-stage while planning and approving the CSR projects due to lack of technical 
expertise. Thus to get rid of this problem it is imperative to have a presence of professional 
in the committee. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; KRISHNAPAL SINGH YADAV 
November 23, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 535 


Butt No. 293 or 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. For article 343 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:— 
"343. The National language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari Script. 


The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union shall be 
the international form of Indian numerals.". 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Substitution 
of new article 
for article 
343. 


536 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Hindi is the language that unites India into one fabric and the promotion of Hindi as 
the national language shall help the Indian identity develop. Roughly forty-five per cent. of 
Indians speak Hindi as their first language and fifty seven per cent. people are fluent in Hindi 
as their second and third language. No other language in India has more speakers and most 
regional language have less than 0 per cent. of the total population speaking it. 


So, it must be our aim to be seen as a land of Hindi the same way China united its 
population with a single dialect Mandarin. Use of Hindi as our national language would help 
us move away from the clutches of colonial mind-set and also help establish Hindi as an 
international language by promoting it in forums like UN and other world bodies. 


Currently Indians speak many languages unlike many other countries which speaks 
only one language. India has many languages and every language has its importance. But it 
is absolutely necessary that the entire country should have one language that becomes 
India's identity globally. Further, it has been a dream of our forefathers to make Hindi in 
Devanagari as National language of India and for that the time period of fifteen year has been 
given to the Government of India to get rid of the colonizer's mind-set. 


However, even after 75 years of Independence of this nation, the language which 
acted as a channel of unity in the country is not declared as the national language of India. 
Moreover, recently the committee headed by the Hon'ble Home Minister in the report also 
suggest that the language used for communication in the administration should be Hindi and 
efforts should be made to teach the curriculum in Hindi. And all work must be done for the 
active promotion of Hindi language. Various committees earlier have also recommended 
promotion of Hindi so that it gives a sense of unity. This bill is in furtherance to the dream of 
our forefathers had enrich this through their blood. It is thus absolutely necessary to redeem 
the pledge and to make Hindi as National Language of India. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; KRISHNAPAL SINGH YADAV 
November 22, 2022. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 537 


Butt No. 248 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Code on Social Security Act, 2020. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Code on Social Security (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


36 of 2020. 2. In section 2 of the Code on Social Security Act, 2020 (hereinafter referred as the 
principal Act) Code,— 


(i) in sub-section (20), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely- 


"Provided that the contractor shall include the agencies engaged by any 
establishment in the name of concessionaire or Licensee;"; 


(ii) for sub-section (78), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely— 


"(78) "social security" means the measures of protection afforded to 
employees, unorganised workers, gig workers and platform workers to ensure 
access to healthcare and to provide income security including sickness benefits, 
unemployment benefits, old age benefit, employment injury benefit, family benefit, 
maternity benefit, invalidity benefit, survivors’ benefits and all other benefits as 
provided under the relevant provisions of this Code or under any other law for 
the time being in force;"; and 


(iii) in sub-section (86) for the words "self-employed worker", the words, gig 
workers, platform workers, freelance workers, agricultural workers, self-employed 
workers shall be substituted. 


3. In section 53 of the Code,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words "five years", the words "two years" shall be 
substituted; 


(9) in the first proviso for the words "three years", the words "two years" shall 
be substituted; and 


(c) in the second proviso, for the words "five years", the words "two years" 
shall be substituted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of Section 2. 


Amendment 
of Section 53. 


538 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Social Security Code, 2020 (the Code) has been enacted to amend and consolidate 
the laws relating to social security with the goal to extend social security to all employees 
and workers either in the organised or unorganised or any other sectors. The Code has vital 
provisions with respect to social security benefits to workers including gig workers. India's 
obligation to provide a comprehensive social security cover for the workers may be traced to 
several provisions enshrined in the Constitution of India which include inter alia securing 
equal pay for equal work for both men and women; directions pertaining to the State's 
responsibility for making effective provisions for assistance in cases of unemployment, old 
age, sickness and disablement; for securing just and humane conditions of work. 


Further, to make the Code more inclusive and inline to various conventions and treaties, 
this amendment seeks to amend various provisions of the Code. Not only that, the standing 
committee also suggested some changes to the Code to make it more inclusive this amendment 
is necessary. Thus, the definition of 'contractor' does not include terms like ‘concessionaire 
or licensee’ which are largely used in Railways, Airports and other Infrastructural Sectors 
because the definition of 'contractor' is inline with the existing definition in the Contract 
Labour (Regulation & Abolition) Act, !970 which had worked well over the years and retained 
in the code to maintain uniformity and this had been done in consultation with stakeholders. 
Thus, a proviso has been added to include 'concessionaire or licensee’ under the ambit of the 
code. 


In addition to it, the definition of ‘Social Security’ under the code is restrictive and do 
not include the nine components contained in the International Labour Organisation (ILO) 
Convention on Social Security (Minimum Standards) |952. Keeping in mind the objective of 
the code, as the whole fulcrum of the code revolves around the definition of ‘social 
security’. It is thus absolutely necessary to make the definition inclusive and encompasses 
in it all the necessary requirements. Thus, this amendment seeks to make the definition more 
inclusive and inline to the mandate of ILO. 


Moreover, the definition is of ‘unorganised worker' also require as it stated earlier in 
‘the unorganised workers social security act 2008' and the standing committee also recommend 
to make the definition more comprehensive and to include gig and platform worker in its 
ambit. Thus, this amendment encompass gig workers, platform workers, freelance workers, 
agricultural workers in the definition of unorganised worker. 


Also, the code prescribe the minimum service of five years for the benefit of gratuity. 
However, keeping in view the nature of India's Labour market where most employees are 
employed for a short duration period only, it becomes difficult to avail any gratuity benefits 
as five years of continuous employment is required as per the extant provisions. This has 
become an incentive to employers to terminate employees before five years are over. Gratuity 
amount should therefore be made payable after completion of two years of service only. 
Thus, this amendment changes the five years mandate to two years. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; KRISHNAPAL SINGH YADAV 
November 23, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 539 


Butt No. 05 07 202] 


A Bill to provide for proper management and disposal of millions of tonnes of 


electronic waste being generated by discarded electronic devices like television, 
personal computer, floppies, audio-video CD, batteries, cell phones, refrigerators, 
air conditioners, electronic toys, telephones, washing machines, electric switches, 
etc. by prescribing norms and fixing responsibilities and duties on manufacturers, 
recyclers and consumers with regard to disposal of electronic waste and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as 


follows:— 


202!. 


. (/) This Act may be called the Electronic Waste (Management and Disposal) Act, 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force at once. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Application 
of the Act. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to ensure 
disposal of 
electronic 
waste. 


Compliance 
criteria and 
procedure for 
disposal of 
electronic 
waste. 


Duty of 
Manufacturer. 


540 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "consumer" means a person using products capable of generating electronic 
waste; 


(c) "disposal" means disposal of electronic-waste in terms of the prescribed 
norm to prevent contamination of soil, ground water, surface water, ambient air quality 
and harmful effect on human health; 


(d) “electronic-waste" means waste generated from discarded television, personal 
computer, floppy, audio-video CD, battery, cell phone, refrigerator, air conditioner, 
electronic toys, telephone, washing machine, electronic switch and such similar 
electronic products; 


(e) "operator" means a person or establishment who owns or operates a facility 
for collection, transportation and disposal of electronic waste; 


(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(g) "re-cycler" means the person who processes electronic-waste for transforming 
it into raw material for producing new product which may or may not be similar to 
original product; 


(h) "storage" means the temporary containment of electronic waste in a manner 
so as to prevent its littering and hazardous effects on human being; 


(i) "transportation" means carrying of electronic waste from one place to other 
place hygienically through specially designed transport vehicle so as to prevent littering 
and harmful effect on human being. 


3. (7) The appropriate Government shall ensure management and disposal of all the 
electronic wastes generated within its territorial jurisdiction in accordance with compliance 
criteria and procedure prescribed under sub-section (/) of section 4 in such manner as may 
be prescribed. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall provide requisite infrastructure for collection, 
storage, transporation and disposal of electronic waste. 


(3) The appropriate Government may after due authorization, authorize any operator 
to collect, transport and dispose of the electronic waste in such manner as may be prescribed. 


4. (/) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Central Pollution Control 
Board, prescribe the compliance criteria and procedure for management and disposal of 
electronic waste. 


(2) The Central Pollution Control Board shall monitor the implementation of the 
compliance criteria and procedure for management and disposal of electronic waste prescribed 
under sub-section (/). 


5. It shall be the duty of every manufacturer:— 


(i) to ensure that every product offered for sale being released in the market 
which is capable of producing electronic waste contains:— 


(a) the procedure for its handling and disposal; and 
(b) the information about the parts which may or may not be recycled. 


(ii) to make available collection centres for collection of the hazardous electronic 
waste for their proper disposal depending upon the quantum of the product sold in the 
market; and 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 54] 


(iii) to create public awareness through advertisements, publications and other 
electronic mediums with regard to hazardous substances in their product which may 
cause ill effect to human body. 


6. It shall be the duty of the consumer to ensure that the electronic-waste is not 
disposed of in any other manner except in the manner prescribed for the purpose. 


7. (/) Every re-cycler of the electronic product shall be registered with the appropriate 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Every re-cycler shall re-cycle only those parts of an electronic product which have 
been permitted by the manufacturer to be re-cycled. 


8. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be liable for imprisonment which 
may extend to one year and fine which may extend to five lakh rupees. 


9. Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act is 
a company, every person who, at the time the contravention committed, was in charge of, and 
was responsible to, the company for the conduct of business of the company as well as the 
company, shall be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge 
or he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention. 


Explanation.—For the purpose of this section:— 


(i) "company" means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association 
of individuals; and 


(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 


0. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force on the subject. 


l. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not derogation of any other 
law for the time in force. 


2. (/) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid before each 
house of the parliament, as soon as may be after it is made, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprises in one session or more successive session, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any such modification in the rule or both the 
houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall as the case may be: so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under the rule. 


Duty of 
Consumer. 


Registration 
and 
responsibility 
of re-cycle. 


Penalty. 


Offence by a 
company. 


Act to has 
overriding 
effect. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
Power to 
make rules. 


542 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

All kind of electronic goods have become the household articles today. Every home 
has not one but a number of electronic products. Once these electronic products become 
obsolete or discarded, they are either thrown in the garbage or given to Kabariwala. The 
Kabariwala sells these products to scrap dealers who dismantle these gadgets and keep 
what is useful and rest of it is rendered into garbage which then is thrown in the landfills. 
This, of course, is not the proper way of its disposal. In this way millions of tonnes of 
electronic waste is generated in various metropolitan cities in the country. A number of 
components in these electronic products are hazardous and should be disposed of in an 
environment friendly manner. Many of these products contain components that contain 
toxic substances like lead, cadmium, mercury, hexavalent chromium, barium, beryllium and 
carcinogenic agents like carbon black and heavy metals. These elements can cause serious 
problems to the health of the person handling it and can also damage the environment if they 
are not disposed of properly. 


In various countries, there are laws for proper disposal of electronic waste products 
and the procedure for it is also displayed on the product. There it is also indicated on the 
product what can be recycled and what cannot be recycled. But, in our country disposal of 
electronic-waste is nobody's responsibility. As of now, there is no law or guideline for the 
disposal of electronic waste and no account is being taken how much is being generated and 
how it is being disposed of. It is, therefore, high time that matter may be regulated before the 
situation becomes alarming. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; JUGAL KISHORE SHARMA 
March 8, 202] 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 543 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide for 
infrastructure for collection, storage, transportation and disposal of the electronic waste. 
The expenditure involved is establishing infrastructure for handling and disposal of e-waste 
in respect of Union territories shall be borne by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, 
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated 
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore would be involved from the 
Consolidated Fund of India per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


544 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 545 


But No. 73 oF 202] 
A Bill to provide for welfare of children and for matters connected therewith. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Child Welfare Act, 202. Short title and 
extent. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, 'child' means a person who has __ Definitions. 
not completed the age of fifteen years. 


3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no Prohibition of 


child shall be employed by any person for any work in any manner. child 
employment. 


Establishment 
of juvenile 
homes. 


Facilities to 
be provided to 
the children 
in juvenile 
homes. 


Provision for 
reservation in 
posts and 
services under 
Central 
Government. 


Power to 
make rules. 


546 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


4. (/) The Central Government shall establish adequate number of juvenile homes with 
all basic amenities for the welfare of children in every district of the country. 


(2) Any child who is abandoned, orphan, destitute, neglected or engaged in any job, 
occupation or begging shall be admitted to the juvenile homes setup under sub-section (J). 


5. (/) Every child who is admitted into the juvenile home shall be entitled to the 
following facilities free of cost,— 


(a) accommodation, food and clothing; 
(b) education including higher and technical education; and 
(c) medical assistance. 


(2) Every child shall also be entitled to such other facilities as arc necessary for his all- 
round development. 


6. The Central Government shall make provisions of reservation in posts and 
services under its control for children admitted to juvenile homes on attaining the age of 
eighteen years. 


7. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 547 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A large number of children are forced by their parents to do menial labour, in order to 
sustain their livelihood . Due to lack of proper diet and healthcare, these children become 
victims of a number of diseases. Some of them even succumb to premature death. Many of 


these children are highly talented. But due to lack of proper education and other opportunities, 
their talent goes waste. 


Children are the future of a country. It is, therefore, the responsibility of the Government 
to provide opportunities of all-round development to every child and also to provide protection 
against exploitation. Thus, itis proposed to bring in a legislation for the welfare and protection 
of children against exploitation . 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; JUGAL KISHORE SHARMA 
March 8, 202). 


548 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for setting up of adequate number of juvenile homes with 
all basic amenities for the welfare of children in every district of the country by the Central 
Government. Clause 5 provides for free of cost food, accommodation, clothing, education 
and medical facilities to the children in juvenile homes. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual 
recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is likely to be involved. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the pruposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of anormal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 549 


Bit No. 264 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 7954. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (J) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In PART-II of the Representation of the People Act, 95, after CHAPTER-IV, the 
following Chapter and section thereunder shall be inserted, namely:— 


CHAPTERIVA 
MaAximMuM TERM OF MEMBERSHIP OF PARLIAMENT AND STATE LEGISLATURE 


"LIC. No person shall be elected as a member to either House of Parliament or of the 
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State for more than three terms for the each 
membership.". 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion 
of new 
Chapter IVA. 


Maximum 
Term of 
Membership 
of Parliament 
and State 
Legislature. 


550 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Since independence, we as a country embraced a democratic system of governance. 
The democratic framework has given the citizens to form any political party, join any political 
party and exercise his or her democratic right. However, it has been seen that with the 
passage of time the democratic framework has rusted in many places with no development in 
political ideology, lack of fresh and innovative ideas and at places the archaic systems are 
still being followed. The political leaders continue for long and thus not introduce any kind 
of variation in the systems. 


To bring change in the system and to infuse new methods and ideas we need to think 
differently. To bring freshness in the political biosphere there is a need to stipulate the tenure 
of political leaders in their capacity as elected representative and develop scope of rotation. 
The term of each person be at State Legislature (both houses where applicable) and at 
Parliament (both houses) should be restricted to a maximum of three terms separately. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; ABDUL KHALEQUE 
November 23, 2022 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 55] 


Bit No. 226 0 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, /9509. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Short title and 
Act, 2022. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 950, paragraph 3 shall be omitted. Omission of 
paragraph 3. 


552 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The founding fathers of our Constitution made several provisions in the Constitution 


which ensured rights and equality to the citizens of this diverse country. Unity in diversity is 
one of the brightest aspects of our country. 


Para 3 of the Constitution (Scheduled Caste) Order, l950 states that no person who 
professes a religion different from Hinduism shall be deemed to be a member of the Scheduled 
Caste. Thereby, the Order ceased to recognise a person as the Scheduled Caste if he or she 
belonged to any religious minority groups. The order was amended later to grant Scheduled 
Caste status to those people of Scheduled Caste origin who embraced Buddhism and Sikhism. 
However, Dalit Christians and Dalit Muslims have been kept out of the amended order thus 
denying them equality and fair justice. 


Meanwhile, several State Governments have recommended that Dalit Muslims and 
Dalit Christians should be brought under the preview of the amended rule and provide a level 
playing ground to all. Further amendment of the original Order is necessary to establish an 
equilibrium amongst the religious minority communities and provide justice. Non-inclusion 
of Scheduled Caste Muslims and Christians is religious discrimination which is against the 
spirit of our Constitution. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; ABDUL KHALEQUE 
November 23 , 2022. 


45 of 860. 


2 of 974. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 553 


Butt No. 85 oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 78609 and the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 49735. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
I. (/) This Act may be called as the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL Cope, |860 


2. In section 99 of the Indian Penal Code, 860, hereinafter referred to as the Penal 
Code, after para 3, the following para shall be inserted, namely:— 


"There is no right of private defence for a police officer or other person authorized 
in this behalf making an arrest of a person in an unprovoked situation which does not 
reasonably cause the apprehension of death or injury.". 


3. After section 308 of the Penal Code, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"308A. If a police officer or such other person while making an arrest of a person 
causes death of the person to be arrested without any reason sufficient to cause 
death, such police officer or other person shall be guilty of offence of extra-judicial 
killing and tried accordingly and shall be punished with death or imprisonment for 
life.". 

CHAPTER Il 
AMENDMENTS To THE CoDE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, |973 


4. In section 46 of the Criminal Procedure Code, !973,— 


(a) in sub-section (2), for the words "use all means necessary to effect the 
arrest", the words "use all means except causing death of the person to effect the 
arrest" shall be substituted; 


(b) after sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


"Provided that if the police officer or other person causes death of the 
person to be arrested, such police officer or other person shall be tried 
accordingly."; and 


(c) sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 99. 


Insertion of 
new section 
308A. 


Extra-Judicial 
killing. 


Amdnement 
of section 46. 


554 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The menace of extra-judicial killings has taken a brutal turn over the last few decades. 
The extra-judicial killings, what is also known commonly as fake encounters has become a 
mean for the security forces to eliminate alleged criminals even before judgement is delivered 
by the judiciary. Police encounters are the violation of the human rights of the person who is 
actually until not proven guilty cannot be called as offender or criminal. India is not a rogue 
State. Nor it is ruled by any kind of dictatorship. These kinds of killings existed centuries 
back primarily during the times of Kings and Emperors. However, such a system cannot 
prevail in a democracy like ours where rule of law exists. 


These extra-judicial killings have become means of settling, at times personal rivalry 
and more so in today's date it has become a tool to silence political opponents. We are 
experiencing the situation across many States in India. Under the garb of section 46 of the 
Criminal Procedure Code, 973 and section 96 of Indian Penal Code, 860 security forces 
indulge in such acts of fake encounters. Many a times, even unarmed person, women and 
child became victims of extra-judicial killings and the persons responsible for such killings 
walked away. So, it is time that the law be tweaked so that Human Rights of people are not 
violated. 


All encounter killings must be investigated with the utmost diligence as such killings 
affect the credibility of the rule of law. Rule of law must be ensured at all costs in every case 
across the country. It is the duty of the State Government to adhere to the rule of law and 
work in accordance with the rule of law. There is a need to train the police officials in such a 
way that they are able to handle every unforeseen situation and protect the accused in police 
custody. As encounter killings are increasing day by day, resulting in human rights violations. 
Thus, there is a need to instill the importance of human rights in the minds of the police 
officers executing these unlawful killings. 


Hence this Bill. 


NEW DELHI; ABDUL KHALEQUE 
March 4, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 555 


Bit No. 266 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. Short title and 
commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In article 85 of the Constitution,— Amendment 


of article 85. 
(a) in clause |, the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:— 


"Provided that the Parliament shall meet for not less than one hundred and 
forty working days in a calendar year.". 


(0) after clause 2, the following explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


"Explanation.—For the purpose of this article, "working days" shall 
include any day on which there is a joint sitting of the Houses and not include 
any period, exceeding two days for which the Parliament is adjourned.". 


556 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the last five years, the average number of working days for the Indian Parliament has 
fallen consistently. As a result, the time spent on discussing Bills has also reduced. In the 
United Kingdom, Parliament sits for an average of one hundred and fifty days each year. In 
the United States, Congress sits for upwards of one hundred days each year. The German 
Bundestag sits for an average of one hundred and five days each year, and has a pre-set 
calendar. 


In the year 208, as many as twenty-five per cent Bills in the Lok Sabha were passed in 
less than thirty minutes and the entire Union Budget of 208 was passed in less than thirty 
minutes. 


As the Government keeps restricting the Parliament's calendar, the opposition's space 
to be effective is constrained leading to ever increasing disruptions in Parliament. 


India needs to set high standards for Parliamentary democracy amongst international 
peers as well as its own leaders. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; SHYAM SINGH YADAV 
November 23, 2022 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 557 


Butt No. 3 oF 2023 


A Bill to establish a Central Human Trafficking Prevention and Control Commission for 
prevention and control of human trafficking in the country and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Human Trafficking (Prevention and Control) 
Act, 2023. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
inthe Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Formulation 
of National 
Policy to 
prevent and 
control 
Human 
Trafficking. 


Establishment 
of Central 
Human 
Trafficking 
Prevention 
and Control 
Commission. 


Functions of 
the 
Commission. 


558 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. (/) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "Commission" means the Central Human Trafficking Prevention and Control 
Commission established under section 4; 


(c) "human trafficking" means an act of recruiting or transferring any person for 
unlawful purpose including sexual exploitations or engaging him as forced labour 
within the country or in a foreign country; and 


(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act. 


(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the 
Indian Penal Code, 860, or the Immoral Traffic (Prevention and Control) Act, !956 shall have 
the same meaning, respectively, assigned to them in those Acts. 


3. (7) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of this 
Act and in consultation with the State Governments by notification in the Official Gazette, 
formulate a National Policy aimed at Prevention and Control of growing incidents of human 
trafficking and overall welfare, protection and rehabilitation of victims of human trafficking. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it 
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the national policy formulated 
under sub-section (/). 


4. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a 
Central Human Trafficking Prevention and Control Commission for Prevention and Control 
of the human trafficking of citizens within the country or abroad. 


(2) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Bulandshahr, Uttar Pradesh. 


(3) The Commission may establish its branches in the States and Union Territories in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Commission shall consist of one Chairperson and such other members having 
relevant experience in the field to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(5) The salary and allowances payable to the Chairperson and members of the 
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(6) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name of aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 


(7) The Commission may appoint such number of officers and employees as may be 
necessary for the efficient functioning of the Commission and carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 


(8) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of 
officers and employees of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 


5. The Commission shall— 
(a) take measures for rehabilitation and welfare of victims of human trafficking; 
(b) provide boarding and lodging facilities for victims of human trafficking; 


(c) provide emergency medical care and necessary legal assistance to victims of 
human trafficking; and 


(d) undertake such other measures as may be deemed fit for Prevention and 
Control of human trafficking. 


45 of l860. 
04 of 956. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 559 


6. The appropriate Government shall formulate rehabilitation scheme for persons 
rescued from trafficking and take such other welfare measures for Prevention and Control of 
human trafficking under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed. 


7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act. 


8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. 


9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act. 


0. (/) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to formulate 
rehabilitation 
scheme. 


A Central 
Government 
to provide 
adequate funds 
to the State 
Governments. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effects. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
other laws. 


Power to 
make rules. 


560 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Human Trafficking is the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of 
people through force, fraud or deception, with the aim of exploiting them for profit. Men, 
women and children of all ages and from all backgrounds can become victims of this crime, 
which occurs in every region of the world. The traffickers often use violence or fraudulent 
employment agencies and fake promises of education and job opportunities to trick and 
coerce their victims. 


In 202], over one thousand human trafficking cases were reported with almost three 
thousand victims across India. The State of Maharashtra had the highest number of human 
trafficking cases in the country with over 260 cases. India is in the league of such nations 
where the Governments have proved to be unsuccessful in Prevention and Control of incidents 
of human trafficking. India has become the largest base of human trafficking in the world. In 
the abominable market of human trafficking, India is being identified both as a consumer and 
producer. 


Human trafficking has taken deep roots in the society. The network of human trafficking 
has been spreading across the country. Lakhs of women are being trafficked every year 
within the country, out of which more than forty per cent are minors. Forty per cent of the 
kidnapped children are forced into child labour or prostitution. 


Human trafficking is a heinous and inhumane crime. The web of human trafficking is 
spreading rapidly in the country and it is not only spoiling the image of India in the world, but 
also contaminating the society on a large scale. If the growing number of incidents of human 
trafficking are not checked in time, the situation would go out of control. 


New DELHI; BHOLA SINGH 
January 47, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 56 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Central Human Trafficking Prevention 
and Control Commission for Prevention and Control of the human trafficking. Clause 5 
provides for rehabilitation and welfare measure of persons victims of human trafficking. 
Clause 6 provides for the formulation of rehabilitation scheme for persons rescued from 
human trafficking. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate 
funds to the State Governments. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees five 
hundred crore per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved. 


562 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause l0 of this Bill empowers the Appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 


out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 563 


Bitt No. 32 oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, /9509. 


Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) _ Short title. 
Act, 2023. 


2. In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, !950, in Part XIV, Amendment 


Tamil Nadu, for entry 8, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— ie i 
cnedule, 


"|6. Kuruma 7 Kuruman के Kurumba $ Kurmbagounder : Kurumban » an d 
& 
Kurumbar.". 


564 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Kurumans is aboriginal tribe of Tamil Nadu and are dwelling throughout the 
state of Tamil Nadu with their tradition, culture, custom, traits etc. but still being denied 


the ST categorisation and other affirmative actions in the better interest of the tribe 
community. 


As per the article 366(25) of the Constitution of India, Scheduled Tribe means 
such tribe or tribal communities or parts of group within such tribe for the purpose of 
Constitution of article 342(2) to specify the Tribe. Kurumans synonyms are presently 
deprived and denied their constitutional rights being extended to tribes. The said 
community is tribal by birth, culture, customs, traits, as concluded, under an 
ethnographic detailed study by the Tribal Research Centre, Ooty, Tamil Nadu. Moreover, 
as early as Meckenzie Manuscript's !86, First India Surveyor General of India and 
other Tribal Literature viz., Madras General of Literature and Science support the 
Kurumans Tribes synonyms with common and generic name & culture, customs, history 
and origination, therefore, to be identified under ST Categorisation. 


In order to render the social justice and affirmative actions without further loss of 
time, this Bill seeks to amend 'The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order 950' for 
inclusion of Kurumans synonyms names such as "Kuruma, Kuruman, Kurumba, 
Kurmbagounder, Kurumban, Kurumbar tribes", in the ST List in order to render social 
justice to oppressed and suppressed Kurumans & its synonyms names. That will ensure 
constitutional protection to the adivasi's Kurumans tribal synonyms against all sorts of 
socio-economic exploitation. Moreover it will confer all Constitutional and Legal Rights 
to Kuruman generic tribes as guaranteed under article 46 of the Constitution. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI C.N. ANNADURAI 
January |9, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 565 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill seeks to include Kuruma, Kuruman, Kurumba, Kurmbagounder, Kurumban 
and Kurumbar as the synonym name of Kurumans to the list of Scheduled Tribes with 
respect to the State of Tamil Nadu by way of amending the Constitution (Scheduled 
Tribes) Order, 950. The Bill, if enacted, would involve recurring and non-recurring 
expenditure on account of the benefits to be given under the schemes and programmes 
of the Government meant for social, educational and economic development of the 
Scheduled Tribes. At this stage, it is not possible to mention the exact amount which 
may be incurred on this account. However, it is estimated that a sum of approximately 
rupees thirty-five crore is likely to be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seventy crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


566 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Bitt No. 77 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for protection and welfare of small land holding farmers by 
constitution of a Minimum Price Assurance Commission and a Small Land 
Holding Farmers Welfare Fund and for matters connected therewith. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


Short title and l. () This Act may be called the Small Land Holding Farmers (Protection and 
commencement. Welfare) Act, 2023 7 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 567 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "agricultural produce" means agricultural produce specified in the sched- 
ule; 


(b) "Commission" means the Minimum Price Assurance Commission consti- 
tuted under section 6; 


(c) "Fund" means the Small Land Holding Farmers Welfare Fund consti- 
tuted under section 4; 


(d) "minimum assured price" means the price of the agricultural produces 
fixed and declared by the Central Government under section 3; 


(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(f) "small land holding farmer" means a person possessing agricultural land 
measuring not more than ten acres and who has no major income from any source 
other than agriculture. 


3. The Central Government shall, on recommendation of the Commission, at least 
one month before every financial year, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare the 
minimum assured price for each agricultural produce. 


4. (J) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Fund to be known as the Small Land Holding Farmers Welfare Fund for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The initial corpus of rupees one hundred crore of which rupees fifty crore shall 
be provided by the Central Government, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, and rupees fifty crore shall be provided by the State Governments in 
such proportion as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute every year to 
the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed. 


(4) There shall also be credited to the Fund moneys received under corporate 
social responsibility from the corporate and other private individuals. 


5. The Fund shall be utilized for— 
(i) providing minimum assured price for agricultural produce; 


(ii) payment of pension to every small land holding farmer who has attained 
the age of fifty-five years; 


(iii) financial assistance to the young small land holding farmers for 
innovative proposals; and 


(iv) establishing efficient institutional mechanism for full-fledged marketing 
of agricultural produce. 


6. (L) The Central Government shall, as soon as possible but not later than six 
months of the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Commission to be known as the Minimum Price Assurance Commission. 


(2) The Commission shall consist of— 


(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government in such man- 
ner, as may be prescribed, from amongst the persons having knowledge in the 
field of agricultural operations in small land holding farming sector and expertise 
in agricultural economics; 


Definitions. 


Central 
Government 
to declare 
minimum 
assured price 
of agricultural 
produce. 


Constitution 
of Small Land 
Holding 
Farmers 
Welfare Fund. 


Utilization of 
Fund. 


Constitution 
of the 
Minimum 
Price 
Assurance 
Commission. 


Functions of 
the 
Commission. 


Power to issue 
directions. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to 
make rules. 


568 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) a Vice-Chairperson to be elected by and from amongst the members of 
the Commission representing the small-holder farmers; 


(c) two Members of Parliament, one each from Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, 
to be elected by the respective Houses; 


(d) one member not below the rank of Joint Secretary, representing the Union 
Ministry of Agriculture; 


(e) one member not below the rank of Joint Secretary, representing the Indian 
Council of Agriculture Research; and 


(f) five members representing small land holding farmers to be nominated by 
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The term of office of the Commission shall be three years. 


(4) The Commission shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and 
common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both movable and 
immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


7. The Commission shall recommend to the Central Government— 


(a) the minimum assured price for agricultural produce after taking into 
consideration the cost of cultivation including fifty per cent. margin on the cost 
of cultivation; and 


(b) the steps to be taken for the improvement of livelihood of small-holder 
farmers. 


8. The Central Government may issue such directions to the State Governments 
as it may think necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


0. (/) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of 
this 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 569 


SCHEDULE 


[see section 3] 


L. Fibre Coconut 

2. Cereals Paddy 

3. Oil seeds Coconut, Oil palm 

4. Fruits Mango, Orange, Papaya, Guava, Banana, Grapes, Jack fruit, 


Pineapple, Rambutan, Mangostin, Cocoa 


5: Vegetables Common pea, Gram, Tomato, Turmeric, Bitter gourd, Snake 
gourd, Ash gourd, Winter crops, Chilly 


6. Tubers Topioca, Carrot, Beet root, Common taro, Elephant foot yam, 
Carrot, Potato 


q: Spices Pepper, Cardamom, Ginger, Nutmeg, Clove, Cinnamon 


8. Cash crops Rubber, Tea, Coffee 


570 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Agriculture plays a major role in Indian economy and small land holding farmers 
owe a considerable share in it. Small land holding farmers are farmers with a low asset 
base and limited resource endowments and who depend on household members for 
most of the labour, small land holding farmers are characterized by smaller applications 
of capital but higher use of labour and other family-owned inputs, and generally higher 
index of cropping intensity and diversification. Farmers, especially small land holding 
farmers fall in debt trap due to vagaries of nature and lack of assured minimum support 
price for agricultural produce. 


Currently, a farmer is born under debt and dies under the threat of its repayment. 
Due to total negligence and non-remunerative profession, youngsters are not preferring 
agriculture as promising and profitable. The pitfalls in farming policy and Free Trade 
Agreements make the situation more assailable, especially in rural economies. The 
whole proceedings result in social discontent, anarchy and turmoil which paves the 
way for terrorism and naxalism. 


In short, an immediate effective intervention is needed by the Government to 
safeguard the dreams, hopes and aspirations of agrarian people. The constitution of 
the Small Land Holding Farmers Welfare Fund and the Minimum Price Assurance 
Commission will lend a helping hand in removing indebtedness and social insecurity 
from small land holding farming community. The Bill seeks to achieve the above 
objectives. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; GANESHAN SELVAM 
February 27, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Small Land Holding Farmers 
Welfare Fund with initial corpus of one hundred crore rupees of which fifty crore 
rupees shall be provided by the Central Government. Clause 6 provides for constitution 
of a Minimum Price Assurance Commission for the welfare of small land holding farmers. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from Consolidated Fund of India. 
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore would be 
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved. 


3572 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |0 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 573 


Bit No. 73 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for right to health for residents of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (Right to Health) Short title, 
Act, 2023. extent and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall extend to the whole of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands only. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


574 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "clinical establishment" means establishments defined as a clinical es- 
tablishment under clause (c) of section 2 of the Clinical Establishment 
(Registration and Regulation) Act, 200; 


(b) "Government" means the Administration of Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
and in all other cases, the Central Government. 


(c) "health care" means testing, treatment, care, procedures and any other 
service or intervention towards a preventative, promotive, therapeutic, diagnostic, 
nursing, rehabilitative, palliative, convalescent, research and/or other health related 
purpose or combinations thereof, including reproductive health care and 
emergency medical included any of these as a result of participation in a medical 
research program; 


(d) "health care establishment" means the whole or any part of a public or 
private institution, facility, building or place, whether for profit or not, that is 
operated to provide inpatient and/or outpatient health care, and a "public health 
care establishment" shall accordingly refer to a health care establishment set up, 
run, financed or controlled by the Government or privately owned; 


(e) "health care provider" means a medical doctor, nurse, other paramedical 
professional, social worker or other appropriately trained and qualified person 
with specific skills relevant to particular health care, nursing, rehabilitation, 
palliative, convalescent, preventative or other health services, and any reference 
to "service provider" shall mean the same unless specifically stated otherwise; 


(f) "health impact assessment" means a combination of procedures, methods, 
and tools for identifying, predicting, evaluating, and mitigating potential effects 
of a proposed law, policy, program, project, technology, or a potentially damaging 
activity, in relation with health prior to taking decisions thereon and making 
commitments thereunder, on the health of the population, and other relevant 
effects, and the distribution of those effects within the population, and any 
reference to health impact assessment shall mean the same; 


(g) "informed consent" means consent given, specific to a proposed health 
care without any force, undue influence, fraud, threat, mistake or misrepresentation 
and obtained after disclosing to the person giving consent, either for himself, or 
in representative capacity wherever it is necessary, all material information 
including costs, risks, benefits and other significant implications of, and 
alternatives to, the proposed health care in a language and manner understood 
by such person; 


(h) "Panchayati Raj Institutions" means institutions of local self-Government 
established under any of the Union territory's Panchayati Raj Laws at village, 
block or district level, like Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti, or Zilla Parishad, or 
by whatever other name called, and any reference to "PRI" shall mean the same; 


(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


() "public health" means the health of the population, as a whole, especially 
as monitored, regulated, and promoted by the Government; 


(k) "public health institution" means governmental organizations that is 
operated or designed to provide in-patient or out-patient treatment, diagnostic or 
therapeutic, interventions, nursing, rehabilitative, palliative, convalescent, 
preventative, promotive, medical research program or other health services to 
public; 


(J) "Government funded health care services" means the health care services 


23 of 200. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 575 


funded and provided by the Government or those provided by the non- govern- 
ment entities but for which Government funds part or whole of the costs of care to 
some or all patients; 


(m) "resident" means an ordinary resident of the Union territory of Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands; and 


(n) "social audit" means the audit conducted by the community using the 
social dimension. 


3. Every person in the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands shall have Right to 
the right: — health. 


(a) to have adequate relevant information about the nature, cause of illness, 
proposed investigations and care, expected results of treatment, possible 
complications and expected costs; 


(b) to avail free Out-Patient Department services, In-patient Department 
services consultation, drugs, diagnostics, emergency transport, procedure, and 
emergency care as provided by all public health institutions accordantly to their 
level of health care as may be prescribed; 


(c) to have emergency treatment and care under any emergent circumstances, 
without pre-payment of requisite fee or charges including prompt and necessary 
emergency medical treatment and critical care, emergency obstetric treatment and 
care, by any health care provider, establishment or facility, including private 
provider, establishment or facility, qualified to provide such care or treatment 
without delay and in a case of medico-legal nature of case, no health care provider 
or health care establishment shall delay treatment merely on the grounds of 
receiving police clearance or a police report. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause "medico-legal case" means 
any medical case which has legal implications, either of a civil or criminal nature, 
and includes but is not limited to cases relating to accidents, assault, sexual 
assault, suicide, attempt to murder, poisoning, injuries on account of domestic 
violence, injuries to workers during course of employment, in some of which the 
service provider may be required to prepare documents in compliance with 
demands by authorized police-officer or magistrate; 


(d) in case of a resident, to have the right to avail free health care services 
from any clinical establishment in the prescribed manner and subject to the terms 
and conditions specified in the rules; 


(e) to have access to patient records, investigation reports and detailed 
itemized bills of treatment; 


(f) to know the name, professional status and job chart of the person who is 
providing health care; 


(g) to informed consent prior to specific tests or treatment including surgery 
and chemotherapy from all health care establishments; 


(h) to confidentiality human dignity and privacy during treatment at all 
health care establishments; 


(i) to the presence of female person, during physical examination of a female 
patients by a male practitioner; 


(/) to choose alternative treatment available at any health care establishments; 


(kK) to have treatment without any discrimination based upon illness or 
conditions, including HIV status or other health condition, religion, race, caste, 


576 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


sex, age, sexual orientation or place of birth of any of them at all health care 
establishments; 


(J) to have information about the rates or charges for each type of service 
provided and facilities available; 


(m) to choose source of obtaining medicines or tests at all health care 
establishments; 


(n) to patient's education about health condition; 


(0) to safe and quality care according to standards prescribed for the health 
care establishments; 


(p) to referral transport by all health care establishments, whether public or 
private, in the prescribed manner; 


(q) to have treatment summary in case of a patient leaving health care 
establishment against the medical advice; 


(r) to be heard and seek redressal in case of any grievance occurred during 
and after availing health care services; 


(s) in case of residents, to avail free transportation, free treatment and free 
insurance coverage against road accidents at all health care establishments in the 
prescribed manner and subject to the terms and conditions specified in the rules; 
and 


(t) to obtain treatment records and information from the treating health care 
establishments to seek second opinion from another health care professional or 
health care establishment. 


Obligation of 4. The Government shall have the following general obligations at all times, by 

Government. enhancing the quantum of the health care resources in time bound manner for realization 
of health and well-being of every resident in the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands:- 


(a) to develop and institutionalize Human Resource Policy for Health to 
ensure availability and equitable distribution of doctors, nurses and other ancillary 
health professionals and workers at all levels of health care as may be prescribed; 


(b) to set up the quality audit and grievance redressal mechanisms as may 
be prescribed; 


(c) to align all health services and schemes to strengthen a system of health 
services to empower and make residents aware for preventive, promotive and 
protective health care, not merely an absence of disease; 


(d) to lay down standards for quality and safety of all levels of health care as 
may be prescribed; 


(e) to make availability of Government funded health care services as per 
distance or geographical area or considering population density which includes 
health care institutions, free medicine, test and diagnostics of notified items and 
ambulance services as per standards as may be prescribed; 


(f) to ensure that there is no any direct or indirect denial to anyone for any 
Government funded health care services at such health care establishment and 
such guaranteed services as may be prescribed; 


(g) to mobilize resources and frame plans or policies to carry out obligations 
under this Act; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 577 


(h) to set up co-ordination mechanisms among the government departments 
to facilitate availability of nutritionally adequate and safe food, adequate supply 
of safe drinking water and sanitation to patients; and 


(i) to take appropriate measures to inform, educate and empower people 
about health issues. 


5. (/) The Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an 
independent body to be known as the Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
Health Authority consisting of the following members, namely:- 


Lieutenant Governor of ex-officio 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands Chairperson; 
Member of Parliament from ex-officio 


House of the People representing 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands 


Vice-Chairperson; 


Chief Secretary, Union Territory of ex- Officio 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands Member; 
Three Members, to be nominated by Members. 


Administration of Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands having knowledge of 
Public Health and Hospital Management 


(2) The Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands Health Authority shall 
meet at least once in three months. 


(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
services of members of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands Health 
Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 


6. The Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands Health Authority shall,— 


(a) advise the Government on any matter concerning public health, including 
preventive, promotive, curative, and rehabilitative aspects of health and 
occupational, environmental, and socio-economic determinants of health; 


(b) formulate Union Territory health goals and get these included in the 
mandate of Panchayati Raj Institutions and urban local bodies; 


(c) formulate Union Territory level strategic plans for implementation of 
Right to Health as provided under this Act, including action on the determinants 
of healthy food, water and sanitation; 


(d) develop mechanisms and systems for regular medical, clinical, and social 
audits for good quality of health care at all levels; 


(e) constitute one or more committees, scientific panels, technical panels for 
the efficient discharge of its functions as and when required; 


(f) ensure quality and cost effective health and diagnostic services by private 
health sector; and 


(g) carry out other functions as may be prescribed. 


7. (/) The Government shall establish Grievance Redressal Mechanism within 
three months from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) The Grievance Redressal Mechanism under sub-section (l) shall include the 
following, namely:— 


(a) a specified web-portal and helpline centre where complaint may be made 
on denial of services and infringement of rights provided under this Act; 


Constitution 
of Union 
territory of 
Andaman and 
Nicobar 
Islands Health 
Authority. 


Functions of 
the Union 
Territory of 
Andaman and 
Nicobar 
Islands Health 
Authority. 


Grievance 
Redressal 
Mechanism. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to 
make rules. 


578 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(b) the web-portal and helpline centre shall forward the grievances received 
to the concerned officer and his immediate supervisors within 24 hours; 


(c) the concerned officer shall respond to the complainant within next 24 
hours; 


(d) if the complaint is not resolved by concerned officer within 24 hours as 
aforesaid the complaint shall be forwarded to Union territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands Health Authority immediately. 


8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


9. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary 
for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two 
years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


0. (J) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 579 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The islanders of the Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar, due to its 
geographical location remain susceptible to public health problems. This island located 


200 km from mainland India, is beset with several bottlenecks, in terms of infrastructure 
in health care facilities as well as in the number of health care professionals available. 


Looking at the overall supply of health care (supply side) and the health outcomes 
(demand side) scenario, the Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar still has miles to go 
in terms of improving its services in health care. The Post Pandemic scenario has 
thrown up new challenges for the island, which is grappling with the constrained 
infrastructure of healthcare facilities, further aggravated by the locational inhibiting 
factors. 


The GB Pant Hospital is the lone referral hospital for the entire Union Territory 
with specialized services in Surgery, Medicine, Gynecology, Pediatrics, ENT, Pathology 
& Ophthalmology, etc. The Union Territory has a total of 4 functioning CHCs, out of 
which urban areas have zero CHCs. 


It is pertinent to note that the right to life and proper health care is an integral part 
of life and the quality of life of an individual depends upon the quality of health care. 
Thus, the schemes implemented by the Government will be reaching out to more and 
will be implemented more efficiently if it is backed by legal sanction. Over the years 
Andaman and Nicobar islands have proven to be of strategic importance to the nation 
and have established itself as tourist hubs. In the first quarter of the last year, the island 
saw a footfall of ,36,90 tourists. It is only imperative that the health infrastructure of 
the island is robust enough to meet the medical needs of the tourists as well. 


Thus, keeping in mind the violability of the life of an individual this bill seeks to 
provide the basic right to health to all the citizens of Andaman and Nicobar. In addition 
to this, this bill also cast a duty upon the Government to protect the right to basic 
health care and the right to access health care for all its citizens. 


The present Bill seeks to enumerate certain rights for the people of Andaman and 
Nicobar including free access to health care for all its citizens. However, these rights 
are not limited to what has been enumerated under this provision but are also in addition 
to what has been provided by the constitution and in other laws for the time being in 
force. Further, under the proposed Bill, certain duty has also been entrusted to the 
Government. Thus, in a nutshell, this Bill provides an inclusive approach to deal with 
the wide range of problems of health care and its accessibility. Further, keeping in mind 
the financial condition of all its citizens of the Andaman and Nicobar island this Bill 
provides free access to health care in cases as enumerated under the provision of the 
Bill. 

Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; KULDEEP RAI SHARMA 
February 28, 2023. 


580 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clauses 4 of the Bill provides for the Administration of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands to develop and institutionalize Human Resource Policy for Health to ensure 
availability and equitable distribution of doctors, nurses and other ancillary health 
professionals and workers at all levels of health care and setting up the quality audit 
and grievance redressal mechanisms, etc. Clause 5 provides for appointment of members 
for Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Health Authority and provides for salary 
and allowances for the members. Clause 7 provides for the Administration of Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands to establish Grievance Redressal Mechanism within three months 
from the date of commencement of this Act. Clause 8 provides for the Central Government 
to provide requisite funds for carrying out the provisions of this Act. The Bill, therefore, 
if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring 
expenditure of about rupees two crore is likely to be involved per annum from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five crore is also likely to be involved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 0 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 58] 


Bitt No. 72 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the welfare of Shopkeepers in Andaman and Nicobar Islands and 
for setting up of Shopkeepers' Welfare Fund and a Board to administer the Fund 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Welfare of Shopkeepers in Andaman and Nicobar Short title, 
Islands Act, 2023. extent and 


commencement. 
(2) It extends to the Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands only. 


(3) It shall come into force at once. 


Definitions. 


Shopkeepers 
Welfare Fund. 


Establishment 
of 
Shopkeepers 
Welfare 
Board. 


Utilisation of 
Fund. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
Funds. 


582 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "Board" means the Shopkeepers Welfare Board established under 
section 4; 


(b) "Fund" means Shopkeepers Welfare Fund set up under section 3; 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and 


(d) "shopkeeper " means any person who is engaged in sale of goods either 
retail or wholesale or where services are rendered to customers and includes an 
office, a store-room, godown, warehouse or workhouse or workplace. 


3. (7) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette set up a 


Fund to be known as the Shopkeepers Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 


(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from Central Government and the 


Administration of Andaman and Nicobar Islands in such ratio as may be prescribed. 


4. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, estab- 


lish a Board to be called the Shopkeepers Welfare Board. 


(2) The Board shall consist of, — 


(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government in such man- 
ner as may be prescribed; 


(b) Member of Parliament representing Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the 
House of the People—Vice-Chairperson; 


(c) one representative from the Administration of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed; and 


(d) two representatives from Retailers Association of India to be appointed 
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the 


service of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 


5. (.) The Board shall administer the Fund determine the purposes for which the 


Fund shall be utilized. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (), the Fund shall be utilized for the 


following purposes:— 


(i) payment of old-age pension at the rate of rupees twenty thousand per 
month after the shopkeeper has attained the age of sixty years and is incapable of 
performing his job on account of physical illness, infirmity or incapacity; 


(ii) free healthcare facilities for the shopkeepers and their dependent family 
members at the Government and other designated hospitals; 


(iii) free insurance cover to shopkeepers; and 
(iv) free housing facilities for shopkeepers. 


6. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by 


Law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Board forthe effective implementation 
of the provisions of the Act. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 583 


7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law providing for matters dealt with in this Act. 


8. (.) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law 
in force. 


Power to 
make rules. 


584 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
According to International Labour Organisation, "Social security is the protec- 
tion that a society provides to individuals and households to ensure access to health 
care and to guarantee income security, particularly in cases of old age, unemployment, 
sickness, invalidity, work injury, maternity or loss of a breadwinner". It is a right which 
is generally guaranteed by some act or legislation to people for their economic and 
social security in the time of sickness, disability or old age. 


The recent occurrence of coronavirus pandemic has brought the issue of social 
security in India at the forefront. Large scale movement of migrant workers from the 
various cities of India was a great lesson for all the stakeholders. It made people realise 
the need for social security for all the members in the society and thus, there needs to 
be a great deal of discussion on this issue at all the levels. It helps the recipients to 
ensure their rights to family protection and assistance, an adequate standard of living 
and adequate access to healthcare. Social security acts as an umbrella for people during 
adverse situations. Social welfare is not possible without social security. It acts as a 
buffer against all odds in the time of need. It helps in lifting millions of people out of 
poverty and thus, raises people's standard of living. 


This bill can be considered as one of the step in the direction of dealing with 
provision of social security net for shopkeepers in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
by providing: 


(i) payment of old-age pension at the rate of rupees twenty thousand per 
month after the shopkeeper has attained the age of sixty years and is incapable of 
performing his job on account of physical illness, infirmity or incapacity; 


(ii) free healthcare facilities for the shopkeepers and their dependent family 
members at the designated Government and other hospitals; 


(iii) free insurance cover to shopkeepers; and 
(iv) free housing facilities for shopkeepers. 


The Bill also seeks to provide for the establishment of a welfare fund for 
shopkeepers in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands with a sense of security in times of 
need. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; KULDEEP RAI SHARMA 
February 28, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 585 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Shopkeepers' Welfare Fund for 
welfare for shopkeepers in Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Clause 4 provides for 
constitution of a Board for administration of the Shopkeepers Welfare Fund. It also 
provides for appointment of Chairperson and other member to the Board. Clause 6 
provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate Funds to the Board for 
effective implementation of the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of 
one hundred crore rupees is likely to be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India 
per annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of one hundred crore rupees is also likely to be 
involved. 


586 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 587 


Bitt No. 70 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for regularization of the services of Anganwadi workers in the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands by giving them status of permanent employee of 
the Government and for matters connected therewith. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called as the Anganwadi Workers of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands (Regularization of Service and Welfare) Act, 2023. 


(2) It extends to the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands only. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


588 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "anganwadi" means an anganwadi centre set up by the Central Govern- 
ment or Union Territory Administration in the Union territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands to implement the Integrated Child Development Scheme; 


(b) "anganwadi worker" means any person working in an anganwadi on 
regular or contract or daily wages basis; 


(c) "helper" means a person who has been engaged to assist Anganwadi 
workers in discharge of their duties under Integrated Child Development Scheme; 
and 


(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


Regularization 3. (L) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, take all 
of services of — such steps as may be necessary to regularize the services of Anganwadi workers and 
cacao helpers employed in Andaman and Nicobar Islands and confer the status of not less 
| than those of Group 'C' employees of the Central Government on all such Anganwadi 
workers. 

(2) The Central Government shall also provide such wages and welfare facilities 

as are available to, or not less than, Group 'C' employees of the Central Government. 
Accommodation 4. The Central Government shall take steps to provide housing facilities to the 


to oo Anganwadi workers and helpers within the vicinity of their workplace. 
WOrkers. 


Committee for 5. (.) There shall be constituted a Committee for the socio-economic develop- 
welfare of ment of Anganwadi workers employed in Andaman and Nicobar Islands to be known as 


A di ८ ५ ही 
a, the Committee for Welfare of Anganwadi Workers. 
Workers. 


(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the 
Committee shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members 
and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson 
and other Members so appointed shall be such as Parliament may by law determine. 


(3) The Committee shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 
(4) It shall be the duty of the Committee— 


(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards pro- 
vided for the Anganwadi workers under any law in force at the time of the com- 
mencement of this Act, or under any other law for the time being in force or under 
any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards; 


(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of 
rights and safeguards of the Anganwadi workers; 


(c) to advise on the socio-economic development of the Anganwadi work- 
ers and to evaluate the progress of their development in the Union territory of 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands; 


(d) to bring about synergy between technology and public policy and rec- 
ommend measures for enhancing income and employment potential of the 
Anganwadi workers through training and reforms in the health sector; and 


(e) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare 
and development and advancement of the Anganwadi workers. 


Provisions of 6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 


the Act to be ther law for the time being in force. 
in addition to 


other laws. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 589 


7. (l) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of Power to 


this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 


make rules. 


590 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Anganwadi Centres were started in this country by the Central Government 
and State Governments for implementation of the Integrated Child Development Services 
Scheme. It includes the comprehensive development of health awareness among women 
and child welfare. The contribution of Anganwadi Centres is remarkable and has become 
an integral and essential part of life in rural areas. The Anganwadi workers are good 
promoters of various schemes of the Central Government and State Government and 
ensuring the health and welfare of children and women. The duties and services rendered 
by the Anganwadi workers are very important for the protection of the health and 
welfare of women and children. The Anganwadi workers do not have job security and 
the honorarium given to them are not sufficient to meet their immediate basic 
requirements. This may adversely affect the working of the Integrated Child 
Development Scheme. 


The Anganwadi workers are one of the main links between the Government and 
the general public. They are helping the Government for the effective implementation of 
health programmes. Considering the importance of their duties and service, it is highly 
necessary to protect their service and welfare. 


Hence this Bill. 


New Delhi; KULDEEP RAI SHARMA 
February 28, 2023. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for regularisation of the services of anganwadi 
workers and helpers and confers the status not less than those of Group 'C' employees 
of the Central Government on all such workers. It also provides for such wages and 
welfare measures as are available to or not less than Group 'C' employees of the Central 
Government to anganwadi workers. Clause 4 provides for accommodation to Anganwadi 
workers. Clause 5 provides for constitution of a Committee for Welfare of Anganwadi 
Workers. It also provides for appointment of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and 
Member to the Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. Arecurring expenditure of about rupees three 
hundred crore is likely to be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore is also likely to 
be involved. 


592 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 593 


Bitt No. 260 oF 2022 


A Bill to provide for welfare of Anganwadi workers employed across the country and 
to ensure that they are provided with all social security benefits. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Anganwadi Worker's Welfare Act, 2022. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify. 
2. In this Act, until unless the context otherwise requires: — 
(a) "anganwadi worker" means any person employed to provide additional 
and supplementary healthcare and nutritional services to children and pregnant 


women under the Integrated Child Development Services Scheme (ICDS Scheme); 
and 


(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Welfare of 


ASHA worker. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulty. 


Power to 
make rules. 


594 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


3. (J) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of welfare of ASHA 
workers,— 


(a) ensure a minimum of honorarium of rupees twenty thousand per 
month which shall be reviewed every five years taking into account the 
prevailing inflation; 


(b) provide a personal accident insurance cover ofrupees ten lakhs to 
each Anganwadi workers; 


(c) provide a health insurance cover of rupees five lakh on floater basis 
which shall be reviewed every five years; and 


(d) provide a life insurance cover of rupees twenty lakh to each 
Anganwadi worker. 


(2) The premium in respect of the personal accident insurance, health insurance 
and life insurance cover to Anganwadi workers under sub-section (/) shall be borne by 
the Central Government. 


4. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient, for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, 
be laid before each House of Parliament. 


5. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient, for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, 
be laid before each House of Parliament. - 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 595 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Anganwadi workers form the backbone of India's healthcare system. They are the 
grassroot workers who have significantly contributed for betterment of our country's 
progress. As a result of this, it's important that we acknowledge their contributions. 
The present remuneration paid for the service of these exemplary healthcare warriors is 
highly inadequate. Moreover, there is no proper social security for these workers. 
Considering the present circumstances, it's important that we provide them with 
adequate social security. This Bill incorporates the minimum amount of wages for 
Anganwadi worker's and also incorporates social security measures such as personal 
accident insurance, health and life insurance for these workers. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; M.K. RAGHAVAN 
November 2, 2022. 


596 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for payment of Honorarium to the Anganwadi work- 
ers by the Central Government. It further provides for payment of insurance premium 
by the Central Government. It also provides for contribution to pension fund of 
Anganwadi workers by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of 
about rupees twenty thousand crore is likely to be involved per annum from the Con- 
solidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees hundred crores is also likely to be in- 
volved. 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISL ATION 


Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 597 


Bitt No.3 oF 2023 
A Bill to amend the Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda Act, 2020. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda Short title, 
(Amendment) Act, 2023. extent and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 
of the long 
title. 


Amendment 
of section |. 


Amendment 
of section 3. 


Insertion of 
new section 
4A. 


Establishment 
of Institute of 
Ayurveda at 
Kozhikode in 
the State of 
Kerala. 


598 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In the Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda Act, 2020 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words, "The Institute of 
Teaching and Research in Ayurveda" the words, "The Institutes of Teaching and Re- 
search in Ayurveda" shall be substituted. 


3. In section | of the principal Act, in sub-section (/) for the words, "The Institute 
of Teaching and Research" the words, "The Institutes of Teaching and Research in 
Ayurveda" shall be substituted. 


4. In section 3 of the principal Act in clause (A), after the words and number 
"under section 4", the words and number "under section 4 including the Institute of 
Ayurveda Kozhikode established under section 4A" shall be substituted. 


5. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"4A. (/) There shall be established an Institute of Ayurveda at Kozhikode in 
the State of Kerala which shall be a body corporate, to be known as the Institute 
of Ayurveda, Kozhikode. 


(2) The provisions of this Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Institute of 
Ayurveda, Kozhikode established under sub-section (/).". 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 599 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Kerala is bestowed with a great natural resources. Its divine location is sand- 
wiched between the Sahyadris on the one side and the majestic Arabian sea on the 
other side. This unique geographical location has led it to have some unique flora and 
fauna. Large number of medicinal plants and herbs are found here. Kerala has been the 
cradle of Ayurvedic medicine since ancient times. Ayurveda is not a science in Kerala, 
but has been blended with the lives of common people in a great way. People from 
across the globe comes to Kerala for its unique Ayurvedic experience. There are large 
number of private sector interventions in Ayurveda in Kerala. Hence there is a great 
need for a Central Government institution of Ayurveda in Kerala. Kozhikode is the ideal 
location for such an institute. Due to its geographic location, Kozhikode will be acces- 
sible easily to neighbouring States as well. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; M.K. RAGHAVAN 
November 2, 2022. 


600 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill vide proposed section 4A provides for establishment of Insti- 
tute of Ayurveda, Kozhikode in the State of Kerala. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum would be involved from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of rupees hundred crore is also likely to be involved. 


45 of 860. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 60 


Bit No. 275 oF 2022 


A Bill further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 78609 and the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, /9735. 


Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


. (/) This Act may be called the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2022. Short title, and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 


notification in the official gazette, appoint. 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENT TO THE INDIAN PENAL (70795, |860 


2. In section 353 of the Indian Penal Code, 860, for the words "which may extend Amendment 
to two years", the words, "which shall not be less than one month but which may extend . रा 
upto one year" shall be substituted. ; 


CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENT TO THE CODE ON CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, |973 


3. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure under the heading 
"I-OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE", for the entries relating to section 
353, the following entries relating to section 353, the following entries shall be substi- 
tuted, namely:— 


2 3 4 fe) 6 

"353 Assault or use of Imprisonment fora Non- Bailable Any 
Criminal force to term which shallnot cognizable Magistrate" 
deter a public be less than one month 
servant from but which may extend 


discharge of his upto one year, or fine 
duty. or with both. 


602 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Over the years, section 353 of the Indian Penal Code has remained a controversial 
one. The veiled nature of this section provided being misused in most of the instances. 
Public servants often misuse this section as a form of privilege. There have been count- 
less incidences whereby many have become victim of this section. It's with the belief 
that no common man walks to the door of any public office with the intention of causing 
any harm to the working of officials that this bill is being introduced. Public servants 
are not a vestige of the elite and coveted civil services, rather they are merely an agent 
of our citizens. Hence, it's our duty to protect the citizens. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code, |860 and the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 973 with a view to make the offence of assault or use of Criminal 
force to deter a public servant from discharge of his duty as "non-cognizable" and 
"bailable". 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DEtut; M.K. RAGHAVAN 
November 2, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 603 


Bix No. 243 oF 2022 
A Bill further to amend the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, |996. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. (!) This Act may be called the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Short title, and 
Act, 2022. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 20 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, !996, in sub-section (l), Amendment 
the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— pr Sea 


"Provided that in all cases related to property loans or vehicle loans, the 
place of arbitration shall be in the district where the borrower usually resides.". 


604 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
There have been many problems with regard to agreement between the parties 
under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 996. In fact, a lot of provisions have been 
made to ease the process of arbitration under the Act, but the lending companies are 


misusing them by getting the borrowers to sign the agreements to the benefit of the 
companies. 


Section 20() of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, |996 provides that "the 
parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration." The same Section 20() of the Act 
is being misused by the lending companies, and in case of a dispute among the parties, 
these companies do not fail to harass the borrower by determining the place of arbitration 
thousands of kilometers away from where the borrower resides. 


Under the Act, there is a provision to refer the case to the arbitrator in case of any 
dispute among the parties. At this juncture, the lending company decides the place of 
appointment of the arbitrator to be included in the terms of the loan agreement as per its 
own convenience. 


Often, it happens that under the guise of Section 20(l) of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 996, the lending companies choose the place of appointment of 
arbitrator at their own convenience, which becomes a hardship to the borrower. Due to 
this, in case of a dispute, the borrower has to travel to other States far from his residence 
to present his case before the arbitrator. 


The place of arbitration being chosen far away, the debtor is neither able to 
appear before the arbitrator nor present his case. This leads to ex-parte decision being 
passed by the arbitrator which is equivalent to a decree of a civil court. 


In view of the above, it is necessary to amend the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 996, with a view to provide that in the cases related to property loan or vehicle 
loan, the place of arbitration shall be in the district, where the borrower usually resides. 


New DELHI; HANUMAN BENIWAL 
23 November, 2022. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 605 


Bitz No. 6] oF 2023 


A Bill to make provisions to deal with misconduct of Government servants and for 
matters connected therewith. 


Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


. (J) This Act may be called the Government Servants (Regulation of Services) 
Act, 2023. 


(2) It extends to the whole of India. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commence- 
ment. 


Definitions. 


Evaluation of 
Government 
servants. 


Penalties. 


606 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appointing authority", in relation to a Government servant, means— 


(i) the President or the authority empowered by the President to make 
appointments to the service of which the Government servant is for the time 
being a member or to the grade of the Service in which the Government 
servant is for the time being included, or 


(ii) the authority empowered to make appointments to the post which 
the Government servant for the time being holds, or 


(iii) the authority which appointed the Government servant to such 
Service, grade or post, as the case may be, or 


(iv) where the Government servant having been a permanent member 
of any other Service or having substantively held any other permanent 
post, has been in continuous employment of the Government, the authority 
which appointed him to that Service or to any grade in that Service or to that 
post, 


(b) "disciplinary authority" means the authority competent under section 5 
to impose any of the penalties specified under section 4 on a Government serv- 
ant; 


(c) "Government servant" means a person who- 
(i) is a member of a Service or holds a civil post under the Union; 


(ii) is a member of a Service or holds a civil post under a Central 
Government and whose services are temporarily placed at the disposal of 
the State Government; 


(iii) is in the service of the Central Government and whose services 
are temporarily placed at the disposal of the local or other authority; 


(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act. 


3. (/) The Central Government shall evaluate the functioning of every Govern- 
ment servant through feedback from the citizens in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) For the purpose of sub-section (), the Central Government shall establish 
unitary feedback system in each of its department. 


4. The Central Government may, for good and sufficient reasons and as hereinaf- 
ter provided, impose the following penalties on a Government servant, namely:- 


(a) minor penalties including,— 
(7) censure; or 
(ii) withholding of his promotion; or 


(iii) recovery from his pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss 
caused by him to the Government by negligence or breach of orders; or 


(iv) reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay by one stage 
for a period not exceeding three years, without cumulative effect and not 
adversely affecting his pension; or 


(v) withholding of increments of pay; 
(b) major penalties including,- 


(i) save as provided for in sub-clause (iv) of clause (a), reduction to a 
lower stage in the time-scale of pay for a specified period, with further 
directions as to whether or not the Government servant may earn 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 607 


increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the 
expiry of such period: 


Provided that the reduction may or may not have the effect of post- 
poning the future increments of his pay; 


(ii) reduction to lower time-scale of pay, grade, post or service for a 
period to be specified in the order of penalty, which shall be a bar to the 
promotion of the Government servant during such specified period to the 
time-scale of pay, grade, post or service from which he was reduced, with 
direction as to whether or not, on promotion on the expiry of the said speci- 
fied period; 


(iii) the period of reduction to time-scale of pay, grade, post or service 
shall operate to postpone future increments of his pay; 


(iv) compulsory retirement; 


(v) removal from service which shall not be a disqualification for fu- 
ture employment under the Government; 


(vi) dismissal from service which shall ordinarily be a disqualification 
for future employment under the Government: 


Provided that, in every case in which the charge of possession of 
assets disproportionate to known-sources of income or the charge of ac- 
ceptance from any person of any gratification, other than legal remunera- 
tion, as a motive or reward for doing or forbearing to do any official act is 
established, the penalty mentioned in sub-clauses (v) or (vi) of clause (b) 
shall be imposed: 


Provided further that where a Government servant delays performing 
an official act requested by any citizen under his jurisdiction by giving 
illogical and unnecessary reasons, the penalty mentioned in sub-clauses 
(i), Gi), or (77) of clause (b) shall be imposed: 


Provided also that in any exceptional case and for special reasons 
recorded in writing, any other penalty may be imposed. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the following shall 
not amount to a penalty, namely:- 


(i) withholding of increments of pay of a Government servant for his 
failure to pass any departmental examination in accordance with the rules or 
orders governing the Service to which he belongs or post which he holds or 
the terms of his appointment; 


(ii) stoppage of a Government servant at the efficiency bar in the 
timescale of pay on the ground of his unfitness to cross the bar; 


(iii) non-promotion of a Government servant, whether in a substan- 
tive or officiating capacity, after consideration of his case, to a Service, 
grade or post for promotion to which he is eligible; 


(iv) reversion of a Government servant officiating in a higher Service, 
grade, or post to a lower Service, grade or post, on the ground that he is 
considered to be unsuitable for such higher Service, grade or post or on any 
administrative ground unconnected with his conduct; 


(v) reversion of a Government servant, appointed on probation to any 
other Service, grade or post, to his permanent Service, grade or post during 


Disciplinary 
Authorities. 


Procedure for 
imposing 
major 
penalties. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
other law. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


608 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


or at the end of the period of probation in accordance with the terms of his 
appointment or the rules and orders governing such probation; 


(vi) repatriation of a Government servant whose services had been 
borrowed from a State Government or an authority under the control of a 
State Government, at the disposal of the State Government or the authority 
from which the services of such Government servant had been borrowed; 
and 


(vii) compulsory retirement of a Government servant in accordance 
with the provisions relating to his superannuation or retirement. 


5. (J) The President may, through the appointing authority or by any other au- 
thority empowered in this behalf by a general or special order, impose any of the penal- 
ties specified in section 4 on any Government servant who is,- 


(a) amember of a Central Civil Service other than the General Central Serv- 
ice; 

(b) a person appointed to a Central Civil Service included in the General 
Central Service, 


(2) The power to impose any of the penalties specified in section 4 may also be 
exercised, in the case of a member of a Central Civil Services, Group 'C' (other than the 
Central Secretariat Clerical Service), or a Central Civil Service, Group 'D',- 


(a) if he is serving in a Ministry or Department of the Government of India, 
by the Secretary to the Government of India in that Ministry or Department; or 


(b) if he is serving in any office, by the head of that office, except where the 
head of that office is lower in rank than the authority competent to impose the 
penalty under section 4. 


6. (/) No order imposing any of the penalties specified in section 4 shall be made 
except after an enquiry held, as far as may be, in the manner provided by the Public 
Servants (Inquiries) Act, !850, where such inquiry is held under that Act. 


(2) Whenever the disciplinary authority is of the opinion that there are grounds 
for inquiring into the truth of any imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour against a 
Government servant, it may itself inquire into, or appoint under this rule or under the 
provisions of the Public Servants (Inquiries) Act, l850, as the case may be, an authority 
to inquire into the truth thereof: 


Provided that where there is a complaint of sexual harassment within the meaning 
of rule 3 C of the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 964, the Complaints Committee 
established in each Ministry or Department or Office for inquiring into such complaints, 
shall be deemed to be the inquiring authority appointed by the disciplinary authority 
for the purpose of these rules and the Complaints Committee shall hold, if separate 
procedure has not been prescribed for the Complaints Committee for holding the inquiry 
into the complaints of sexual harassment, the inquiry as far as practicable in accordance 
with the procedure laid down in those rules. 


7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force. 


8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, make such provisions or give such directions not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the 
removal of the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order or direction shall be made or given after the expiry of 
two years from the commencement of this Act. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 609 


9. (/) The Central Government may, by notification and in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of India, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and, if before 
the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Power to 
make rules. 


6l0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Bureaucrats are an essential component of government machinery. They work in 
government for the improvement of society and to help their fellow citizens. However, 
they are frequently found to be misbehaving and refusing to cooperate with the people 
they are obligated to serve. Many individuals frequently complain about how 
government employees waste their time. Even if we now have a number of rules in place 
to govern the behaviour of government officials, yet a robust legislation regulating the 
conduct of erring officials to benefit individuals and the country as a whole is urgently 
required. 


Hence this Bill. 


New DELHI; OMPRAKASH BHUPALSINH RAJENIMBALKAR 
February |3, 2023. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 6ll 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish unitary 
feedback system in each of its department for having feedback on the functioning of 
every government servant. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about 
rupees one thousand crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to 
be involved. 


6]2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 


Secretary General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 


AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-0054. Kshitiz 


Mohan 


MGIPMRND—248GI—6-09-2023 


