रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल०--(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


The Gazette of Gudia 


Ooh. -ST. Wet. -37.-0922025-268360 
CG-DL-E-0922025-268360 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग I — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


नई दिल्ली, शुक्रवार, दिसम्बर 5, 2025/अग्रहायण 4, 947 (शक) 


सं" 9] 
NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, DECEMBER 5, 2025/AGRAHAYANA ]4, 947 (Saka) 


No. 9] 
इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


RAJYA SABHA 


The following Bills have been introducedfin the Rajya Sabha on the 5th December, 2025:— 


I 
Bit No. XLIII 07 2024 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of a National Committee for Protection of 
Media Persons for the effective prevention of violence in cases related to 
arbitrary censorship, intimidation, assault, or risk to free speech of media 

and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
(3) This Act may be called the National Committee for Protection of Media 
Persons Act, 2024. 


l. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement 


Definitions. 


45 of 2023 


45 of 2023 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


2: 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(9 


(ii) 


(iii) 


(iv) 


(v) 


(vi) 


(vid) 


(viii) 


(ix) 


(x) 


(xi) 


(xii) 


(xiii) 
(xiv) 


“accredited media person” means a person who is accredited by 
the Central Government under prevailing accreditation rules with 
a purpose to facilitate the collection of news/ information; 


“appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 


“arbitrary censorship” means the suppression, prohibition, or 
control of information, communication and expression without 
proper and reasonable, legal or constitutional basis; 


“assault” shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it under 
Section 30 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; 


“Committee” means the National Committee for Protection of 
Media Persons constituted under section 6 of this Act; 


“Council” means the Executive Council of the Committee under 
section 0 of this Act; 


“intimidation” shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it under 
Section 30 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; 


“media institution” includes any newspaper establishment 
registered under the Registrar of Newspapers for India, news 
channel establishment, news-based’ electronic media 
establishment, or news station or news portal establishment, 
professionally engaged in the collection, processing, and 
dissemination of information, views and opinion to the public as 
well as collection and dissemination of public opinion; 


“media person” means an employee or representative, of a media 

institution, either whole-time or part-time and includes an editor, 
writer, news editor, sub-editor, feature writer, copy-editor, 
reporter, correspondent, cartoonist, digital news publisher, news- 
photographer, news-videographer, copy-tester trainee media 
person, news gatherer, or a freelance journalist eligible to be 
accredited as freelance journalist under prevailing Central Media 
Accreditation Rules; 


“newspaper” means a periodical of loosely folded sheets usually 
printed on newsprint and brought out daily or at least once in a 
week, containing information on current events, public news or 
comments on public news; 


“News and current affairs content” means newly received or 
noteworthy content, including analysis, especially about recent 
events primarily of socio-political, economic or cultural nature, 
made available over newspapers, internet or computer networks, 
and through any digital media, where the context, substance, 
purpose, import and meaning of such information is in the nature 
of news and current affairs content; 


“Register” means the Register for Media Persons maintained 
under Section 3 of this Act; 


“prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


“violence” means an act which causes any harm, injury or 
endangerment of life or intimidation, obstruction or harassment or 
coercion or assault of criminal force or threat to journalist in 
discharge of his service or duties or causes to be the reason for 
damage or loss to the property or reputation of a journalist or a 
media institution. 


47 of 2023 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


CHAPTER II 


REGISTER FOR MEDIA PERSONS 


(0) The Government shall maintain a Register for media persons 
(hereinafter referred to as the Register) in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(2) The Register shall be a public document, under section 74 of the 
Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 and shall be published on the website 
of the National Committee for Protection of Media Persons in the manner 
prescribed for this purpose. 


(3) Additions, deletions or alterations to the Register along with the 
effective date shall be reflected on the website within thirty days from the 
date of such change. 


(4) Every person who is eligible under section 4 of this Act shall be eligible 
for registration as a media person. 


(5) Every person whose application has been accepted shall be given a 
registration number and the manner of assignment of such registration 
numbers shall be such as may be prescribed by the Committee constituted 
under section 6 of this Act. 


(6) Such registration shall be valid for a period of three years from the date 
of registration, for accredited media persons and two years for non- 
accredited media persons: 


Provided that, after expiry of the validity of the registration period, the 
registration shall be eligible for renewal for an extended period equivalent 
to the initial period. 


(7) Registration under sub-section (8) will, however, not confer any 
benefits or entitlements other than those expressly provided in this Act. 


(0) Every person practising and having at least one year of experience in 
journalism and fulfilling the below mentioned conditions shall be eligible 


for registration as a media person: — 


(a) at least six articles/ news and current affairs content, affiliated 
to, authored, or co-authored in his or her name and published by 
a Media Institution in the five months prior to the date of 
application for such registration; or 


(b) has received at least one payment from a Media Institution for 
compilation of news in the preceding five months; or 


(c) has taken photographs related to current affairs that have been 
published by a Media Institution at least three times in the 
preceding three months; or 


(d) certified by a media institution as being employed by it as a 
media person, as defined in section 2 of this Act: 


Provided that no employee of Government/ semi-Government/ 
board/corporation/ organisations which are wholly, or partially funded by 
the Government can apply for registration as a media person on the basis of 
publication of their articles in newspapers or magazines. 


Register for 
media persons. 


Eligibility for 
registration as a 
media person. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


CHAPTER III 


NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR PROTECTION OF MEDIA PERSONS 


Constitution 5. (&) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
of the Gazette, with effect from such date as it may appoint, constitute a 
National Committee, to be known as the National Committee for Protection of 


Committee 

for Protection 

of Media 

Persons. (2) The Committee shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, 
sue or be sued. 


Media Persons, to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform 
the functions assigned to it, under this Act. 


(3) The Committee shall comprise the following bodies:— 
(a) Executive Council. 
(b) Unit for Admitting Cases and Rapid Reaction. 
(c) Risk Evaluation Unit. 


(4) The headquarters of the Committee shall be at such place in the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi, and it shall have regional and other 
offices in any other place in India as the Central Government may by 
notification, specify. 


(5) The Cabinet Secretary of the Union Government shall be the ex-officio 
Secretary to the Committee. 


(6) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers and 
staff including experts to the Committee, as may be required for its 
efficient functioning. 


Objectives 6. The Committee shall exercise and perform the following functions: — 
and Functions 
of the (a) protect the rights of media persons and media institutions guaranteed 


Committee. under article 9 () (a) of the Constitution; 
(b) provide necessary protection to: 


(i) media person(s) or media institution(s) who are facing arbitrary 
censorship, intimidation, violence, assault, or risk, either 
physical or verbal; 


(ii) partner by marriage or otherwise, any next of kin or dependents 
of the media person; 


(iii) persons from the same media institution, who participate, 
collaborate or associate in the same or similar activities; and 


(iv) property, goods or other objects belonging to the media 
person(s), group, institution. 


(c) to direct, coordinate, evaluate and review specific actions that ensure 
that those media persons and media institutions, who are at risk in 
the performance of their work or profession, are provided with the 
necessary conditions to continue their activities; 


(d) to enquire and investigate into violence upon media persons and 
media institutions or threats and risks to them and pass appropriate 
directions to the concerned authorities for their protection; 


(e) to summon relevant authorities and call for relevant documents in 
connection with enquiries and investigation, the passing of 
appropriate directions of protection and prevention, and the 
evaluation and review of such orders; and 


(f) any other functions as assigned to it by the Central Government from 
time to time. 


5 of 908 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Ts 


(4) The Committee shall serve as the designated authority for monitoring 
the registration of media persons. 


(2) The Committee shall be vested with the power to determine the 
following matters: — 


(a) all applications received for registration as a media person; 


(b) all applications for renewal of registration as a media person; 


(c) additions, deletions or alterations of entries in the Register, 
specified under section 3 of the Act; and 


(d) revocation of registration in case of non-compliance with 
established rules and regulations. 


(3) The Committee shall conduct annual reviews of the Register, and may, 
as necessary, modify, update or correct entries to ensure its accuracy and 
completeness. 


(4) The Committee shall meet at such regular intervals, as may be 
prescribed, for evaluation and determination of the applications received for 
registration and renewal of registration. 


(5) The Committee may, from time to time, issue guidelines or directives 
to administer the registration process and to ensure compliance with the 
objectives and provisions of this Act. 


(6) The Committee shall have the power to revoke the registration of a 
media person and strike-off the name of such person from the Register if, it 
comes to the conclusion, on the basis of an enquiry conducted thereon, that 
the registration was erroneous or was done as a result of material mis- 
representation, suppression of facts or fraud: 


Provided that no such action shall be taken without giving notice and 
affording a reasonable opportunity of hearing to the concerned media 
person, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(0) For the purpose of performing its functions or holding any inquiry under 

this Act, the Committee shall have the same powers throughout the country 
as are vested with a civil court while trial of a suit under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 908, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and 
examining them on oath; 


(b) disclosure and inspection of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; and 


(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any office 
or court; 


(2) The Committee shall have the power to recommend emergency 
protection measures and protection plans to the Superintendent of Police of 
the district concerned, who in turn will take appropriate decision as per the 
extant provisions of the prevailing Act/ Rules/ Regulations in this regard. 


(3) The Committee shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 


(0) All Government authorities and persons employed by the appropriate 
Government shall provide all information called for by the Committee 
unless the information is protected from disclosure by law. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall provide all necessary assistance to the 
Committee in discharging its duties and functions efficiently. 


Committee to be 
the authority for 
registration of 
Media Persons. 


General Powers 
of the Committee. 


Appropriate 
Government 
assistance. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Composition 0. 6) The Executive Council shall be the governing body of the Committee 
0... 7 and shall consist of the following persons to be appointed by the President 
Executive : हि 

of India by warrant under his hand and seal, namely:— 


Council. 
(a) aperson, who has been the Chief Justice of India, - Chairperson; 
(b) one person who has been a judge of the Supreme Court, - Member; 
(c) Chairperson of the Press Council of India, - Member, ex-officio; 


(d) Six media persons, with ten or more years of experience, out of 
which at least three shall be women, - Members; 


(e) two persons, who are representatives of civil society organisations 
with a mandate to secure Freedom of Speech and Expression, out of 
which at least one shall be a woman, - Members; 


(f) one person, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government 
of India, to represent the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 
to be nominated by the Minister in-charge of that Ministry, - 
Member, ex-officio; and 


(g) one person not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government 
of India, to represent the Ministry of Home Affairs, to be nominated 
by the Minister in-charge of that Ministry, - Member, ex-officio. 


(2) Every appointment under sub-section (/) shall be made after obtaining 
the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of: — 


(a) the Vice President of India and ex-officio Chairman of the Council 
of States (Rajya Sabha); 


(b) the Chief Justice of India; 
(c) the Speaker of the House of the People (Lok Sabha); 


(d) the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) 
or where there is no such Leader of the Opposition, then, the Leader 
of the single largest party in opposition to the Government in the 
Council of States; and 


(e) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People (Lok Sabha) 
or where there is no such Leader of the Opposition, then, the Leader 
of the single largest party in opposition to the Government in the 
House of the People: 


Provided that no appointment under this sub-section shall be made in 
the absence of consensus between at least three members. 


il.  (J)A person appointed as the Chairperson of the Council shall hold office 
for a term of three years from the date, he enters office or until he attains the 
age of seventy years, whichever is earlier. 


remms. ana (2) A person appointed as a Member of the Council shall hold office for a 
oe af term of three years from the date, he enters office or until he attains the age 
pal asa of seventy years, and shall be eligible for re-appointment. 


Chairperson, 

aa (3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and 
0 the ore . Chai ८ . 
Canc conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the Council 


as well as officers, staff and experts of the Committee shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 


2. 0) The Chairperson or any Member of the Council may, by notice in 
writing under his hand addressed to the President of India, resign from his 
office. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


3. 


4. 


(2) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent 
without excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Committee, from three 
consecutive meetings of the Committee. 


(3) The Chairperson or any Member shall not be removed from office 
except by an order made by the President on the ground of their proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity, after an enquiry made by a Judge of the 
Supreme Court in which such a Chairperson or Member has been informed 
of the charges against them and given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in respect of those charges. 


(4) A person shall be disqualified for being appointed and continued as the 
Chairperson or a Member, if he— 


(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; 


(b) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence, 
which in the opinion of the President, on the advice of the Selection 
Committee, involves moral turpitude; 


(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting 
capacity; 


in such 


(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, which is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions in such capacity; or 


(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office 
prejudicial to the public interest. 


(5) A vacancy caused by the resignation or removal or death of the 
Chairperson or any other Member, or otherwise, shall be filled by fresh 
appointment in accordance with the provisions of section 0. 


(0) No act or proceeding of the Council shall be invalid merely by reason 
of:— 


(a) any vacancy, or any defect in the constitution of the Council; or 


(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the Chairperson; 
or a Member; or 


(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the 
merits of the case. 


(0) The Council shall meet not less than once in every three months in a year 
at such time and place as may be determined by the Chairperson. 


(2) The Chairperson shall preside over the meeting of the Council and if, for 
any reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend the meeting of the Council, 
the Chairperson of the Press Council of India, shall preside over the meeting: 


Provided that if, the Chairperson of the Committee and the Chairperson of 
the Press Council of India both are unable to attend the meeting, any 
member so appointed by the Chairperson of the Council shall preside over 
the meeting. 


(3) One-half of the total number of Members of the Council including the 
Chairperson shall constitute the quorum and all the acts of the Committee 
shall be decided by a majority of the members present. 


(4) If on any matter there is an equality of voting among the members of 
the Committee, the Chairperson shall have and exercise the casting vote. 


(5) At all times of voting, there should be at least two representatives of 
the Press as well as 2 from the Civil Society Organizations, who have 
worked in this field for at least ten years and have experience in the defence 
of freedom of speech and expression. 


Conditions _ for 
the appointment 
and continuation 
of Chairperson 
and Members: 

Disqualifications, 
Resignation, 

Removal, and 
filling of 
vacancy(ies). 


Vacancy, etc., not 
to invalidate 
proceedings of the 
Council. 


Meetings of the 
Council. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Unit for I5.  (4) The Unit for Admitting Cases and Rapid Reaction shall be responsible 
Admitting for:— 

Cases and 

Rapid (a) receiving applications for consideration by the Committee, receiving 
Reaction. information from the Committee on cases of which it has taken suo- 


moto cognizance, and receiving information from the police where 
a Media Person or Media Institution faces imminent arrest; 

(b) conducting an evaluation for immediate action to determine whether 
cases require Extraordinary or Ordinary Procedure; and 


(c) defining and implementing urgent protection measures. 


(2) Any media person or media institution facing arbitrary censorship, 
intimidation, violence, assault, or risk; physical or verbal, as defined in 
section 2, as a result of his or her profession, or a third party on behalf of 
such a person, may apply or communicate with the Committee through the 
Unit for Admitting Cases and Rapid Reaction. 


(3) Any criminal cases involving arrest or imprisonment of a media person 
or media institution shall be placed before the Unit for Admitting Cases and 
Rapid Reaction by the concemed police department: 


Provided that no arrest shall be made unless it is sanctioned by the 
Committee. 


Provided further that the evaluation as to whether the accused in a 
criminal case qualifies to be a media person or media institution shall 
be made by the Committee. 


(4) The Unit for Admitting Cases and Rapid Reaction shall accept the 
application of the Petitioner, or information forwarded to the Unit by the 
Committee, and shall conduct an Evaluation for Immediate Action. 


(5) In the event that it is determined, through a thorough assessment, that a 
person's life, physical integrity, or liberty is in imminent danger, 
Extraordinary Procedures may be employed in the case, and the Unit for 
Admitting Cases and Rapid Reaction shall take the following steps: — 


(a) determine the Urgent Protection Measure to be used, no later than 
three hours after receiving the application or the information; 


(b) implement the Urgent Protection Measure no later than nine hours 
after they have been determined; 


(c) conduct a simultaneous evaluation of the Urgent Protection 
Measure; 


(d) submit a report of the evaluation and action taken to the Council; 
and 


(e) forward the case to the Risk Evaluation Unit for determination of the 
Protection Plan, as in Ordinary Procedures. 


(6) If it is determined that there is a prima facie assault or a threat against a 

media person or media institution, but no person's life, physical integrity, or 
liberty is in imminent danger, Ordinary Procedures shall be employed, and 
the Unit for Admitting Cases and Rapid Reaction shall forward the case to 
the Risk Evaluation Unit. 


Risk 6. The Risk Evaluation Unit shall be responsible for:-— 
Evaluation 
Unit. (a) undertaking a Risk Assessment Study to analyse the determinants of 


risk levels applicable to the applicant or a prospective beneficiary, 
incorporating elements of gender- specific dangers; 


(b) proposing protective and preventive measures; 


(c) forwarding the findings of the study to the Executive Council no 
later than ten days after receipt of the application; and 


(d) determining the Protection Plan, no later than one week after receipt 
of the study. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


7. 


8. 


9. 


20. 


2i. 


22. 


(0) When the Committee is prima facie of the view that it is expedient to 
extend protection to a media person or institution in situations where: — 


(a) there lies allegations or investigation against a media person or 
media institution; or 


(b) there is an ongoing investigation, inquiry or trial involving a media 
person, or; 


(c) the material produced before it requires such intervention; 


shall direct the Superintendent of Police of the district concerned to 
supervise the investigation and submit a report within fifteen days. 


(2) If the district Superintendent of Police, in consultation with the District 
Prosecution Officer, is of the opinion that the case is fit for withdrawal from 
prosecution, it shall recommend the same to the Committee, which in turn 
shall forward its report to the appropriate Government requesting to take 
necessary action for withdrawal of the prosecution. 


Notwithstanding any other Act currently in force, no media person or media 
institution while engaged in a news-gathering capacity, shall be compelled 
to disclose in any legal proceeding or trial, before any court, before the 
presiding officer of any tribunal, or before any committee or elsewhere, the 
sources of any information procured or obtained by him and published in 
the newspaper, periodical or website, broadcast by any broadcasting station, 
or televised by any television station in which he is engaged, connected with 
or employed. 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law on this behalf, grant such sums of money to the 
Committee, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(0) The Council shall prepare once in every year, in such form, manner and 
at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a full account of 
the activities of the Committee during the previous year and such other 
reports and retums, as may be directed, and copies of such report and returns 
shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 

(2) A copy of the annual report and returns received under sub-section (7) 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of 
Parliament. 


(0) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the said Act as appear 
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the 
expiry of a period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


(0) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Protection from 
unfair 
prosecution. 


Privileged 
Communication. 


Central 
Government to 
provide adequate 
funds to the 
Committee. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Power to make 
rules. 


0 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Media is the fourth estate of Indian democracy. In Romesh Thapar vs 
State of Madras and Brij Bhushan vs State of Delhi, the Supreme Court held 
that the freedom of press is an integral part of freedom of speech and expression 
guaranteed under article 9 () (a) of the Constitution. Article 9 of Universal 
Declaration and International Covenant on Human Rights (UDHR) and the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCR), as well as 
international standards including the Council of Europe’s Platform to Promote 
the Protection of Journalism and the Safety of Journalists, Organisation of 
American States, International Declaration on Protection of Journalists 
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe, etc. recognize that in a 
democratic society, the media should be simultaneously free and responsible. 


India featured in the Reporters Without Borders (RSF) list of five 
deadliest countries in December, 2020. In 2023, India's ranking in the Press 
Freedom Index slipped from 40 in 2074 to 6, out of 80 countries. A study 
by Thakur Foundation shows that at least 98 serious attacks were recorded on 
press reporters between 204 to 209, and of these, 36 happened in 209 alone. 
In 40 of these, journalists were killed. While the Government has committed 
to creating an enabling environment for independent press, suitable steps are 
required to safeguard journalist against increased violence, threats, denigration, 
arbitrary arrests and detention. The stakes of inaction are of the gravest nature 
both in human terms - a matter of life and death, even — and in democratic terms, 
due to the chilling effect on the very voices that permit citizens to form their 
opinions and ensure accountability. While the report of the Index Monitoring 
Cell did nothing to address issues of censorship, intimidation by agencies, etc. 
of media persons, recommendations of the Law Commission on journalistic 
privileges has also not been codified into law. 


Therefore, there is an urgent need for a uniform and centralised 
legislation to monitor threats and violence against media persons and protect 
their rights and freedoms. 


In view of the reasons stated, it is proposed to enact a legislation to 
provide for: — 


(6) a Register for Media Persons; and 


(ii) a National Committee for Protection of Media Persons comprising of an 
Executive Council, a Unit for admitting cases and a rapid Reaction and 
a Risk Evaluation Unit- to conduct case specific evaluation, enquire and 
investigate and provide necessary protection to media persons and 
media institutions. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives 


MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY il 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the maintenance of a Register for Media 
Persons, while Clause 5 provides for the setting up of a National Committee for 
Protection of Media Persons and appointment of such number of officers, staff and 
experts thereto, as may be required, for the efficient discharge of its functions. Clause 
i provides for the salaries and allowances payable to as well as other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the Council as also to the 
officers, staff and experts. Clause 9 provides that the Central Government, shall after 
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money 
to the Committee, as it may think fit for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. 


Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not 
possible at this juncture to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATEDLEGISLATION 


Clause 2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make provisions 
through an order to remove any difficulties likely to arise in giving effect to the 
provisions of the Bill, after its enactment. Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules and 
order(s) will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a 
normal character. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


II 


Bill No. XLII of 2024 


A Bill to amend the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 202 and the 
Assisted Reproductive Technology (Regulation) Act, 2027. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 

CHAPTER I 

PRELIMINARY 


Short title and 
commencement. 


(0) This Act may be called the Surrogacy Laws (Amendment)Act, 2024. 


(2)This Act shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE SURROGACY (REGULATION) ACT, 202 


ieee of 2. In the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 202 (hereinafter referred to as the 
section 2. principal Act), in section 2,— 


(a) clause (h) shall be omitted; 


(b) for clause (r), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely— 


“(r) “intending person(s)” means person(s), who due to 
medical or biological reasons cannot undergo pregnancy and 
intends to become parent(s) through surrogacy. 


Explanation— For the purposes of this clause, the 
expression “intending person(s)” shall include:-— 


(i) same sex couples between the age of twenty-six 
years to fifty-five years in the case of males, and 
between the age of twenty-three years to fifty years 
in the case of females; 


(ii) heterosexual married couples, where the male is 
between the age of twenty-six years to fifty-five 
years and the female is between the age of twenty- 
three years to fifty years; and 


(iii) single males and single females between the age of 
twenty-five years to fifty years.”. 


(c) clause (s) shall be omitted. 


Amendment 3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in clause (ii), sub-clause(a), after the word 
of section 4. “medical”, the words “or biological” shall be inserted. 


Amendment 4. In section 7of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (f), sub-clause (iv), 
of section 7. after the words “women welfare organizations”, the words “and organizations 
working for the welfare of LGBTQIA communities” shall be inserted. 


CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY(REGULATION) 
ACT, 202 
Amendment 5. In the Assisted Reproductive Technology (Regulation) Act, 202l, in 


of section 2. section 2, - 
(a) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely— 


“(e)“commissioning person(s)” means infertile person(s), who 
approach an assisted reproductive technology clinic or assisted 
reproductive technology bank for obtaining the services 
authorized of the said clinic or bank; 


47 of 202. 


42 of 202. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, the expression 
“commissioning person(s)” shall include:— 


(i) same sex couples between the age of twenty-six 
years to fifty-five years in the case of males, and 
between the age of twenty-three years to fifty years in 
the case of females; 


(ii) heterosexual married couples, where the male is 
between the age of twenty-six to fifty-five years and the 
female is between the age of twenty-three to fifty years; 
and 


(iv) single male and single females between the age of 
twenty-five to fifty years.” 


(b) in clause (j), for the words “medical condition preventing a couple”, 
the words “medical or biological condition preventing person(s)” shall 
be inserted. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 202 and The Assisted Reproductive 
Technology (Regulation) Act, 202 are heteronormative, patriarchal and 
exclusionary. They inadvertently perpetuate gender norms and societal 
structures that do not adequately address the diverse range of familial 
arrangements and reproductive choices present in our complex social 
landscape. Under the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 202, surrogacy is made 
available only for infertile heterosexual married couples or single women, 
who are either widowed or divorced, completely omitting the LGBTQIA+ 
community and single unmarried women. It is not in the interest of the 
progressive growth of the society in not acknowledging the reproductive 
autonomy of women, as well as the rights of LGBTQIA+ individuals to 
found a family. Article I6 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 
Article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and 
Article 0 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights recognise the universal right to parenthood. Additionally, 
recognition of ‘atypical families’ or ‘chosen families’ beyond the 
constraints of marriage, blood or adoption is required in consonance with 
Articles 4, 5, 9 and 2! of the Constitution. 


The Indian judiciary, conscious of this, regards the right to 
procreate as a fundamental one. The Andhra Pradesh High Court 
recognized the civil rights to rightly include the freedom to reproduce and 
affirmed that "the right to reproductive autonomy" is inclusive under the 
"right to privacy" in B. K. Parthasarthi v. Government of Andhra Pradesh. 
In Navtej Singh Johar v. The Union of India, the LGBTQIA+ community 
was assured to be entitled to equal legal rights and to be treated equally in 
society without experiencing any stigma. In Supriyo v. Union of India, the 
Supreme Court held that the Parliament should fill the vacuum in 
legislation. 


Therefore, by extending surrogacy rights, the Parliament would be 
taking a progressive step towards inclusivity that mirrors the aspirations of 
the population, fostering a society that respects the autonomy of individuals 
and reflects the principles of equality and human rights enshrined in the 
Indian Constitution and other international covenants and documents. 


Embracing the principles of equality and non-discrimination, this Bill 
strives to reform surrogacy laws, thus breaking down barriers for 
individuals of diverse sexual orientations and gender identities. It 
champions inclusivity and ensures that surrogacy becomes an accessible 
and affirming avenue for all, irrespective of their sexual orientation or 
marital status, to build families with dignity and equality. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [7 


Ul 


Bill No. LXXXIII of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 203. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 


l. 0) This Act may be called the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace Short title and 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Amendment Act, 2024. a a 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment of 
the long title. 


Amendment of 
Section . 


References to 
certain 
expressions to 
mean and 
include 

certain other 
expressions. 


Amendment of 
Section 2. 


Amendment of 
Section 4. 


Amendment of 
Section 7. 


8 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[Part-II 


5. 


6. 


In the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition 
and Redressal) Act, 20i3 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in 
the long title for the word ‘women’, the word ‘persons’, shall be 
substituted. 


In the principal Act, in section l, for sub-section (), the following shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“ 6) This Act may be called the Sexual Harassment of Persons at 
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 203.” 


In the principal Act, unless the context otherwise requires, the words 
‘woman’ or ‘women’, wherever it occurs in the Act, shall mean and include 
‘persons of all gender’. 


In section 2 of the principal Act, — 


(6) inclause (f), 


(a) after the words “daily wage”, the words, “or gig”, shall be 
inserted; and 


(b) after the words “co-worker”, the words, “gig worker”, shall 
be inserted. 


(ii) in clause (9), 


(a) in sub-clause (ii), after the word “workplace”, the words, “gig 
workers, and platform workers;”, shall be inserted; and 


(b) in the Explanation, after the words “organisation”, the words 
“including policies governing gig workers and _ platform 
workers;”, shall be inserted. 


In the principal Act, in section 4, in sub-section (2), after the proviso to 
clause (c), the following proviso, shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided further that in the event that the aggrieved person belongs 
to a gender other than female and requires adequate representation on the 
Internal Committee, an additional representative from within the 
organization, belonging to the gender of the aggrieved person, shall be 
nominated on the Internal Committee, in such manner, as may be 
prescribed.” 


In the principal Act, in section 7, in sub-section (7), after clause (d), the 
following proviso, shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that in the event that the aggrieved person belongs to a 
gender other than female and requires adequate representation on the Local 
Committee, an additional representative from within the organization, 
belonging to the gender of the aggrieved person, shall be nominated on the 
Local Committee, in such manner, as may be prescribed.” 


4 of 203. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Bill reflects the urgent need to protect all individuals in the workplace, 
regardless of their gender and nature of work, from sexual harassment. 
Recognizing that discrimination and harassment can affect people of all gender 
identities, this Bill seeks to make the legal framework more inclusive, 
progressive, and aligned with India’s constitutional and social values. 


There has been a flux in the Indian gig economy, which has introduced a 
large segment of workers who are often not covered under the traditional 
workplace protections. To address this gap, this Bill seeks to expand the 
definitions of “employee” and “employer” to explicitly include gig workers and 
platform workers. This aims to ensure that protections against sexual harassment 
extend to all types of work arrangements, reflecting the evolution of modern 
workplaces. 


The Bill upholds the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by articles 4, 5 and 
2] of the Constitution of India, which protect equality, prohibit discrimination, 
and ensure the right to life and personal dignity. The landmark case of NALSA v. 
Union of India (204) recognized transgender persons as a third gender and 
affirmed their rights. This amendment, building on that precedent, extends 
protections to include all persons, thereby aligning the law with constitutional 
values and rights. This amendment aligns with the Court’s recognition of the 
need for laws to evolve with changing social conditions, as underscored in cases 
such as National Textile Workers’ Union v. P.R. Ramakrishnan and State v. S.J. 
Chowdhury, wherein, the Supreme Court has emphasized the importance of 
adapting statutory interpretation to contemporary societal values. By updating the 
language and definitions in the erstwhile POSH Act, this Bill acknowledges the 
shifting realities of gender identities and the evolving workforce. The amendment 
to cover persons of all gender identities, brings Indian law closer to global 
standards and recognizes the importance of inclusive workplace policies. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


IV 


Bill No. LXXII of 2024 


A Bill to establish an Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Committee to 
ensure regulation and development of urban areas in the country and for all matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the State 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) “Committee” means the Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) 
Committee established under section 3; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Establishment 
of Urban 
Areas 
(Development 
and 
Regulation) 
Committee. 


Functions of 
the 
Committee. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2] 


(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 


(d) “Urban Areas” means the territorial areas of a Municipality as is 
notified by the Government under article 243Q of the Constitution. 


Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, “Municipality” means an 
institution of Self-Government constituted under article 243Q of the 
Constitution. 


(+) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a Committee to be known as the Urban Areas (Development 
and Regulation) Committee for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Committee shall consist of— 


(a) the Prime Minister of India who shall be the ex-officio 
Chairperson of the Committee; 


(b) the Union Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs — ex- 
officio Member; 


(c) one Member of Parliament each from the House of the 
People and the Council of States to be nominated by the Presiding 
Officers of the Houses concerned— ex-officio Member; 


(d) 4 representative of the NITI Aayog to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed— ex-officio 
Member; 


(e) arepresentative from the Indian Administrative Services to 
be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed, who shall be the Member-Secretary to the Committee; and 


(f) one senior architect engineer to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner and on such salary and 
allowances and terms and conditions of service, as may be 
prescribed— Member. 


(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and 
staff, as it deems necessary, to aid the efficient functioning of the 
Committee. 


(4) The salary, allowances and other terms of conditions of services of 
officers and staff of the Committee shall be such, as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Committee shall meet at least twice in a month and shall observe such 
rules of procedure with regard to transaction of business at its meetings as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


Provided that the Committee shall meet at such time and place and at 
such intervals, as the Chairperson of the Committee deems fit. 


Provided further that the Union Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
shall provide secretarial assistance during the meetings of the Committee. 


(2) The Committee shall recommend to the appropriate Government to,— 


(a) ensure availability of means for the development and 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


regulation of urban areas under this jurisdiction; 


(b) impart modern training in techniques of urban development 
to the institutions and persons involved in the regulation and 
development of urban areas; 


(c) ensure adherence to the stipulated method for financing the 
development of urban areas, i.e, seventy-five percent. of the 
expenditure shall be borne by the Central Government and rest of the 
twenty-five percent. by the State Government; 


(d) put an obligation onthe District Magistrate concerned to 
ensure appropriate development and regulation of urban areas under his 
jurisdiction; 

(e) establish durable, strong and inclusive infrastructure 


required for the development and regulation of urban areas in the 
country; 


(f) establish natural land cover including parks and 
playgrounds in the urban areas in the country; 


(g) ensure availability of safe housing, clean water, water 
management, healthcare facilities and appropriate educational facilities 
in the urban areas of the country; 


(h) ensure complete ban on encroachment upon lakes, wet 
lands and rivers; 


(i) establish balance between supply and demand of public 
transport facilities in the urban areas; 


(j) ensure availability of electric buses, establish bus corridor 
and bus rapid transit system for promoting green mobility in the urban 
areas; 


(k) promote e-participation of urban local bodies in the 
development and regulation of urban area under their jurisdiction; 


(!) establish suburbs along with metropolitan cities to make a 
balance between population and resources; and 


(m) undertake such other measures as are required for the 
regulation and development of urban areas; 


(2) The Committee shall prescribe the form and manner and the time within 
which the appropriate Government shall prepare and submit an action taken 
report on its recommendations. 


The appropriate Government shall prepare a report on the action taken on the 
recommendations of the Committee including the reasons for non- 
implementation and/or delay in taking action thereon and submit the report to 
the Committee, in such form and manner and within such time, as may be 
prescribed by the Committee. 


(/) The Committee shall prepare once every year, in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed, an annual report giving the summary of its activities, 
including schemes it has undertaken and recommended to the State 


Duties of the 
appropriate 
Government. 


Annual report. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


Governments during the previous calendar year containing therein the 
statements of annual accounts of the Authority. 


(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and 
the Central Government shall lay the report before each House of Parliament 
as soon as it is received. 


Central 7. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due 
पक appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds 
0 provide f रे शि 
funds. or carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
Power to 8. ‘If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
eee Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make 
ifficulty. : Daler . : ; a : 
z such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of any 
difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of three years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 
Power to 9. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules. 


make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this section, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid , both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


India’s biggest tragedy after independence is the migration of about fifty crore 
people from their ancestral homes and villages. A study of the changes in this socio- 
economic structure reveals that almost one-third of the country’s population (about 
3.6 percent.) is now living in cities. Census data of 20! shows that the number of 
people leaving the villages and migrating to the cities is increasing constantlyand 
now thirty-seven crore and seventy lakh people live in the cities. On comparing the 
figures of 200l and 20I census, it is found that during this period the population of 
cities increased by nine crore and ten lakhs, whereas the population of villages 
increased by only nine crore and five lakh. 


The population of villages in the country is still about 68.84 crore, that is, two- 
thirds of the total population of the country, but the contribution of agriculture in the 
country’s GDP has been continuously decreasing to only fifteen per cent. There is a 
decline in the standard of living in villages, lack of education, health care and basic 
facilities and lack of employment, and so people there are moving to the cities in 
search of a better life. As a result, all big cities including the metropolitan cities of 
the country have turned into slums. Out of a total of 7.89 crore families living in 
cities across the country, !.37 crore families live in slums. 


Urbanization should be seen as an opportunity and urban centers as engines of 
growth. Urban and rural development in the country should complement each other. 
If we analyze from the perspective of development in the field of urbanization in 
different States of India, it is evident that the quantum and speed of urbanization in 
different States is not the same. For urbanization and development to move on the 
same track, there should be people-centric urban development, which can weave the 
fabric of such cities and which shall be built according to the required global 
standards. A city that is two steps ahead of people’s aspirations, a city built on 
global best practices, a city that integrates technology, transportation, energy 
efficiency, proximity to work, etc. A city where all urban development plans are 
undertaken with people’s participation. 


As per a report by the United Nations, globally, a total of 3i such cities are 
home to an estimated 5 crore people. This is 6.8 per cent. of the world’s total 
population. By the year 2030, the number of mega cities shall increase to 4] and 
their population shall be 7.3 crore, which would be 8.7 per cent. of the population of 
the entire world. The administrative boundaries of the cities have not been relied 
upon in this report. Instead, priority has been given to use the concept of growing 
urban area. The report reveals that only people from urban areas live in these mega 
cities. About 2! per cent. of the world’s people live in cities, whose population is 
between 50 thousand and one crore. By the year 2030, 60 percent of the world’s 
population shall live in small and big cities, which is currently 54 per cent. Most 
developing cities in Asia and Africa are seeing population growth, and by 2030, 33 
of the 4 mega cities shall be in third world countries. 


According to a report by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of 
United Nations, by the year 2030, India shall have seven mega cities, each with a 
population of 96 lakh. Among these seven, Delhi shall be second in terms of 
population. 


The World Cities Report, 206 states that at present, the country has five mega 
cities, - Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore and Chennai, each with a population of 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


more than one crore. Hyderabad and Ahmedabad will also join the ranks by the year 
2030. 


The need is to create development centers across the country instead of 
adopting foreign models for urbanization. Inequality and imbalance shall increase 
further by adopting foreign models. Uneven and imbalanced urbanization is not 
correct considering the diversity of India. In view of the above, the present Bill is 
very important so that the people of the urban areas of India may be able to live in 
conditions suitable for humans. 


Hence, this Bill. 
BHIM SINGH 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of an Urban Areas 
(Development and Regulation) Committee with a senior architect engineer to be 
appointed as a member thereto. It also provides for appointment of requisite number 
of officers and staff to assist the Committee as well as their salary and allowances 
and other terms and conditions of their service. Clause 7 provides for the Central 
Government to provide requisite funds to the Committee for carrying out the 
purposes of the Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees 
two hundred crore per annum will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, in consultation with 
the State Governments, to make such order or give such direction for removing any 
difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. Clause 9 empowers the 
Central Government to frame rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the 
orders, directions and rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


28 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Bill No. LXV of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 


India as follows:— 


. 


(3) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


In the Preamble to the Constitution, the words "SOCIALIST" and 
"SECULAR" shall be omitted. 


Nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of any provision of the 
Constitution, unless explicitly amended by Parliament in exercise of its 
constituent power under article 368. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
the Preamble. 


Act not to affect 
operation of any 
provision of the 
Constitution. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The purpose of this Bill is to omit the words ‘Socialist’ and 'Secular' from 
the Preamble to the Constitution of India, which were added by way of the 
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 976. This Bill seeks to correct the 
apparent violation of democratic standards and to restore the original, unaltered 
Preamble adopted by the Constituent Assembly on November 26, 949 and its 
constitutional validity in accordance with the original vision of the founding 
fathers of the Constitution and to address the deep ideological tensions that were 
triggered during the Emergency period. 


The Forty-second Amendment, commonly referred to as the ‘Mini 
Constitution’, was enacted in 976 during a time when the country was placed 
under a state of Emergency when civil liberties were suspended, and most of the 
leaders of the opposition were imprisoned. The said amendment was passed by 
the Parliament expeditiously leading to widespread concerns about its 
implications. The apparent arbitrariness of this process, the absence of opposition 
dissent and the imprisonment of leaders have raised questions about its 
constitutional validity and the sanctity of the democratic process to this day. 


The words 'Socialist' and 'Secular' were not in the original Preamble and 
this was a reasoned priority of the founding fathers of the Constitution. The 
founding father of the Constitution, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, clearly opposed the 
inclusion of the term “Socialist”, stating that it would “completely destroy 
democracy”, as it would bind the future generations to a particular economic 
ideology and deprive them of the freedom to choose their own paths according to 
time and circumstances. Similarly, he considered the term "Secular" unnecessary, 
as the fundamental structure of the Constitution had already ensured the religious 
freedom and the neutrality of the State in Articles 25 to 28. The Preamble was a 
fundamental principle declaration, not a code bound by any rigid ideological 
framework. Thus, omission of these words would be a sign of respect towards the 
original intent and vision of the Constituent Assembly. 


It is also significant that even in the absence of these words in the 
Constitution, it had clearly incorporated the principles of protecting the rights of 
the minorities, and ensuring religious freedom, and economic justice. From the 
very beginning, the values of liberty, equality, justice, and fraternity have been at 
the core of the Preamble and the Constitution. Therefore, it is reasonable to say 
that the Constitution was inclusive and equitable even without these additional 
words. 


"Socialism" and "Secularism" are often considered western concepts that 
do not align with cultural and civilisational traditions of India. India's religious 
perspective is based on the principle of ‘Sarva Dharma Samabhava’, which 
reflects a sense of equal respect for every religion, rather than the necessity of 
complete separation of religion from the State. In the Indian tradition, religion has 
been an integral part of life, not an element that should be completely separated 
from public life. After the addition of the term 'Secular', a misconception arose 
that the State has to maintain distance from all religious activities, which is 
contrary to the spirit of the Indian tradition. 


Similarly, the Indian version of socialism turned into a system of 
government control, subsidy-based arrangements, and a bureaucratic mechanism, 
which stifled the possibilities of innovation, competition, and private initiative. It 
could neither eradicate poverty nor mitigate economic inequality. Instead, it gave 
birth to a corrupt and inefficient system. In contrast, Indian economic concepts 
such as Gandhian 'trusteeship' have been based upon service, obligation, and 
community welfare. 


The addition of these words has led to criticism as promoting ‘artificial 
secularism’ and ‘politics of appeasement’ . Removal of these words will allow 
India to redefine its national identity and guiding principles based on its own 
cultural and philosophical heritage. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


The addition of these words through the 42nd amendment was an apparent 
violation of democratic ideals. Through this Bill, the Parliament can send a clear 
message that constitutional amendments should only be made through free and fair 
democratic deliberations and not as a tool for centralization of power or 
authoritarian tendencies. 


Though, the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India has held 'Secularism' and 
‘Socialism' as part of the basic structure of the Constitution, as seen in the rulings 
such as Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala (973) and the recent Dr. 
Balaram Singh vs. Union of India (2024), this Bill is a strong assertion of the 
legislative sovereignty of the Parliament. This gives the judiciary an opportunity to 
review whether any principle could be part of that “Basic Structure” which has 
been added to the Constitution through an apparent undemocratic process, while 
democracy itself is the fundamental basis of the basic structure. This legislative 
initiative simultaneously challenges the judicial concepts and also demonstrates 
that the will of Parliament is the highest constitutional expression in a democracy. 


Hence, this Bill. 
BHIM SINGH. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3] 


VI 


Bill No. XCII of 2024 


A Bill to establish mandatory procedures for evaluating the impact of enacted 
legislation within each Ministry of the Central Government, creating 
Legislative Impact Assessment Units to ensure comprehensive 
assessments, administrative planning, stakeholder engagement, 
and centralised oversight through a Legislative Impact 
Assessment Committee and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


l. 0) This Act may be called the Legislative Impact Assessment Act, 2024. Short title and 
commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Establishment 
of Legislative 
Impact 
Assessment 
Units. 


Composition of 
the Unit. 


32 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


2. 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Committee" means the Legislative Impact Assessment 
Committee, a central oversight body constituted under section 9 of 
this Act; 


(b) “enacted legislation” or “legislation” means any Government or 
Private Members’ Bill considered and passed by both Houses of 
Parliament and duly notified in the Official Gazette as an Act of 
Parliament after assent by the President of India; 


(c) "impact assessment or legislative impact assessment" means a 
structured evaluation process to assess the social, economic, 
environmental, administrative, and judicial effects of enacted 
legislation; 


(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(e) “public consultation” means the conducting of a physical or 
online meeting between the Legislative Impact Assessment Units 
within each Ministry/ Department, the identified stakeholder(s) 
and/or the general public to discuss and receive inputs on enacted 
legislation or obtaining feedback /opinion from them in such form as 
may be prescribed; 


(f) "stakeholders" include individuals, groups, or organisations likely 
to be affected by the legislation; and 


(g) "Unit" means the Legislative Impact Assessment Unit, a 
specialised unit established within each Ministry / Department under 
section 3 of this Act, to carry out legislative impact assessments as 
per the provisions of this Act. 


CHAPTER II 
LEGISLATIVE IMPACT ASSESSMENT UNITS 


0) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish, a Legislative Impact Assessment Unit, within each 
Ministry or Department of the Central Government, which shall be 
responsible for assessing the impact of an enacted legislation, coming 
under its jurisdiction. 


(2) Each Unit shall operate independently within each Ministry/ 
Department, to ensure the objective and impartial analysis of the enacted 
legislation. 


(3) Each Unit shall have the power to regulate its own procedure with 
respect to the conduct of and transaction of its business with respect to the 
functions assigned to it under the Act. 


Each Unit shall consist of the following, namely — 


(i) a Chairperson — to be appointed by the Central Government, in such 
manner, as may be prescribed; 


(ii) the following officers of the Ministry/Department concerned as ex- 
officio Members — 


(a) Secretary of the Ministry/Department; 
(b) Additional Secretary of the Ministry/Department; and 


(c) Joint Secretary of the Ministry/Department; 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


(iii) the following persons to be appointed by the Central Government 
as Judicial Members, in such manner as may be prescribed: 


(a) one retired Supreme Court Judge; and 
(b) two retired High Court Judges. 


(iv) Subject matter experts like policy analysts, economists, 
environmentalists, public health experts, data analysts etc., as external 
(ad-hoc) Members, to be appointed by the Central Government, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 


(v) any other persons as the Ministry / Department concerned may 
consider necessary for the effective discharge of the functions of the 
Unit, as Members, to be appointed by the Central Government, in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the total number of Members of the Unit shall not at 
any point of time exceed twenty. 


5... 0) The Chairperson and Members of the Unit shall hold office for such 
term, as may be prescribed. 


Provided that the Judicial and ad-hoc Members of the Unit shall hold 
office for a term not exceeding six years from the date on which they enter 
upon office and shall not be eligible for reappointment. 


(2) The qualifications and experience, salaries, remuneration and 
allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, 
the Chairperson and Members of the Unit shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


6... 0) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section () of section 5, 
the Chairperson or any Member may, by writing given under his hand to 
the Central Government, resign from his office at any time. 


(2) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office, the 
Chairperson or any Member, if the Chairperson, or as the case may be, 
such other member — 


(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or 


(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence 
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; or 


(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
competent court; or 


(d) refuses to act or has become physically or mentally incapable 
of acting in his official capacity; or 


(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Unit, absent 
from three consecutive meetings of the Unit; or 


(9 has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his 
office as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the 
interest of office or the public interest: 


Provided that no person shall be removed from office under this 
clause, unless that person has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in the matter. 


Term of office 
and conditions 
of service of the 
Chairperson and 
Members. 


Resignation and 
removal and 
filling of 
vacancy(ies). 


34 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Officers and 7. 


Staff of each 
Unit. 


Functions of 8. 


the Unit. 


Constitution of 9, 


the Legislative 
Impact 
Assessment 
Committee. 


(3) Any vacancy in the Units shall be filled as soon as may be possible 
and, in any case, not later than three months from the date of occurrence of 
such vacancy. 


(0) The Central Government, shall provide such number of officers 
and staff to each Unit, as may be considered necessary for the efficient 
discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(2) The method of recruitment, the qualifications and experience, the 
salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of 
service of, the officers and staff, so appointed, shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


Each Unit shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely:— 


(i) _ examine whether the enacted legislation is meeting its intended 
objectives using data-driven metrics, policy analysis, and feedback 
from affected groups; 


(ii) conduct analyses to detect any unforeseen impacts or 
implementation challenges, including those related to administrative 
burden, financial costs, or social welfare or economic, 
environmental and legal impacts; 


(iii) evaluate the effectiveness, compliance, and implementation 
outcomes of enacted legislation and conduct performance 
measurement to assess the results against measurable outcomes; 


(iv) conduct perception surveys involving stakeholder consultation 
of the perceived impact, both benefits and costs, of enacted 
legislation; 


(v) ensure alignment with the guidelines issued by the Committee 
and best practices, especially in complex or cross-sectoral 
legislation; 


(vi) generate detailed Legislative Impact Assessment Reports 
summarising findings and assessment results related to legislative 
impact of legislations and containing recommendations including 
amendments or improvements in existing legislation, and data 
visualisations thereof, for transparency and public access, in 
accordance with the stipulated timelines and in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed and submit such reports to the 
Committee; 


(vii) provide technical and policy advice to the Ministry/Department 
concerned on the legislative process and regulatory changes required 
to address any issues identified; and 


(viii) any other matter related to legislative impact assessment or 
otherwise, which may be referred to it by the Central Government 
from time to time. 


CHAPTER III 
LEGISLATIVE IMPACT ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE 


(0) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a body, to be known as the Legislative Impact 
Assessment Committee (LIAC), to exercise the powers conferred on, 
and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act. 


(2) The Committee shall serve as a central body to provide oversight, 
guidance, and support to the Units established under section 3 in 
conducting legislative impact assessments. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


(3) The Committee shall function under the administrative control of the 
Union Ministry of Law and Justice and shall operate in accordance with 
such regulations and guidelines, as may be issued by the Ministry, from 
time to time, for the effective discharge of its functions under this Act. 


0. The Committee shall consist of the following, namely, — 
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be: 
(a) a retired Judge of the Supreme Court of India, or 


(b) a distinguished jurist with not less than twenty-five years of 
experience in constitutional and administrative law, 


to be appointed by the President of India by warrant under his hand 
and seal on the recommendation, in such manner as may be prescribed, 
of a Selection Committee, which shall consist of: 


(a) the Prime Minister of India; 

(b) the Chief Justice of India; and 

(c) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People; 
(ii) five Ex-officio Members, namely — 


(a) Secretary, Legislative Department, Union Ministry of Law and 
Justice - Member Secretary; 


(b) Secretary, Union Ministry of Finance; 
(c) Secretary, Union Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs; 
(d) Secretary, NITI Aayog; and 


(e) Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, Union Ministry of Law 
and Justice; 


(iii) three Judicial Members, namely — 


(a) two retired High Court Judges, to be nominated by the Chief 
Justice of India, in such manner as may be prescribed; and 


(b) one senior advocate with expertise in legislative drafting, to be 
nominated by the Minister of Law and Justice, in such manner as 
may be prescribed; 


(iv) six Expert Members, namely, to be appointed by the Union 
Ministry of Law and Justice, on the recommendation of the Search- 
cum-Selection Committee as provided under section 2 and in such 
manner as may be prescribed— 


(a) three distinguished policy experts with experience in: 
(i) public policy and governance; or 
(ii) economic and social impact assessment; or 
(iii) data analytics and research methodology. 

(b) one expert in environmental impact assessment; 

(c) one expert in technology and digital governance; and 


(d) one expert in public administration; 


Composition of 
the Committee. 


Qualifications 
for appointment 
to the 
Committee. 


Selection 
Process of 
Expert and 
Academic 
Members of the 
Committee. 


Terms of office 
and conditions 
of service of 
the Chairperson 
and Members. 


Resignation 
and removal. 


36 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


il. 


2. 


3. 


4. 


(v) two Academic Members, who shall be distinguished professors 
from premier institutions specializing in the following:— 


(a) law and governance; or 
(b) public policy or social sciences, 


to be appointed by the Union Ministry of Law and Justice on the 
recommendation of the Search-cum-Selection Committee as provided 
under section 2 and in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(0) All Members including the Chairperson to be appointed to the 
Committee shall have at least fifteen years of experience in their respective 
fields; and 


(2) The Chairperson and all Members shall have demonstrated experience 
in policy analysis, legislative review or impact assessment; and 


(3) The Chairperson and no Member shall have any conflict of interest 
with their role in the Committee. 


(/) A Search-cum-Selection Committee, to be headed by the Cabinet 
Secretary shall, recommend names for appointment as Expert and 
Academic Members of the Committee, in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 


(2) The selection process shall ensure representation from diverse 
backgrounds and expertise relevant to the functions of the Committee and 
shall be in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Provided that at least one-third of the total number of Expert and 
Academic Members so selected shall be women. 


(0) The Chairperson shall hold office for a term not exceeding five years 
and shall not be eligible for reappointment; 


(2) The Expert and Academic Members shall hold office for a term not 
exceeding three years and shall not be eligible for reappointment; and 


(3) All other Members shall hold office for such term as may be prescribed 
and shall be eligible for reappointment for an additional term. 


(4) The salaries, remunerations and allowances payable to and other 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of 
the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(0) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7) of section 3, 
the Chairperson may, by writing given under his hand to the President, 
resign from his office at any time. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (2) and (3) of 
section 3, any Member of the Committee may, by writing given under 
his hand to the Union Ministry of Law and Justice, resign from his office 
at any time. 


(3) The President may, by order, remove from office, the Chairperson and 
the Union Ministry of Law and Justice may, by order, remove from office, 
any Member, if the Chairperson, or as the case may be, such other 
member — 


(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or 


(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, 
in the opinion of the President or the Union Ministry of Law and 
Justice, involves moral turpitude; or 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


5. 


6. 


7. 


(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent 
court; or 


(d) refuses to act or has become physically or mentally incapable of 
acting in his official capacity; or 


(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Committee, 
absent from three consecutive meetings of the Committee; or 


(f) has, in the opinion of the President or the Union Ministry of Law 
and Justice, so abused his office as to render his continuance in office 
detrimental to the interest of office or the public interest: 


Provided that no person shall be removed from office under this 
clause, unless that person has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in the matter. 


(7) Any vacancy in the Committee shall be filled as soon as may be 
possible and, in any case, not later than three months from the date of 
such vacancy. 


(2) No act or proceeding of the Committee shall be questioned or shall be 
invalidated merely by reason of: 


(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 
Committee; or 


(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or 
Member of the Committee; or 


(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Committee not affecting 
the merits of the case. 


(0) The Committee shall meet at least once every quarter in each calendar 
year. 


(2) The quorum for the meetings of the Committee shall be one-half of the 
total members of the Committee. 


(3) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Committee and 
in his absence, any Member, so elected by the Committee from the 
Members present, shall preside. 


(4) The decisions of the Committee shall be taken by majority vote of the 
members present at such meeting, and in the case of an equality of votes 
on any matter, the Chairperson shall have, and exercise, a casting vote. 


() The Committee shall be assisted in the efficient discharge of its 
functions under the Act by a secretariat, headed by the Member 
Secretary of the Committee. 


(2) The secretariat shall consist of such number of officers and staff 
including technical staff for data analysis, research, and coordination 
with the Legislative Impact Assessment Units, as may be deemed 
necessary, to be appointed by the Union Law and Justice, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The method of recruitment, qualifications and experience, salaries 
and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service 
of, the officers and staff, so appointed, shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


Vacancy(ies) 
etc. 


Meetings of the 
Committee and 
quorum. 


Administrative 
support to the 
Committee. 


38 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Functions of 8. 
the Committee. 


Timelines for 9. 
Legislative 

Impact 

Assessments. 


Process of the 20. 
Assessments. 


The Committee shall perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely: — 


() formulate and mandate policy guidelines and assessment 
methodologies for the Units to ensure uniform quality and reliable 
assessments across Ministries/Departments; 


(ii) oversee and verify the assessments conducted by the Units to 
ensure objective, data-based analyses; 


(iii) formulate and forward standardized data collection, analysis 
protocols and public consultation methodologies to each Unit to 
ensure that assessments made by them are data-driven, unbiased and 
consistent; 


(iv) compile the findings received from the Unit of each Ministry or 
Department in the form of Legislative Impact Assessment Reports, as 
referred to under clause (vi) of section 8 into a Consolidated Annual 
Legislative Impact Assessment Report, outlining the successes, 
challenges and the extent of fulfillment of the objectives of the 
legislation and summarising trends, challenges, and recommendations 
of the Committee, in accordance with the timelines and in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed and take further action thereon in 
accordance with the provisions of section 23 of the Act; 


(v) facilitate inter-Ministry cooperation for laws that intersect 
multiple jurisdictions to ensure thorough cross-sectoral assessments; 


(vi) the functions as stipulated in sub-sections (3) to (6) of section 22 
and sub-sections (2) and (5) of section 24; and 


(vii) any other matter related to its functions or otherwise, which may 
be referred to it by the Central Government, from time to time. 


CHAPTER IV 
ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY AND PROCESS 


The initial legislative impact assessment shall be conducted within three 
years from the date of commencement of each Central legislation and 
subsequently periodic assessments shall be carried out at intervals of every 
five to ten years, as deemed necessary. 


The process for conducting legislative impact assessments shall include 
any or all of the following methodologies, namely, — 


(a) Data-Driven Audits — using advanced data analytics tools to evaluate 
the impact and performance of legislation; 


(b) Stakeholder Consultations — gathering real-time feedback from 
those affected by the legislation; 


(c) Periodic Reviews — conducting assessments at mandated intervals, 
as may be prescribed, based on clear performance indicators such as 
economic growth, social welfare metrics, and environmental impact; 
and 


(d) Field Surveys and Case Studies — conducting targeted research on 
regional and sectoral impacts of the legislation. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


2i. 


22. 


CHAPTER V 
DATA COLLECTION AND STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT 


(0) Every Unit shall employ standardised data collection, analysis 
protocols and public consultation methodologies, as mandated by the 
Committee, to ensure that assessments are data-driven, unbiased, and 
consistent. 


(2) Ministries or Departments with overlapping responsibilities shall 
collaborate in data sharing and analysis, providing a unified understanding 
of the legislation’s impact across sectors. 


(3) Ministries or Departments shall collect, both quantitative and 
qualitative data, employing qualitative research methods, including 
document analysis, in-depth interviews with key informants from 
legislative, administrative, and legal sectors, individuals impacted by laws, 
and experts in various fields on the implementation and effects of the 
legislation. 


(4) The primary intention of data collection shall be to assess whether the 
intended objectives of the legislation are being achieved, and to analyse 
unintended consequences, cross-sector impacts, and cost-benefit metrics. 


(5) Data collection and analysis protocols shall ensure collection and 
maintenance of comprehensive and reliable data, with data interoperability 
and integral ‘anti-fudging’ mechanism inbuilt therein. 


(6) A digital tool such as ‘leanbot’ shall be developed and deployed to 
prevent legal conflicts, ambiguities and enactment of cross-purpose and 
overlapping laws regarding antitrust through self-identification of 
commonalities and potential conflicts across related laws and resolution 
thereof. 


(7) With the objective of gaining deeper insights into the long-term effects 
of major legislation, longitudinal studies spanning ten to fifteen years shall 
be initiated, aiming to identify socio-economic, environmental, and legal 
impacts that may not be immediately apparent in short-term assessments. 


(0) The Committee shall identify key stakeholders, from amongst — 


(a) citizens, in particular directly affected groups, civil society 
organisations, industry leaders, academia, activists, unions and 
associations, other interest and pressure groups; and 


(b) local elected Governments bodies such as Panchayats, Zila 
Parishads, Municipalities, bureaucrats, self-help groups, who shall 
play a crucial role in data collection and analysis. 


(2) Zila Parishads shall serve as primary entities for data collection, and 
shall collect data by employing a bottom-up approach, collecting diverse, 
representative, and authentic feedback through gram panchayats. 


(3) The Committee shall organise state level, focused group 
consultations, in both urban and rural areas, including discussions 
with civil society organisations, industry leaders, academia, activists, 
unions and associations, other interest and pressure groups, allowing 
for a more inclusive approach to gathering feedback, considering the 
needs of various societal groups. 


(4) The Committee shall organize expert workshops’ with 
academicians, economists, legal professionals, and sectoral experts, 
involving policy think tanks, Universities, and associations for in- 
depth technical discussions and data-driven assessments of the laws. 


Data Collection 
and = Analysis 
Protocols. 


Stakeholder 
engagement and 
public feedback. 


Legislative 
Impact 
Assessment 
Report. 


Submission of 
Annual 
Legislative 
Impact 
Assessment 
Report to 
Parliament. 


Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 


40 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


23. 


24. 


25. 


(5) The Committee shall establish a dedicated digital portal, where 
citizens can submit their opinions, grievances, and suggestions on any 
Central legislation, ensuring a streamlined and accessible feedback 
process. 


(6) The Committee shall widely publicise the dates, locations, and 
formats for consultations through newspapers, government websites, 
official notifications, and radio and TV broadcasts to ensure broad 
public awareness. 


CHAPTER VI 
REPORTING AND PARLIAMENTARY OVERSIGHT 


(0) The Committee shall publish the Annual Legislative Impact 
Assessment Report, as referred to under clause (iv) of section 8, on its 
website in a conspicuous manner for access by the general public and invite 
feedback/suggestions from all stakeholders including the general public, in 
accordance with the timelines as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Committee shall after collecting and analyzing the feedback 
received, generate easily understandable data visualizations and concise 
policy briefs and publish them as an Addendum to the Report, referred to 
in sub-section (/), to ensure that both government officials and the general 
public can easily grasp the key findings and recommendations contained 
therein. 


(3) The Committee shall also facilitate translation of such Reports into all 
the regional languages given under the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution 
to enable their wide-spread access, availability and understanding by 
diverse stakeholders. 


(0) The Committee shall submit the Annual Legislative Impact Assessment 
Report, along with its Addendum, as referred to under sub-section (2) of 
section 23, and containing recommendations for necessary amendments in 
legislations, within six months of its completion, to the Central 
Government, who shall, as soon as it is received, cause it to be laid before 
each House of Parliament. 


(2) The Committee shall forward the Report, as referred to in sub-section 
(0), after its presentation to Parliament, to the concemed Ministry or 
Department for initiating necessary amendments to the legislations 
concerned and bringing an amendment Bill, as the case may be, after due 
process, for consideration and passing by the Parliament: 


(3) The Ministries or Departments concerned shall lay the Action Taken 
Report on the Report of the Committee, as referred to in sub-section (2) 
containing therein the status of action taken on the recommendations 
contained therein and the reasons for non-acceptance, if any, of any of the 
recommendations of the Committee, before each House of Parliament. 


0) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to 
time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The funds so provided under sub-section () shall be allocated to 
each Ministry / Department of the Central Government, for the 
purpose of meeting expenditure incurred on establishment and 
maintenance of their respective Legislative Impact Assessment Units, 
including personnel and operational expenses, such as data collection, 
and other resources required for the performance of its functions 
under this Act. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4l 


26. 


27. 


CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(0) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may 
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


(7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to make 
rules. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


In India, once laws are enacted, there is often insufficient follow-up to 
determine whether these laws achieve their intended objectives or create 
unforeseen challenges. This gap in post-legislative assessment has led to significant 
issues, including excessive burdens on the judiciary, confusion in implementation, 
and unintended hardships for citizens. A structured framework for evaluating the 
impact of laws after enactment will address these issues, allowing for informed 
adjustments and amendments, where necessary. 


The Bill aims to create a transparent system/process for checking how well 
laws are working after they are put into action, analysing their effects on intended 
stakeholders and communities, to make sure they are helpful, relevant and fulfilling 
the intended objectives. By setting up regular reviews, the Bill helps hold 
lawmakers accountable, making it easier to spot and fix any unexpected errors, 
which is likely to lead to better governance and protect public interest. It also 
relieves the judiciary of excess burden to review every legislation that is passed by 
the legislature, wasting crucial time for a country so burdened with pending 
caseload. An in-built legislative mechanism that will carry out comprehensive 
legislative impact assessment at regular intervals post enactment of a law will 
ensure that the crucial practice of post enactment impact assessment is carried out 
systematically without arbitrary, ad hoc burden on other institutions. 


In recent years, legislative amendments to the Consumer Protection Act, 
209 and Section 38 of the Negotiable Instruments Act have been brought before 
judicial review where courts have highlighted the importance of legislative impact 
assessment. Amendments to the Consumer Protection Act expanded district forum 
jurisdiction, leading to a surge in cases and overwhelming the judicial system. 
Similarly, Section 438 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, provisioning 
criminalization of cheque-bounce cases has placed nearly i5 per cent. of criminal 
case burdens on courts. These examples underscore the need for structured impact 
assessments to identify such issues early and adjust legislation accordingly. 


Legislative impact assessments are standard practice in other democracies. 
Countries like the United Kingdom and Finland have successfully implemented 
frameworks to ensure regular, data-informed reviews of laws. The United 
Kingdom, for example, mandates legislative assessments for regulatory and policy 
interventions, while Finland and Kenya employ structured frameworks for 
assessing the economic, social, and administrative impacts of new laws. Aligning 
India’s legislative process with these international practices would foster a more 
transparent and effective governance system, responsive to the evolving needs of 
society. 


This Bill proposes a decentralised model, establishing Legislative Impact 
Assessment Units (LIAUs) within each Ministry, supported by a central Legislative 
Impact Assessment Committee (LIAC). These LIAUs will conduct thorough 
assessments, measuring impacts on social welfare, economic stability, 
administrative efficiency, and judicial resources. Such a framework will ensure that 
each Ministry takes responsibility for its legislation, and a centralised LIAC will 
provide oversight, guidelines, and periodic reporting to Parliament. 


The Legislative Impact Assessment Act, 2024 will enable evidence-based 
adjustments to legislation, reduce judicial burdens, and improve public 
accountability. By instituting a structured evaluation process, this Bill will support 
good governance and contribute to a well-functioning legal system that aligns with 
the evolving needs of the people of India. 


Hence this Bill. 


K. R. SURESH REDDY 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Legislative Impact 
Assessment Units (LIAUs) in each Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government and Clause 4 provides for the composition of each Unit. Clause 5 
provides for the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and Members of each Unit, whereas Clause 7 provides that the Central 
Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff to each Unit to assist 
their functioning and for the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and 
conditions of service of such officers and staff. 


Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Legislative Impact 
Assessment Committee (LIAC), to guide and monitor the activities of the Units and 
Clause 0 provides for the composition of the Committee. Clause 3 inter alia 
provides for the salaries and allowances payable to and other conditions of service 
of the Chairperson and Members of the Committee, Clause 7 provides for a 
Secretariat consisting of such number of officers and staff including technical staff 
to assist the functioning of the Committee and for the salaries and allowances 
payable to them and their conditions of service. Clause 22 lays down some of the 
functions of the Committee such as organising of public consultations and 
workshops with diverse stakeholders and the general public for data collection and 
assessment of legislative impact etc. and establishing a dedicated web portal for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 25 provides that the Central 
Government shall provide adequate funds for the purposes of the Bill and such 
funds shall be allocated to each Ministry/Department of the Central Government 
for the purpose of meeting expenditure incurred on establishment and maintenance 
of their respective Legislative Impact Assessment Units, including personnel and 
operational expenses, such as data collection, and other resources required for the 
performance of its functions under this Act. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure, both of recurring and 
non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is difficult 
to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved at this juncture. 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make such 
provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving 
effect to the provisions of the Bill. Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Government to make rules, for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 


As the matters in respect of which rules or orders may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


Vil 


Bill No. XCV of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Representation of the People Act, /950. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic 


of India as follows:— 


Short title and 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) 
commencement. 


Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


Amendment of 
section 20A. 


Insertion of 
new _ section 
20B. 


Usual 
Resident. 


46 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


4. 


In the Representation of the People Act, !950 (hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Act), in section 9, in clause (b), for the words, “is ordinarily 
resident in a constituency”, the words, “is ordinarily or usual resident in a 
constituency”, shall be substituted. 


In the principal Act, in section 20A, after sub-section (3), the following 
new sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, a citizen of 
India residing outside the country for employment, education, or 
other purposes for a time period not less than a year, shall be entitled 
to cast their vote in elections through a method as prescribed by the 
Election Commission of India from the country of their current 
residence. 


(5) The Election Commission shall take measures to enable a citizen 
mentioned in sub-section (4) to vote remotely, ensuring the security, 
confidentiality, and authenticity of the process, in accordance with 
the rules framed under the Representation of the People Act, 95.” 


In the principal Act, after section 20A, the following new section shall be 
inserted — 


“20B.(/) Any person, who has been staying continuously in a local 
area (village/town) within India for at least six months or intends to 
stay for six months or more shall be deemed as a usual resident of 
that place. 


Provided that if a person was not staying in the village/town 
continuously for six months, but was found to be staying there 
during the enumeration, with the intention to stay there continuously 
for six months or more, then that place shall be deemed to be the 
person’s usual place of residence and this category shall include, but 
not be limited to: 


(a) persons whose usual place of residence is evidenced by 
ongoing familial, social, or economic ties to the constituency for 
not less than six months; 


(b) inter-state migrants who have temporarily relocated for 
work, education, or other purposes for not less than six months; 


(2) The status of "usual resident" shall be determined without 
prejudice to any other residence status an individual may hold for 
other legal purposes; 


(3) A person may be considered a usual resident of only one 
constituency at any given time for the purposes of electoral 
registration; 


(4) No usual resident shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral 
roll of more than one constituency within a period of not less than six 
months, given that the person holds any other residence status in 
India in more than one constituency; 


(5) The Central Government in consultation with the Election 
Commission may prescribe additional criteria or documentation 
requirements to establish usual residence, ensuring that such 
requirements do not unduly burden the right to vote; 


(6) If any question arises as to where a person is usually resident 
within India at any relevant time, the question shall be determined 
with reference to all the facts of the case and to such rules as may be 
made in this behalf by the Central Government in consultation with 
the Election Commission. 


43 of 950. 


43 of 95]. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


(7) Any person, who disputes his inclusion in the electoral roll based 
on the determination of his usual place of residence within India may 
appeal in accordance with the provisions mentioned in section 24 of 
the Act. 


5. Inthe principal Act, in section 22— 


(i) in clause (b), for the words, “ordinary residence within the 
constituency”, the words, “ordinary or usual residence”, shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) in clause (c), for the words, “ordinarily resident”, the words, 
“ordinarily or usual resident”, shall be substituted. 


(iii) in the proviso, for the words, “ordinarily resident”, the words, 
“ordinarily or usual resident”, shall be substituted. 


6. Inthe principal Act, in section 27, in sub-section (5),— 


(i) in clause (a), for the words, “ordinarily resident”, the words, 
“ordinarily or usual resident”, shall be substituted. 


(ii) in clause (b), for the words “ordinarily resident”, the words 
“ordinarily or usual resident” shall be substituted. 


7. In the principal Act, in section 28, in sub-section (2), for clause (a), the 
following shall be substituted, namely— 


“the determination of ordinary residence under sub-section (7) of 
section 20 and the determination of usual residence under sub- 
sections (/) and (5) of section 20B;” 


8. In the principal Act, after section 29, the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“29A. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any 
other law for the time being in force or in any rule or regulation 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.” 


Amendment of 


section 22. 


Amendment of 


section 27. 


Amendment’ of 


section 28. 


Insertion of 


new section 
29A. 


Act to 
overriding 
effect. 


have 


48 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Representation of the People Act, 950, laid the foundation for 
India's electoral system, establishing the framework for voter registration and 
constituency delimitation. Over the years, this Act underwent several 
amendments to adapt to changing socio-political landscapes. Despite these 
changes, a significant challenge remains unresolved, low voter turnout during 
elections. 


One of the key factors contributing to this issue is internal migration, 
as identified in various assessments. Migrant voters who reside away from 
their home constituencies often face difficulties in returning to vote during 
polling day due to logistical and financial constraints. This challenge has 
been acknowledged by the Election Commission of India (ECI) as a critical 
factor affecting voter participation, particularly in States with historically low 
turnout. 


While the Constitution guarantees the right to vote and the 
Representation of the People Act, 950 provides the legal framework for 
voting, however, it still fails to enable domestic migrants to vote from their 
current place of residence. This issue is particularly pressing for India's large 
population of inter-state migrants, who often rely on seasonal employment 
and receive low wages. The scale of this challenge became evident in the 
209 general election, where 300 million eligible voters—twice the 
population of Russia—did not cast their ballots. The ECI highlighted internal 
migration as a key reason contributing to this low turnout. 


Therefore, the Bill envisages amending the Representation of the 
People Act, 950 to remove unreasonable restrictions imposed on domestic 
migrants by requiring them to be physically present in their constituencies. 
The Bill intends to add provisions to facilitate their voting to their home 
constituencies from a location within India where they have set up their usual 
place of residence for not less than six months. The Bill makes provision to 
ensure that there is only one registration per voter regardless of the status of 
the usual resident in any other residence they may hold for other legal 
purposes. This Bill, therefore, ensures that any individuals who have 
maintained a usual place of residence in a different constituency are entitled 
to vote for their home constituencies from their usual place of residence 
anywhere within India, thereby eliminating the need for them to travel to 
their ordinary residence to cast votes. This will not only empower the voting 
rights of the people of India but also mend the democratic deficit prevailing 
in India. 


A significant milestone in the amendments made to the principal Act 
was the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 20l0, which 
introduced Section 20A, allowing overseas Indian citizens to register as 
voters in their constituencies of ordinary residence. This amendment aimed to 
enfranchise the growing Indian diaspora, recognizing their right to participate 
in the democratic process of their home constituency. However, while this 
was a step forward in expanding voting rights, it did not fully address the 
logistical and financial challenges faced by Indian emigrants in returning 
back to their home constituencies to exercise their voting rights, thus 
necessitating further reform. 


Despite the existence of the constitutional right to vote and the 
provisions in the Representation of People Act, 950, it still fails to entitle 
Indian emigrants to vote from their usual place of residence. As per 
estimates, India has the largest diaspora population. Out of 99,844 registered 
NRI voters, only 25,606 cast their votes proving how a substantial portion of 
Indian citizens are deprived of their legitimate right to participate in the 
electoral process. Comparatively, in the 204 Parliamentary elections, only 
,846 NRIs were registered. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


The Ministry of External Affairs reports that there are 35.42 million 
foreign emigrants from India. Further, India is expected to have a migration 
rate of around forty per cent. in 2030, according to the India Employment 
Report 2024 by the Institute for Human Development and the International 
Labour Organization. In light of the growing foreign migration for study or 
work purposes, it becomes indispensable to provide them with voting rights 
from their usual residence instead of ordinary residence. The amendment in 
this Bill is introduced against the backdrop of several previous efforts to grant 
voting rights to Non-Resident Indians (NRIs). Notably, a Bill passed by the 
Lok Sabha in 20l8 sought to enable overseas voters to exercise their 
franchise from their place of residence abroad. However, the Bill lapsed due 
to the dissolution of the Lok Sabha. However, despite these attempts, the 
issue of extending voting rights to Indian emigrants remains unresolved, 
necessitating further legislative action to ensure their participation in the 
democratic process the Bill envisages amending the Representation of the 
People Act, 950 to remove unreasonable restrictions imposed on foreign 
emigrants by requiring them to be physically present in their constituencies. 
The Bill intends to add provisions to facilitate their voting to their home 
constituencies from a location where they have set their usual place of 
residence for not less than one year. The Bill makes provision to ensure that 
there is only one registration per voter regardless of the status of any other 
residence they may hold for other legal purposes. This Bill, therefore, ensures 
that any individuals who have maintained a usual place of residence in a 
different country are entitled to vote for their home constituencies from their 
usual place of residence, thereby eliminating the need for them to travel to 
their ordinary residence in India to cast votes. This will not only empower the 
voting rights of the people of India but also mend the democratic deficit 
prevailing in India. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


JEBI MATHER HISHAM 


50 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The amendment to the Representation of the People Act of !950 
vide Clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill, will entail certain initial costs for 
upgrading the electoral roll management systems, developing secure 
platforms for remote voting and voter verification, and conducting 
widespread voter education campaigns. Ongoing annual expenditures will 
involve maintaining these systems, training election officials, and 
managing the increased complexity of voter registration and verification 
processes. While the implementation of these amendments represents a 
substantial financial commitment, it is expected to provide long-term 
benefits by increasing voter participation, especially among domestic 
migrants and Indian migrants, thereby enhancing the democratic process. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of 
recurring and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, at this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure 
likely to be involved. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5] 


Vul 


Bill No. LXXXVI of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 203. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
PARTI 
PRELIMINARY 


l. 0) This Act may be called the Sexual Harassment of Women at Short title and 
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Amendment Act, 2024. मल 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment of 
section 4. 


Amendment of 
section 6. 


Amendment of 
section 7. 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


Insertion of 
new section 
lA. 


Replacement of 
the Presiding 
Officer or 
Member of the 
Internal 
Committee or 
Chairperson or 
Member of the 
Local 
Committee. 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


2. In the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition and __Redressal) Act, 20i3 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in section 4, — 


(i) in sub-section (2), in clause (2), after the existing proviso, the 
following new proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided further that wherever applicable, at least one of the 
members shall be a woman belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes or a minority 
community as notified by the Central Government, from time to time.” 


(ii) in sub-section (5), after clause (d), the following new clause shall 
be inserted, namely: — 


“(e) has been accused by the aggrieved woman of loss of trust and 
lack of confidence at any point of time during an inquiry,” 


3. Inthe principal Act, in section 6 — 


(6) in sub-section (0), the following new proviso shall be inserted, 
namely: — 


“Provided that if any District Officer fails to constitute a Local 
Committee, for whatsoever reasons, he shall be liable to a penalty 
in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to 
him.” 


(ii) in sub-section (2), the following new proviso shall be inserted, 
namely: — 


“Provided that the details of the nodal officer designated by the 
District Officer shall be made available and publicized through 
every local government office to enhance the accessibility of any 
aggrieved woman to their rights under this Act.” 


4. Inthe principal Act, in section 7 — 


(6) in sub-section (), after clause (b), the following new clause shall 
be inserted, namely: — 


“(bb) one Member to be nominated from amongst the women 
working in the informal sector, such as domestic work, 
construction, street vending, gig work, who have engaged in 
the field of social work and are committed to the cause of 
women;” 


(ii) in sub-section (3), after clause (d), the following new clause shall 
be inserted, namely: — 


“(e) has been accused by the aggrieved woman of loss of trust and 
lack of confidence at any point of time during an inquiry,” 


5. In the principal Act, in section 9, in sub-section (), for the words “three 
months”, wherever they occur, the words “one year”, shall be substituted. 


6. In the principal Act, after section , the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


“JA. Any aggrieved woman, who loses trust and lacks confidence 
in any Presiding Officer or Member of the Internal Committee or 
any Chairperson or Member of the Local Committee, at any point of 
time during an inquiry, may request in writing to the employer or the 
District Officer, as the case may be, to replace such member of the 
Internal Committee or Local Committee, as the case may be, until 
the inquiry is disposed of: 


4 of 203. 


22 of 2005. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


7. 


8. 


0. 


Provided that necessary action shall be taken by the employer 
or the District Officer, as the case may be, within a period of 
fifteen days from the date of receipt of such request: 


Provided further that both the aggrieved woman and the 
member so accused, shall, within the fifteen day period for 
processing the request for replacement, be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and/or to make a representation against 
the findings, before the Internal Committee or the Local 
Committee, as the case may be.” 


In the principal Act, in section 3, in sub-section (4), for the words “sixty 
days”, the words “thirty days”, shall be substituted. 


In the principal Act, for section 6, the following shall be substituted, 
namely: — 


“]6.60) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to 
Information Act, 2005, the contents of the complaint made under 
section 9, the identity and addresses of the aggrieved woman, 
respondent and witnesses, any information relating to conciliation 
and inquiry proceedings, recommendations of the Internal 
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, and the 
action taken by the employer or the District Officer under the 
provisions of this Act shall not be published, communicated or made 
known to the public, press and media in any manner: 


Provided that information may be disseminated regarding the 
justice secured to any victim of sexual harassment under this Act 
without disclosing the name, address, identity, or any other 
particulars calculated to lead to the identification of the aggrieved 
woman and witnesses. 


(2) Any person entrusted with the duty to handle or deal with the 
complaint or inquiry under the provisions of this Act, shall not 
disclose the case to the respondent in any means before formal 
communication by the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, 
as the case may be. 


(3) If the person who disclosed or publicized the identity and 
addresses of the aggrieved woman or witnesses, or contents of the 
complaint and inquiry proceedings, is a member of the Internal 
Committee or the Local Committee, the employer or the District 
Officer, as the case may be, shall take measures to immediately 
expel the guilty from the Internal Committee or the Local 
Committee.” 


In the principal Act, for section 7, the following shall be substituted, 
namely: — 


“J7, Where any person entrusted with the duty to handle or deal 
with the complaint, inquiry or any recommendations or action to be 
taken under the provisions of this Act, contravenes the provisions of 
sub-section (8) and sub-section (2) of section 6, such person shall 
be liable to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of the 
service rules applicable to the said person or where no such service 
rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed.” 


In the principal Act, in section 8, — 


(i) for sub-section (), the following shall be substituted, namely : — 


“Any person aggrieved from the recommendations made under sub- 
section (2) of section 3 or under clause (i) or clause (ii) of sub- 
section (3) of section 3 or sub-section (/) or sub-section (2) of 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Substitution of 
section 6. 


Substitution of 
section I7. 


Amendment of 
section 8. 


Amendment of 
section 20. 


Substitution of 
section 22. 


Substitution of 
section 24. 


Amendment of 
section 26. 


54 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


il. 


2. 


3. 


4. 


section 4 or sub-section (3) of section 6 or section I7 or non- 
implementation of such recommendations, may prefer an appeal to 
the court or tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the service 
rules applicable to the said person or where no such service rules 
exist then, without prejudice to provisions contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, the person aggrieved may prefer an 
appeal in such manner as may be prescribed.” 


(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “ninety days”, the words “forty-five 
days”, shall be substituted. 


In the principal Act, in section 20, after clause (b), the following new 
clause shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(c) take such measures as may be necessary to maintain a list of 
practitioners or organizations that provide free legal aid and guidance 
for supporting the aggrieved women in ensuring their rights.” 


In the principal Act, for section 22, the following shall be substituted, 
namely: — 


“22. The employer shall include in its annual report and publish the 
report on its website or mobile-based application of the organisation, 
or both, as the case may be, the number of cases filed, if any, and their 
disposal under this Act, and further, intimate such number of cases, if 
any, to the District Officer.” 


In the principal Act, for section 24, the following shall be substituted, 
namely: — 


“24. The appropriate Government may, subject to the availability 
of financial and other resources, — 


(a) develop relevant information, education, communication 
and training materials, and organise awareness programmes 
in every four months to advance public understanding of the 
provisions of this Act providing for protection against sexual 
harassment of woman at workplace; 


(b) formulate orientation and training programmes in every 
six months for the members of the Local Committee.” 


In the principal Act, in section 26, in sub-section (8), for the words “fifty 
thousand rupees”, the words “two lakh rupees”, shall be substituted. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 55 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition, and Redressal) Act, 20i3 also known as the POSH Act, was 
enacted to prevent and manage sexual harassment of women in the workplace. 
While the Act has been instrumental in addressing workplace harassment, 
significant gaps remain in its implementation, particularly in strict 
enforcement of the Act. More importantly, the provisions in the Act fail to 
capture the practical problems of women in reporting harassment and the case 
is worse for women in the informal sector. 


The informal sector constitutes a large portion of India's workforce, 
including domestic workers, agricultural laborers, construction workers, and 
others, who are highly vulnerable to sexual harassment but often lack access 
to formal mechanisms for redress. Local Complaints Committees (LCCs), 
which were designed to serve this purpose, are not sufficiently accessible or 
effective for women in the unorganized sector due to a lack of awareness, 
structural issues, and inadequate representation. The absence of concrete 
mechanisms to enforce accountability in both public and private institutions 
further exacerbates the problem. Hence there is an imperative need to check 
the execution of the Act to ensure that the benefits and protection of the Act 
reach every woman in both formal and informal settings. Further, the goal is 
to bring confidence in the systems for women to come forward to report 
incidents of sexual harassment. 


Therefore, the Bill seeks to amend the POSH Act to ensure better 
representation, broader accessibility, effective inquiry processes, and 
increased penalties for non-compliance. Key amendments include mandating 
that District Officers establish fully functional LCCs in rural and urban areas 
and publicizing the nodal officers at every administrative level (block, taluka, 
tehsil, ward, and municipality) to expand accessibility to women. The Bill also 
obligates District Officers to maintain a list of organizations and practitioners 
offering free legal aid to support aggrieved women, ensuring that financial 
constraints do not hinder their access to justice. Most importantly, the Bill has 
mandated the inclusion of women from the informal sector as members of the 
LCCs to make sure their representation is adequately met to capture the 
unique challenges of the informal sector. 


Further, to protect the privacy of complainants, the Bill strengthens 
confidentiality provisions — imposing stricter penalties for disclosing the 
identity of the aggrieved woman or other parties involved. It also empowers 
aggrieved women to request the replacement of any Internal Complaints 
Committee (ICC) or LCC member if they lose trust during an inquiry. Also, to 
provide women with greater flexibility to seek justice without undue pressure, 
the time limit for filing complaints of sexual harassment has been extended 
from three months to one year. Additionally, the time limit for issuing an 
inquiry report by ICCs and LCCs upon the completion of the investigation is 
reduced from sixty days to thirty days, thereby reducing undue delays in 
justice delivery. The Bill mandates the Central and State Governments to 
organize public awareness initiatives every four months to ensure that women, 
including those in the informal sector, are empowered to seek redress when 
necessary. 


Hence, this Bill. 


JEBI MATHER HISHAM 


56 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 (i) of the Bill proposes to amend section 7 of the Sexual 
Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) 
Act, 203 (POSH Act) to include a member to be nominated from amongst 
the women working in the informal sector to the Local Complaints Committee 
(LCC), which will entail financial compensation to this additional member in 
the LCCs and will involve recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. Besides, Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to substitute section 24 of the 
POSH Act to improve measures to publicize the Act to the public by 
increasing the frequency of awareness events and prescribes conducting 
orientation and training programs every six months for the members of the 
LCC to improve its efficiency and sensitivity. 


Thus, the Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure of recurring nature 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is difficult to estimate the 
actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 57 


Ix 


Bill No. X of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (0) This Act may be called the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 
2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


22 of 2005 2. In the Right to Information Act, 2005, in section 9, in sub-section (6), 
after the words “An appeal under sub-section (2) or sub-section (2)”, the 
words “or a second appeal under sub-section (3)”, shall be inserted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


58 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Right to Information Act, 2005, provides for a specific time-frame for 
the disposal of requests for information made to the Central Public Information 
Officer or the State Public Information Officer under Section 70) of the Act. 


Further, the Act provides for a specific time-frame for the disposal of first 
appeals preferred against an order made by a Central Public Information Officer 
or a State Public Information Officer. 


However, the Act, in its present form, is lacking when it comes to 
establishing a specific time-frame for the disposal of second appeals made to the 
Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission. 


As a result of this, second appeals made before the Central Information 
Commission or the State Information Commission often remain undisposed for a 
prolonged period of time which results in delay and adversely affects the right of 
a citizen to seek and receive information which is provided for under the Act. 


Therefore, there needs to be a specific time-frame in the Act for disposal of 
an appeal made to the Central Information Commission or the State Information 
Commission. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SAKET GOKHALE 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


Bill No. LX of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the transcription, maintenance, and public availability 
of accurate records of proceedings of all courts in India 
and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (29) This Act may be called the Records of Court Proceedings Act, 2025. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Maintenance of 
transcripts of 
court 
proceedings. 


Public access 

to transcripts of 
court 
proceedings. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Power of 
Courts to make 
tules, etc. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: — 


(a) “court” means the Supreme Court of India, all High Courts in 
India, and all subordinate courts as defined under Chapter VI of Part VI 
of the Constitution of India; 


(b) “court proceeding” means all words uttered by judges, 
magistrates, lawyers, or any other party involved in a matter during the 
hearing of any matter in any court in India, whether civil or criminal; 


(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


(d) “public record” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it 
under clause (e) of section 2 of the Public Records Act, 993; and 


(e) “transcript” means an accurate and complete verbatim record 
of the proceedings of the court rendered in written form, whether 
manually or electronically generated. 


(7) Every court shall maintain a transcript of all court proceedings held 
before it, which shall be treated as public record. 


(2) The transcripts under sub-section (/) shall be — 
(a) accurate and verbatim in nature; and 


(b) recorded either by court-authorised stenographers, trans- 
cription services, or by automated speech-to-text systems, as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The format and standards of transcription, manner of authentication, and 
storage shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(4) Every court shall nominate one of its officers as the Officer in-charge of 
the transcripts of court proceedings, who shall be responsible for the proper 
arrangement, maintenance, preservation and periodic review of such 
transcripts, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(7) Every court shall, for the purpose of access to the public, upload the 
transcript of the daily court proceedings held before it on its official 
website in an electronic format within twenty four hours from the 
conclusion of such proceedings. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, every court may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, withhold, redact, or delay the publication 
of any portion of a transcript, if such publication is likely to — 


(a) prejudice the administration of justice; 


(b) infringe the privacy of parties, especially in matters involving 
minors, sexual offences, or other sensitive issues; 


(c) contravene any existing statutory restriction; and 


(d) any other circumstance, as may be prescribed by rules made 
by the court. 


(3) The manner of redaction, time period for withholding, etc. shall be such 
as may be prescribed by rules made by the court. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything 
therewith inconsistent contained in any other law for the time being in force 
or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. 


Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, every court shall have the 
power to make rules, regulations, directions or orders, as may be required, 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


69 of 993. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 6l 


(J) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
tule. 


Power to make 
rules. 


62 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Maintenance of records is an essential function in a democracy so as to 
ensure that the correct information about the day-to-day functioning of any public 
institution is preserved and recorded. The Public Records Act, 993, already covers 
the management, administration and preservation of public records of the Central 
Government, Union territory Administrations, Public Sector Undertakings, 
statutory bodies and corporations, Commissions and committees constituted by the 
Central Government or a Union territory Administration and matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. Similarly, verbatim proceedings of the Parliament 
of India and all State Legislatures are recorded under the relevant rules of that 
legislative body. Therefore, it is crucial to maintain accurate records of all 
proceedings that take place before the Judiciary as is already done for the 
Executive and the Legislature. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SAKET GOKHALE. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 63 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill requires all Courts of India to maintain transcript of their 
court proceedings, recorded either by court-authorised stenographers, transcription 
services, or by automated speech-to-text systems. Clause 4 requires all courts to 
upload the transcript of each day’s proceedings held before it on their official 
website in an electronic format. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the 
exact amount of recurring and non-recurring expenditure likely to be involved. 


64 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Act. As the matters in respect of which rules may 


be made are matters of procedure and administrative detail, the delegation of 
legislative power is, of a normal character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 65 


XI 


Bill No. XI of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows. — 


l. (8) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment of 
article 24. 


Amendment of 
article 27. 


66 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


In article 24 of the Constitution, in clause (2), the following new proviso 
shall be inserted, namely,— 


“Provided that the Chief Justice of India shall hold office for a 
minimum period of two years or until he attains the age of sixty-five 
years, whichever is later, subject to the provisions of clause (4).” 


In article 27 of the Constitution, in clause (2), the following new proviso 
shall be inserted, namely,— 


“Provided that the Chief Justice of the High Court shall hold 
office for a minimum period of two years or until he attains the age of 
sixty-two years, whichever is later, subject to the provisions of clause 
(b) of the proviso to clause ().” 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 67 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill seeks to ensure the efficient 
functioning of the judiciary by mandating a minimum tenure of two years for the 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts, subject only to lawful 
removal from office. The primary rationale behind this provision is to provide the 
Chief Justice with sufficient time to acclimatize to the administrative and judicial 
responsibilities of the office, thereby enhancing the continuity and effectiveness of 
their leadership. 


2. A two-year tenure is essential for fostering stability within the judiciary, 
as it enables the Chief Justice to establish and implement long-term reforms, 
address systemic challenges, and provide consistent guidance to the bench. 
Frequent changes in leadership can disrupt the strategic functioning of the judiciary 
and undermine public confidence in its ability to deliver timely and impartial 
justice. 


3. Ensuring a minimum tenure strengthens the institutional framework of the 
judiciary, allowing the Chief Justice to perform their functions in a manner that 
contributes meaningfully to the efficacy and independence of the judicial system. 


Hence, this Bill. 


SASMIT PATRA. 


68 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


xi 


Bill No. XV of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 206 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (॥) This Act may be called the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 69 


Sec-2] 


In the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 206, in the Explanation to section 


Amendment 2. 
f section 53. me दे ४ 
कम की 53, after clause (ii), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(iii) the Central or the State Government shall not be classified as a 
secured creditor unless a security interest has been created pursuant to a 
transaction of the Central Government or a State Government with the 


corporate debtor”. 


3 of 206. 


70 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 206, was enacted to 
consolidate and amend the laws relating to reorganisation and insolvency 
resolution of corporate persons, partnership firms, individuals and to 
achieve the desired objectives under it. The Code was amended in the past 
to deal with the emerging market realities and to achieve certainty to the 
various processes under the law. 


2. Section 53 of the Code establishes the waterfall mechanism for the 
distribution of liquidation proceeds, prioritizing secured creditors while 
ensuring equitable treatment of all claimants. This mechanism is 
foundational to the liquidation process and the sale of assets of a corporate 
debtor. 


3. The Code was designed to grant favorable treatment to financial 
creditors, recognizing their critical role in funding and supporting 
businesses. By definition, government dues are not categorized as financial 
debt under the Code. However, ambiguities in the interpretation of the term 
“secured creditor” has led to the classification of statutory dues, including 
those owed to the State and Central Governments, as secured debts. This 
broad interpretation distorts the equitable distribution intended by the Code, 
effectively elevating statutory creditors over operational creditors and other 
stakeholders. Such an outcome undermines the certainty and fairness of the 
insolvency resolution framework, creating disincentives for investments 
and delaying resolutions. 


4. The inclusion of government dues as secured debts contradicts the 
principles underlying the waterfall mechanism by allowing statutory 
creditors to circumvent their designated priority under Section 53. This not 
only skews the intended balance but also risks the rejection of resolution 
plans that do not account for inflated statutory claims, thereby frustrating 
the Code’s objectives of timely and effective resolution. 


5. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs seems to have recognised this issue 
as far back as 2023. As per the contents of a discussion paper, only where 
the security interest is created pursuant to a transaction of the Central 
Government or a State Government with corporate debtor, the Government 
in question will continue to be treated as a secured creditor in the order of 
priority. 


6. The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Bill, 2025 which 
seeks to amend the Code, provides for the following, namely: — 


I. Clarify that the State or Central Government shall not be classified 
as secured creditors for the purposes of Section 53 unless a security 
interest has been created pursuant to a transaction of the Central 
Government or a State Government with the corporate debtor. This 
amendment aims to restore the intent of the legislature by ensuring 
that statutory dues are treated in accordance with their designated 
priority, thereby upholding the principles of equity and 
predictability essential for an efficient insolvency regime. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY है औ। 


II. Eliminate ambiguity, foster trust among stakeholders, and 
strengthen the insolvency resolution process by reaffirming the 
equitable distribution of liquidation proceeds in alignment with the 
Code’s objectives. By providing this clarity, the proposed change 
will enhance India’s insolvency framework, making it more 
efficient and conducive to economic growth. 


The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives. 


SASMIT PATRA. 


72 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Xi 


Bill No. XVI of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (4) This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 
2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 73 


Insertion of new 2. In the Information Technology Act, 2000, after section 66A, the following 
Sechon.oei: new section shall be inserted, namely: — 


“66AA. (I) Any person who — 


(a) sends, publishes, or transmits भगाए. electronic 


Punishment for communication which — 

online . . . . . . . . 
harassment, (i) is deliberately and objectively intended to incite 
threats, and violence, communal disharmony, or public disorder, with a 
malicious 


Be direct and imminent threat to public safety; or 
communications. 


(ii) contains specific and credible threats of harm, sexual 
violence, or criminal intimidation; or 


(iii) is knowingly and demonstrably false and is intended 
solely to cause public alarm or panic; or 


(iv) disseminates obscene or defamatory material with clear 
and demonstrable intent to harm the dignity of an individual or 
a group, provided such material does not fall within the ambit 
of fair criticism or satire; or 


(b) uses electronic communication to persistently stalk, 
harass, or intimidate any person in a manner that causes severe 
harm to their privacy, dignity, or mental well-being; or 


(c) engages in the creation or distribution of deepfake media, 
impersonation, or any other digital forgery intended explicitly to 
defame, deceive, or cause measurable harm, 


shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year or with fine, which may extend to rupees one lakh, or with 
both. 


(2) No action shall be taken under this section except upon a 
complaint made by the aggrieved person, their legal guardian, or a 
competent authority designated by the appropriate Government, in 
such form and manner, as may be prescribed. 


(3) The offence under this section shall be non-cognizable and 
bailable, unless the violation involves threats to life, bodily harm, or 
national security, in which case it shall be cognizable and non- 
bailable. 


(4) No complaint under this section shall be registered unless 
approved by an officer not below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent 
of Police after determining a prima facie case. 


(5) Any arrest under this section shall require prior approval from a 
Magistrate of the First Class, except in cases involving credible 
threats to life or national security. 


(6) The Central Government shall constitute a Review Committee 
consisting of a Chairperson and such number of members having 
special knowledge of the subject matter, as it may deem fit, to assess 
complaints and prevent frivolous misuse of this provision while 
ensuring protection of free speech, dissent, satire, fair criticism, and 
journalistic freedom. 


(7) The manner of appointment, salary and allowances and other 
terms and conditions of the Chairperson and members of the Review 
Committee shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(8) Social media platforms and intermediaries shall be required to 
implement grievance redressal mechanisms, in such manner as may 
be prescribed, to allow users to report violations of this section before 
resorting to any legal action. 


2 of 2000. 


74 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(9) Any person found misusing the provisions of this section to file 
frivolous or malicious complaints shall be liable to a penalty, 
including a fine up to rupees fifty thousand or community service as 
determined by the adjudicating officer, appointed under sub-section 
(0) section 46. 


(/9) A mechanism shall be developed by the appropriate Government 
based on the recommendations of the Review Committee, to ensure 
that individuals posting content in good faith, including opinions, 
satire, or journalistic investigations, are not wrongfully targeted under 
this provision. 


(/4) Law enforcement officials found misusing the provisions of this 
section to curb free expression shall be subject to disciplinary action; 
and 


(/2) A\ll legal actions under this section shall be reviewed by a 
Digital Rights Ombudsman, to be appointed in such manner as the 
Central Government may by rules prescribe, to ensure compliance 
with constitutional safeguards. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) “electronic communication” means an e-mail or message 
or information created or transmitted or received on a computer, 
computer system, computer resource or communication device 
including attachments in text, image, audio, video and any other 
electronic record, which may be transmitted with the message; 


(b) “deepfake” means digitally manipulated or fabricated 
digital content, including but not limited to images, videos or 
audio recordings, created through the use of advanced digital 
technologies such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, or 
other advanced technologies, with the intent to convincingly and 
deceptively depict subjects or issues or represent individuals 
engaging in actions, making statements, or being in circumstances 
that did not occur or exist in reality; and 


(c) “digital forgery means the act of utilization of 
technologies, such as artificial intelligence and machine learning 
methodologies, to create or alter audio, visual, or textual content 
with the purpose of deceiving.” 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 75 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Supreme Court of India, in Shreya Singhal v. Union of India (2045), 
struck down Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000, citing 
concerns of vagueness and overreach, which led to arbitrary restrictions on free 
speech. However, with the proliferation of online harassment, cyber threats, 
misinformation, and digital forgeries, there is a compelling need to frame new 
provisions, which shall be a refined and constitutionally sound version of Section 
66A and intended to prevent such cases. 


This Bill ensures that only narrowly defined categories of harmful speech — 
such as incitement to violence, criminal intimidation, targeted harassment, and 
deepfake-related offences — are penalized while safeguarding fundamental 
rights. Additional procedural safeguards, such as prior approvals, intermediary 
grievance mechanisms, and review committee, ensure that misuse by law 
enforcement officials is prevented. The amended provisions also explicitly protect 
fair criticism, satire, dissent, and journalistic freedoms to uphold democratic 
values. This amendment balances national security, public order, and individual 
rights in the digital age. 


This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


SASMIT PATRA 


76 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Review Committee 
consisting of a Chairperson and such number of members as the Central 
Government may deem fit and for the manner of their appointment, salary and 
allowances payable to them and other terms and conditions of service, as may 
be prescribed by rules. It also provides for the appointment of a Digital Rights 
Ombudsman in such manner as the Central Government may by rules prescribe. 
The salary, allowances and other monetary benefits payable to the Chairperson 
and members of the Review Committee and the Digital Rights Ombudsman as 
and when appointed shall be met from the annual Budget estimates of the 
Ministry. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, may involve additional expenditure, both of 
recurring and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, at this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely 
to be involved. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


77 


XIV 


Bill No. XIX of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, /9609. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
(Amendment) Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

59 of 960. 2. In the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 960 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), in section 2,— 


(i) for clause (a), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


(a) “animal” means any living creature other than a human 
being, including but not limited to all terrestrial, avian, and 
aquatic species;"; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(ii) after clause (a), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(bb) “bestiality” means any act where a human being 
voluntarily commits, attempts to commit, or abets the commission 
of any act with an animal that, by its nature or circumstances, is 
done for the purpose of sexual gratification; 


Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, an act shall be deemed 
to be for the purpose of sexual gratification if, by its inherent character 
or the surrounding circumstances, a reasonable person would conclude 
that the offender sought or intended sexual pleasure and shall include 
any act involving: 


(i) penetration of an animal’s anus, vagina, or urethra by a 
person’s penis or any other part of the person’s body; 


(ii) penetration of an animal’s anus, vagina, or urethra by 
any object not constituting part of a person's body; and 


(iii) sexual stimulation of an animal’s anus, vagina, penis, 
or urethra by any means;”; 


(iii) after clause (c), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(cc) “community animal” means any animal born in a 
community for which no ownership has claimed ownership, 
excluding wild animals as defined under the Wild Life (Protection) 
Act, 972;”; 


(iv) after clause (d), the following new clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(dd) “gruesome cruelty” means any act or omission that 
causes, or is likely to cause, extreme physical suffering to an 
animal, resulting in or likely to result in severe bodily harm, 
mutilation, or permanent disability; 


Explanation: Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, 
“gruesome cruelty’ includes— 


(i) engaging in bestiality as defined under this Act; 


(ii) causing permanent damage to any part of an animal’s 
body or committing an act of mutilation that results in 
permanent or lifelong impairment, rendering the animal 
useless; 


(iii) inflicting any injury likely to result in death or lifelong 
physical deformity to an animal; 


(iv) inciting any animal to fight or bait another animal; 


(v) organizing, keeping, using, or managing any place for 
animal fighting or baiting, or permitting or offering any place 
for such purposes, or receiving money for the admission of any 
person to such a place; and 


(vi) promoting or taking part in any shooting match or 
competition in which animals are released from captivity for 
the purpose of being shot;”; 


(ddd) “jurisdictional veterinarian” means a person, employed 
by the State Government within the local jurisdiction of the area, 
who holds a degree from a recognized veterinary college and is 
registered with the State Veterinary Council or the Veterinary 
Council of India; 


53 of 972. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


79 


(dddd) “livestock farm” means any establishment where 
economically important animals are kept for the production of food 
for mankind;”; 


(v) after clause (g), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


(gg) “poultry establishments” means any premises or 
operation where poultry birds, as defined by the World 
Organization for Animal Health, are bred, hatched, reared, 
housed, or otherwise managed for any commercial purpose, 
including but not limited to meat production, egg production, or 
the supply of breeding stock;”; 


(vi) after clause (h), the following new clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(hh) “SPCA” means the Society for Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals, established in every district in the State, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 


(hhh) “State Board” means the State or Union territory 
Animal Welfare Board constituted by the State or Union 
territory or Central Government, as the case may be, under 
section I0A.” 


3. In the principal Act, after section 3, the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely,— 


“3A. It shall be the duty of every person having care, charge, or 
custody of an animal to ensure that the animal in his or her care, charge, 
or custody is provided with the following five freedoms: 


(a) freedom from thirst, hunger and malnutrition; 

(b) freedom from discomfort due to the environment; 

(c) freedom from pain, injury and disease; 

(d) freedom to express normal behavior for its species; and 
(e) freedom from fear and distress: 


Provided that in the case of a community animal, the local 
government, such as a municipality or a panchayat, shall be 
responsible for ensuring these freedoms in accordance with the 
guidelines or standard operating procedures issued by the State 
Government or by the Board.” 


4. Inthe principal Act, in section 5, in sub-section (/) — 
(i) for clause (ba), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(ba) four persons to represent respectively the Ministries 
of the Central Government dealing with Home Affairs, 
Education, Urban Development and Health and Family 
Welfare, to be appointed by the Central Government;”; 


(ii) after clause (bc), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely,— 


(bd) one person each from the animal science division of 
the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, and the 
Veterinary Council of India, to be nominated by their 
respective organisations, in the prescribed manner;”; 


(iii) for clause (2), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


Insertion of 


new section 3A. 


Five freedoms 


of animals. 


Amendment 
section 5. 


of 


Amendment of 
section 7. 


Insertion of 


new section 7A. 


Committees of 
the Board. 


Amendment of 
section 8. 


Insertion of 


new section 8A. 


Annual Report, 
Accounts and 
Audit. 


80 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


5. 


“(c) two veterinarians with diploma or degree in animal 
welfare and working in the said field, to be nominated by the 
Central Government, in the prescribed manner;”; 


(iv) in clause (d) for the words “two persons”, the words “one 
person” shall be substituted; 


(v) for clause (०), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


“ (९) three persons, to be nominated by the Central 
Government in the prescribed manner, from such State 
Boards which in the opinion of Board are actively involved in 
the work of resolving the difficulties at the local level and 
have done an extraordinary work in the field of animal 
welfare;”; 


(vi) in clause (f) for the words “one person”, the words 
“three persons” shall be substituted; and 


(vii) clause (g) shall be omitted; 


In the principal Act, in section 7, in sub-section (2), for the words 
“Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in 
this behalf,”, the words ‘Subject to the approval of the Central 
Government,”; shall be substituted; 


In the principal Act, after section 7, the following new section shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“7A. (7) The Board may constitute as many Committees or 
sub-Committees including an Executive Committee, as it may 
think fit, for discharging its duties to advise the Board on such 
matters as may be referred to them by the Board, from time to 
time. 


(2) A Committee or sub-Committee shall consist of such 
number of Members of the Board, as may be deemed necessary, 
to be nominated thereto by the Chairman of the Board, in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the regulations. 


Provided that a sub-Committee may also co-opt other 
members, if required, in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the regulations.” 


In the principal Act, in section 8, after the word “gifts”, the words 
“processing fees, penalties, fines, levy or any other amount directly paid 
to the Board by any person”, shall be inserted. 


In the principal Act, after section 8, the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“8A. (J) The Board shall prepare, in such form and manner and 
at such time of each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual 
report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government, 
which shall cause it to be laid, as soon as may be after they are 
received, before each House of Parliament. 


(2) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the 
balance sheet, in accordance with such general directions as may be 
issued and in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 


(3) The accounts of the Board shall be audited annually by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed 


[Part-II 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


8] 


9. 


by him on this behalf and any expenditure incurred by him or any 
person so appointed in connection with such audit shall be payable 
by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(4) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any 
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the 
accounts of the Board shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and 
other documents and papers and to inspect the office(s) of the 
Board. 


(5) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed by him in this 
behalf, together with the audit report thereon, duly approved by the 
Board in its Annual General Meeting, shall be forwarded annually to 
the Central Government, who shall cause the same to be laid before 
each House of Parliament.” 


In the principal Act, in section 9,— 


(i) for clause (h), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(h) to coordinate, cooperate, and supervise the general 
working of the SPCA, State Board and local bodies established 
for the purpose of preventing unnecessary pain or suffering to 
the animals or for the protection of animals and birds”; 


(ii) in clause (k), after the words “to impart education’, the words 
“and to facilitate capacity building” shall be inserted; 


(iii) after clause (7), the following new clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(m) to recognize any organization registered in India that is 
working for animal welfare in more than one State and seeking 
financial or other assistance and support from the Central 
Government after following due process as may be prescribed; 


(n) to review the records, annual reports or any other reports 
and information submitted to the Board by organisations 
working for animal welfare and recognized by the Board under 
clause (m) to section 9, the State Animal Welfare Board and the 
SPCA ; 

(o) to work towards the expeditious implementation of the 
Act, rules and regulations made thereunder so as to prevent the 
unnecessary pain and suffering of the animals; and 


(p) to facilitate coordination among local bodies, including 
police departments and any other public or private authorities, to 
take appropriate and expeditious action for the prevention of 
cruelty to animals.” 


0. In the principal Act, for section 0, the following shall be substituted., 


namely:— 


“J0. (J) The Board shall take up, either suo motu or on being 
informed thereof, all issues arising out of matters related to the 
implementation of the Act, rules and regulations made thereunder, 
with the appropriate authorities, for expeditious action thereon. 


(2) The Board shall have the power of entry and inspection and, 
may for the said purpose, authorize in writing in such form and 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


Amendment of 
section l0. 


Powers of the 
Board. 


82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


manner as may be prescribed, any government official(s) or any 
other person acting on its behalf, to:-— 


(i) inspect places or premises, when there is sufficient reason 
to believe that an offence under this Act, rules and regulations 
made thereunder has been or is being or is likely to be 
committed; 


(ii) enter at any time considered reasonable by him, such 
places or premises, where animals are kept or sheltered for any 
purpose based on reports of animal cruelty or violation of any of 
the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations framed 
thereunder; and 


(iii) require any person to produce any or all records 
maintained by them, as mandated under this Act or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder, for inspection; 


and report to the Board their findings as a result of such entry and 
inspection. 


(3) The Board may, as and when require issue necessary 
advisories in respect of any incident of cruelty to mitigate 
unnecessary suffering of animals or where cruelty to animals is 
involved. 


(4) The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the 
Central Government make such regulations, as it may deem fit, for 
the administration of its affairs and for carrying out its functions and 
exercising the powers conferred on it under this Act.” 


Insertion of New il. After Section 0 of the principal Act, the following new Chapter shall be 
el inserted, namely:— 
“CHAPTER ITA 
STATE ANIMAL WELFARE BOARD 
Establishment 0A. (४) Every State Government and Government of a Union 


7 Bond. territory having Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be after 


the commencement of this Act, by notification in the official Gazette, 
establish a State Animal Welfare Board for the State or Union 
territory, as the case may be, with such name as may be specified in 
the notification of the State / Union territory Government, for the 
promotion of animal welfare generally in coordination with the 
Board and for the purpose of protecting animals from being subject 
to unnecessary pain or suffering, in particular:’. 


Provided that in the case of a Union territory with no 
Legislative Assembly, the Central Government shall, as soon as may 
be after the commencement of this Act, by notification in the official 
Gazette, establish a Animal Welfare Board for the Union territory 
with such name as may be specified in the notification of the Central 
Government. 


(2) Every State Board shall be a body corporate with the name specified 
by the State or Union territory or Central Government, as the case may 
be, in the notification under sub-section (7), having perpetual succession 
and a common seal with power, subject to the provision of this Act, to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property and may by its name sue and be 


sued. 
Composition of 0B. (7) The State Board shall consist of the following persons, 
the State Animal 

namely— 
Welfare Board. 


(a) Minister, Animal Husbandry Department of the State or 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Union territory Government, as the case may be, who shall be 
the Chairman ex-officio; 


(b) one Member of the Legislative Assembly of the State or 
Union territory, as the case may be, to be nominated by the 
Speaker of that Assembly from amongst its members — 
Member; 


(c) Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary, Animal 
Husbandry Department of the State or Union territory 
Government, as the case may be - Member ex-officio; 


(d) Chief Wildlife Warden of the State or Union territory, as 
the case may be — Member ex-officio; 


(e) Director, Animal Husbandry Department of the State or 
Union territory Government, as the case may be, who shall be 
the Member Secretary ex-officio; 


(f) Transport Commissioner of the State or Union territory 
Government, as the case may be - Member ex-officio; 


(g) Director-General or Director, Health Department of the 
State or Union territory Government, as the case may be - 
Member ex-officio; 


(h) Director Panchayat Department of the State or Union 
territory Government, as the case may be — Member ex-officio; 


(i) Director-General of Police of the State or Union territory, 
as the case may be, or his representative, so authorized by him, 
in such manner as may be prescribed - Member ex-officio; 


(j) Director, Urban Development Department of the State or 
Union territory Government, as the case may be — Member ex- 


officio; 


(k) one person each from three SPCAs in the State, to be 
nominated by the State Government on rotation basis, in such 
manner as may be prescribed, so as to ensure representation of 
all SPCAs in the State on the State Board — Members; 


(J) one person to represent registered Gaushalas / pinjrapoles 
to be nominated by the State Government, in such manner as 
may be prescribed — Member; 


(m) one person from the Gauseva Aayog to be nominated by 
the State Government in such manner as may be prescribed — 
Member; 


(n) five eminent persons involved in animal welfare within 
the State to be nominated by the State Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed — Member; 


(o) Registrar of the State Veterinary Council - Member ex- 
officio; 


(p) one representative of the State Veterinary Doctors’ 
Association, to be nominated by the State Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed - Member; and 


(q) one representative of the Animal Welfare Board of India, 
to be nominated by that Board in such manner as may be 
prescribed — Member. 


(2) The State Board shall be constituted or reconstituted in accordance 
with sub-section (/), if already in existence, and in any case, not later 


84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


than three months after commencement of this Act: 


Provided that any State Board functioning in any State or Union 
territory on the date of commencement of this Act shall continue to 
discharge its functions till the constitution or reconstitution of the State 
Board as per the provisions of this Act. 


(3) The members of the State Board shall serve in an honorary capacity 
and shall not draw any salary from the State Board by virtue of their 
appointment or nomination thereto: 


Provided that the State Board may provide for travel and other 
incidental expenses incurred by the Members for attending meetings of 
the State Board, in accordance with the State Government norms. 


Terms of office 0C. (/) The term of the State Board shall be three years from the date 
eee ett of its constitution or reconstitution and the Chairman and other Members 
of the State Board. of the State Board shall hold office till the expiry of the term for which 


the State Board has been so constituted or reconstituted. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/),— 


(a) the term of office of an ex-officio Member shall continue so 
long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is such a Member; 
and 


(b) the term of office of a Member nominated under clause (0), 
clauses (k) to (0) and clauses (p) and (9) of section 0B to represent 
any body shall come to an end as soon as he ceases to be a member 
of the body in respect of which he was nominated; and 


(3) Any casual vacancy(ies) arising in the State Board shall be filled up 
as per the provisions of this Section. 


(4) A member nominated to fill up a casual vacancy shall hold office for 
the remainder of the term of the State Board, from the date of his 
nomination. 


(5) No act done or proceeding taken by the State Board shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or 
defect in the constitution or reconstitution of, the State Board and in 
particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, 
during the period intervening between the expiry of the term for which 
the Board has been constituted or reconstituted and its further 
reconstitution, the ex-officio Members of the State Board shall discharge 
all the powers and functions thereof. 

Removal of 0D. The State Government may remove any member of the State Board 


Member(s) from हि 
the State Board. who: 


(a) fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the State Board 
without intimation in writing to the State Board; or 


(b) has been adjudged an insolvent; or 


(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
competent Court; or 


(d) has been convicted and/or sentenced to imprisonment for an 
offence under this Act or any other law pertaining to cruelty to 
animals or an offence involving moral turpitude; or 


(e) has become physically or mentally incapable of performing 
the duties of a Member; or 


(f) has submitted his or her resignation as a Member of the State 
Board; or 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


85 


(g) has been found guilty of corruption or misconduct. 


I0E. (J) Subject to such rules as may be made by the State Government 
in this behalf, the State Board may appoint such number of officers and 
other employees as may be deemed necessary for the efficient exercise 
of its powers and the discharge of its functions as assigned under this 
Act. 


(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and conditions 
of service of such officers and other employees shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the State Board by regulations framed by it with the 
previous approval of the State Government. 


0F. The funds of the State Board shall consist of grants made to it by 
the State Government from time to time, as well as contributions, 
donations, subscriptions, bequests, gifts, fees, levies and other similar 
payments received from any local authority or any other person. 


0G. The State Board shall perform all or any of the following 
functions, but not limited to the following, namely:— 


(a) ensure that the provisions of the Act and the rules and 
regulations framed thereunder are given widespread publicity to 
create adequate awareness of animal welfare amongst the general 
public and take all necessary steps for the strict implementation of 
the Act and the rules and regulations framed thereunder in the State; 


(b) provide assistance and guidance for the functioning of the 
SPCAs, animal shelters, gaushalas, pinjrapoles, rescue homes, 
sanctuaries and the likes within the State, to ensure implementation 
of the provisions of the Act and the rules and regulations framed 
thereunder; 


(c) exercise such functions as may be delegated to it by the 
Government of the State or Union Territories or by the Central 
Government, as the case may be, for furthering the objectives of this 
Act; 


(d) advise the State Government or any local authority or any 
other relevant entity on matters related to animal welfare; 


(e) undertake capacity-building efforts with concerned 
departments, institutions and individuals, as required, to strengthen 
the enforcement of this Act and promote best practices in animal 
welfare; 


(f) extend financial assistance and support to animal welfare 
organizations that have obtained recognition from the State board 
after following due process as prescribed by the State Board; and 


(g) any other function(s) as may be assigned to it by the 
Government of the State or Union territory or Central Government, 
as the case may be or by the Animal Welfare Board of India. 


0H. (/) Every State Board shall prepare, in such form and manner and 
within such time as may be prescribed, an Activity Report incorporating 
therein the activities undertaken by it for the welfare of animals and the 
steps or measures taken by it to implement various provisions of the Act 
and the rules and regulations made thereunder along with an annual 
statement of accounts including the balance sheet, maintained and 
prepared in accordance with such general directions as may be issued 
during the previous financial year and submit a copy thereof to the 
Board and the State or Union territory Government or the Central 
Government, as the case may be, at the end of the first quarter of the 
next financial year. 


Secretary 


and 


other employees 
of the Board. 


Fund of 
State Board. 


the 


Functions of the 


State Board. 


Activity Report 


of the 
Board. 


State 


86 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(2) The State or the Union territory Government, shall cause the annual 
report under sub-section (/) along with the audited accounts of the State 
Board to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each 
House of the State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or 
where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House: 


Provided that in the case of Union territories without a Legislative 
Assembly, the Central Government, shall cause the annual report along 
with the audited accounts of the State Board of that Union territory to be 
laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of 
Parliament. 


Power of the 0I. The State Board may, subject to previous approval of the State or 
Sule 70200 Union territory or Central Government, as the case may be, make such 


make A हर हि है ake : 

regulations. regulations as it deems necessary for the financial and administrative 
affairs of the State Board and for the effective discharge of its 
functions.” 

Amendment of 2. Insection |] of the principal Act,— 

section | I. 


(i) in sub-section (/),— 
(a) clauses (7) to (०) shall be omitted; 


(b) for the words “he shall be punishable, in the case of a 
first offence, with fine which shall not be less than ten rupees but 
which may extend to fifty rupees and in the case of a second or 
subsequent offence committed within three years of the previous 
offence, with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees 
but which may extend to one hundred rupees or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with both”, the words “he shall be punishable, in the case of a 
first offence, with fine which shall not be less than two thousand 
rupees per animal but which may extend to five thousand rupees 
per animal and in the case of a second or subsequent offence, 
with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees per 
animal but which may extend to twenty thousand rupees per 
animal with imprisonment for the minimum term of six months 
which may be extended to one year, or with both” shall be 
substituted. 


(ii) clause (b) of sub-section (3), shall be omitted. 


(iii) after sub-section (3), the following new sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(4) The investigating officer shall report each case 
registered under this Act to the district police headquarters in 
which due records of all such cases shall be maintained in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that a copy of such record shall be shared with the 
State Board and the State Board shall forward such record or any 
part thereof to the Board on a request in writing in this regard.” 


(5) Any person found guilty of an offence under this section 
shall be prohibited from owning, keeping, having in possession, 
or working with animals in any capacity for a period of five 
years from the date of conviction: 


Provided that upon conviction, any animals in the 
possession of the offender, not limited to those involved in the 
specific case for which the offender was convicted, shall be 
confiscated and rehabilitated as per the procedure prescribed by 
the Board; 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 87 


Provided also that in case of a second or subsequent 
offence, the prohibition under this sub-section shall extend for 
the lifetime of the offender; 


Provided further that any violation of this prohibition shall 
be punishable with fine of not less than ten thousand rupees, but 
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
both.” 


3. After Section l] of the principal Act, the following new sections shall be Insertion of new 


5 aad sections from llA 
inserted, namely: ae. 


“JA. (/) If any person commits an act of gruesome cruelty, as Penalty for 
defined under section 2, he shall be punishable in the case of first gruesome 
offence with fine of fifty thousand rupees, which may extend to cruelty. 
seventy-five thousand rupees, and in the case of a second or 
subsequent offence, with fine of one lakh rupees, which may extend 
to one lakh fifty thousand rupees or an amount equivalent to the cost 
of the animal, whichever is higher, as determined by the Judicial 
Magistrate in consultation with the jurisdictional veterinarian or 
with imprisonment for a term of one year, which may extend up to 
three years or with both: 


Provided that in the case of first offence, the offender shall be 
prohibited from owning, keeping, or having any animal in his or her 
possession for a period of ten years from the date of conviction and 
in the case of a second or subsequent offence, the prohibition shall 
extend for the lifetime of the offender.”. 


“IB. If any individual or group of individuals or organization Penalty for 
commits any act with the intention to harm any animal resulting in Killing of an 
its death or kills an animal by use of strychnine injection or in any animal: 
other cruel manner, such individual or group of individuals or 
organization shall be punishable, in the case of first offence, with a 
fine of seventy-five thousand which may extend to one lakh rupees 
per animal and in the case of a second or subsequent offence, with a 
fine of one lakh fifty thousand rupees which may extend to two lakh 
rupees or an amount equivalent to three times of the cost of the 
animal, as determined by the Judicial Magistrate in consultation 
with the jurisdictional veterinarian, whichever is higher or with 
imprisonment for a term of three years which may extend to five 
years or with both.” 


“C. Where an offence under this Act, has been committed by Offence by 
any poultry establishment or livestock farm, such offence shall be poultry 
deemed to have been committed by the owner or the person in establishments 

f tr हि f. and livestock 
charge of the poultry establishment or livestock farm and shall be कह 
punishable, in the case of first offence, with fine equivalent to 
twenty-five per cent of the total market value of all birds or animals 
housed therein and in the case of a second or subsequent offence, 
with fine equivalent to forty per cent of the total market of all birds 
or animals housed therein: 


Provided that the market value shall be determined by the 
Judicial Magistrate in consultation with the jurisdictional veterinary 
officer.” 


4. Insection 2 of the principal Act, for the words “one thousand rupees, or Amendment — of 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years”, the 30220 
words “seventy-five thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term of 
two years for first offence and in the case of a repeat offender, with fine 
of one lakh rupees or with imprisonment for a term of three years or 
with both’, shall be substituted. 


88 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Amendment of 5. In section 20 of the principal Act, — 
section 20. 


(i) after the word “person”, the words “or institution”, shall be 
inserted; and 


(ii) for clause (b), the following shall be substituted, namely— 


“(b) commits a breach of any condition imposed by the 
Committee under that section; 


such person or institution shall be punishable in the case 
of first offence, with fine which shall be up to five times the 
amount of the registration fees as per the ongoing fee structure of 
the Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision of 
Experiments on Animals , established under this Act and in the 
case of a repeat offender, with fine which shall not be less than 
five times the amount of the registration fees as per the ongoing 
fee structure of the said Committee which may extend, to ten 
times or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years or with both”. 


Amendment of 6. In section 26 of the principal Act, for the words “he shall be punishable 

0726 2S on conviction with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or 
with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with both’, the 
words “he shall be punishable on conviction with fine which may extend 
to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with imprisonment which may extend 
to six months, or with both.”, shall be substituted. 


Amendment of ]7. In section 28 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be 
Seaton AP inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that such killing is carried out in a licensed 
slaughterhouse which is in compliance with all applicable laws, 
including but not limited to the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006; 34 of 2006. 
the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 98l; the Water 4 of 98]. 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 974; and the Environment 6 of 974. 
(Protection) Act, 986, and the rules and regulations made thereunder.” 29 of 986. 
Amendment of 8. In section 29 of the principal Act:— 


section 29. 
(i) sub-section (4) shall be omitted. 


(ii) in sub-section (5) for the words “one hundred rupees, or 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months”, 
the words “five thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months”, shall be substituted. 


Amendment of 9. In section 30 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be 
SECOND: inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that if any person is charged with an offence under 
section |B for the killing an animal and if the body or any part thereof 
is found in their possession, then it shall be presumed that such person 
has committed the offence with which he has been charged unless 
proven otherwise, and the burden of proof shall lie on the accused. 


Amendment of 20. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, 
section 3. namely:— 


#>३], (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023,— 46 of 2023. 


(a) an offence punishable under sections |lA, llB and 2 of 
this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable; and 


(b) an offence punishable under clauses (c), (i), (j), and (k) of 
sub-section (/) of section ll, sections lC and sub-section (J) of 
section 38 of this Act shall be cognizable and 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) No person accused of an offence under sections |lA, lB 
or |2 shall be released on bail or on their own bond except by an 
order of a Court of competent jurisdiction, and only after the 
Public Prosecutor has been heard and the Court has recorded a 
reasoned order in writing.” 


2l. In section 32 of the principal Act,— 


(i) in sub-section (/), for the words “clause (7) of sub-section 
(7) of section ll in respect of any such animal as is referred to in 
section 30”, the words “section |B”, shall be substituted. 


(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words “phooka or doom dev or 
any other operation of the nature referred to in section |2”, the 
words “or any act of gruesome cruelty”, shall be inserted. 


(iii) after sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that any animal so seized under this section shall be 
kept in the custody of the local SPCA or recognised animal welfare 
organization, as per the order of the jurisdictional Magistrate in 
accordance with the rules framed under this Act.” 


22. In section 34 of the principal Act,— 


(i) after the words “State Government”, the words “or the 
Animal Welfare Board of India or the State Animal Welfare Board,” 
shall be inserted. 


(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that any animal so seized under this section shall be 
kept in the custody of the local SPCA, as per the order of the 
jurisdictional Magistrate in accordance with the rules made under 
this Act.” 


23. In section 35 of the Principal Act, for sub-section (2) the following shall 
be substituted, namely:— 


“(2) The Magistrate before whom a prosecution for an offence 
against this Act has been instituted shall direct that the animal 
concerned shall be treated and cared for in an infirmary until it is fit 
to perform its usual work or is otherwise fit for discharge, or that it 
be sent to a pinjrapole, or, if the veterinary officer in charge of the 
area in which the animal is found or any other veterinary officer as 
may be authorised in this behalf by rules made under this Act 
certifies that the animal is incurable or cannot be removed without 
causing further suffering, the Magistrate may order its humane 
euthanasia: 


Provided that a record of such euthanasia shall be maintained 
by the infirmary which shall be produced as and when required for 
the purpose of investigation or legal proceedings.” 


24. In section 36 of the principal Act, for the words, “three months”, the 
words “twelve months”, shall be substituted. 


25. In section 38 of the principal Act, — 
(i) in sub-section (2), — 
(a) clause (aa) shall be omitted. 


(b) after clause (i), the following new clause shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


“(ia) the process of according recognition any 
organisation working for animal welfare and seeking 
financial or other assistance and support from the Central 


Amendment 
section 32. 


Amendment 
section 34. 


Amendment 
section 35. 


Amendment 
section 36. 


Amendment 
section 38. 


of 


in 


of 


of 


of 


90 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Government, which shall work under the general supervision 
and guidance of the Board.” 


(ii) in sub-section (3), for the words “one hundred rupees or 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months”, 
the words “fifty thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years”, shall be substituted. 


Amendment of 26. For section 38A of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, 

section 38A. namely: — 

Rules. व and “38A. (J) Every rule made by the Central Government or by 

ee लक the Committee constituted under section I5 and every regulation 

Parliament and made by the Board shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 

State before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 

Legislature. period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or regulation as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation, as the case may be, should not be made, the rule or 
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment, shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 

(2) Every regulation made by the State Board shall be laid, as 

soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State 
Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 

Insertion of new 27. After section 38A of the principal Act, the following new sections shall 


sections 38 AA 
and 38AAA. 


Power of Central “38AA. The Central Government may, as required from time to 
Government to time, issue general or specific directions to the Board or the State 
give directions. f हि thi 
Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act, and the Board and 
the State Board shall, while discharging their functions under this 
Act, comply with such directions. 


be inserted namely. — 


Power of State 38AAA. (/) The State Government may, by notification in the 
chad 0 Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
make rules. 


(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where 
such Legislature consists of one House before that House. 


Power to remove 38AAAA. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the 

difficulties. provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order 
published in the official Gazette make such provisions not consistent 
with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the date of enactment. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.” 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 960, which was enacted to 
prevent the infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on animals, has served as 
India's primary animal welfare legislation for over six decades. While the Act 
laid the foundation for animal welfare legislation in India, its provisions have 
proven inadequate in addressing contemporary challenges, particularly due to 
nominal penalties, limited institutional framework, and absence of clearly 
defined offences and insufficient mechanisms for implementation and 
accountability. 


The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment) Bill, 2025 seeks to 
address these deficiencies through comprehensive reforms aimed at creating a 
moder, robust, and enforceable animal welfare regime. The Bill's primary 
purpose is threefold: first, to provide effective deterrence against animal cruelty 
through substantially enhanced penalties; second, to create strong institutional 
mechanisms for implementation and oversight; and third, to expand the scope of 
protection to address contemporary forms of cruelty while ensuring proper care 
for different categories of animals. The amendments are necessitated by the 
growing instances of animal cruelty, the need for institutional support at state 
levels, and the importance of aligning our animal welfare laws with evolving 
jurisprudence and international standards of animal protection. 


The Bill strengthens institutional mechanisms through significant reforms. 
It restructures the Animal Welfare Board of India through amendments to 
Section 5, expanding representation from various Ministries and including 
veterinary experts. New provisions under Section 8A establishes robust financial 
accountability through proper accounting, auditing, and reporting mechanisms. 
The Board's powers are enhanced under Section 0, including authority for 
inspection and investigation. 


A major institutional reform is the mandatory establishment of State 
Animal Welfare Boards through insertion of a new Chapter IIA in the principal 
Act. These Boards, constituted with broad representation from relevant 
Departments of the State Government and stakeholders, are empowered with 
specific functions including implementation oversight, capacity building, and 
coordination with law enforcement. The Bill provides for their proper funding, 
reporting mechanisms, and regulatory powers. 


The Bill substantially strengthens deterrence through enhanced penalties. 
For general acts of cruelty under sub-section (/) of Section I, the minimum fine 
is increased from ten rupees to one thousand rupees per animal, extending up to 
two thousand five hundred rupees, with imprisonment terms increased to a 
minimum of six months. New provisions under Section lA introduces penalties 
for gruesome cruelty, including acts of bestiality, mutilation, and animal 
fighting, with fines up to seventy-five thousand rupees and imprisonment up to 
three years. Section lB specifically addresses the killing of animals through 
cruel means, prescribing fines up to one lakh rupees per animal and 
imprisonment up to five years. Section llC introduces specific provisions for 
offences by poultry facilities and livestock farms, with penalties linked to the 
market value of animals involved. 


The Bill significantly strengthens enforcement mechanisms. It amends 
Section 3] to make several offences cognisable and introduces provisions 
regarding bail. Section 32 and Section 34 are proposed to be amended to provide 
for proper custody of seized animals. Section 35 is modified to ensure proper 
treatment and care of animals during legal proceedings. The limitation period for 
prosecution under Section 36 is extended from three months to twelve months, 
allowing adequate time for investigation and prosecution. 


92 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


These comprehensive amendments are essential to modernise India's 
animal welfare law, ensure effective prevention of cruelty, strengthen 
implementation mechanisms, and align the legal framework with contemporary 
societal values. The Bill creates a robust structure capable of addressing both 
current inadequacies and future challenges in animal welfare. 


Hence this Bill. 


SUDHA MURTY 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for enhancing the composition of the Animal 
Welfare Board of India in section 5 of the principal Act to make more broad- 
based. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for constitution of as many Committees or 
sub-Committees including an Executive Committee by the Animal Welfare 
Board of India with such number of Members of the Board nominated thereto by 
the Chairman of the Board and other Members co-opted thereto. Clause || of 
the Bill provides for the establishment of State Animal Welfare Boards in all 
States and Union territories of the country along with their composition and also 
providing for the travelling and other incidental charges of the Members for 
attending the meetings of the Board. The said clause also provides that State 
Board shall undertake capacity building measures to ensure proper enforcement 
of the Act and shall extend financial assistance and support to animal welfare 
organisations which obtain recognition therefrom. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of non- 
recurring and recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it 
is not possible to estimate the exact recurring and non-recurring expenditure at 
this stage. 


94 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


XV 


Bill No. XX of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the right to health care services for 
all citizens and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 


l. (0) This Act may be called the Right to Health Care Services Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 95 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 


(a) “appropriate Government” means, in respect of matters 
relating to, — 


(6) a Union Territory without legislature, the Central 
Government; 


(ii) Union Territories with legislature, the Government of such 
Union Territories; 


(iii) a State, the State Government. 


(b) “Authority” means the National Health Care Services Authority 
constituted under section 9 of this Act; 


(c) "citizen" means a person who is a citizen of India within the 
meaning of Part II of the Constitution of India and the provisions of 
the Citizenship Act, 955, and includes such other persons as may be 57 of 955. 
declared as citizens of India under any law for the time being in force; 


(4) “emergency medical care’ means immediate and necessary 
medical attention required to prevent death or serious health 
consequences; 


(e) “essential medicines” means medicines included in the National 
List of Essential Medicines (NLEM), as notified by the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare; 


(9 “genetic disorder” means any disease or condition caused by an 
abnormality in an individual’s DNA, including inherited disorders and 
conditions such as cancer; 


(g) “government-funded health care services” means health care 
services funded and provided directly by the Government or services 
provided by non-governmental entities for which the Government 
funds part or all of the costs of care for some or all patients; 


(h) “health care service” means testing, treatment, care, procedures, 
or any other service or intervention aimed at preventative, promotive, 
therapeutic, diagnostic, nursing, rehabilitative, palliative, convalescent, 
research, or other health-related purposes, including combinations 
thereof; and shall also include reproductive health care and emergency 
medical care arising from participation in a medical research 
programme; 


(i) “health care establishment” means the whole or any part of a 
public or private institution, facility, building, or place, set up, 
financed, controlled, or managed by the Government or privately 
owned, whether for profit or not, to provide inpatient or outpatient 
health care including treatment, diagnostic or therapeutic 
interventions, nursing, rehabilitative, palliative, convalescent, 
preventative, promotive, or research-based health services to the 
general public; 


(Gj) “health care provider’ means a medical doctor, nurse, 
paramedical professional, social worker, or any other appropriately 
trained and qualified individual possessing specific skills relevant to 
health care, nursing, rehabilitation, palliative care, convalescent care, 
preventative care, or other health services; 


(k) “informed consent” means consent that is specific to a proposed 
health care intervention, given voluntarily without force, undue 
influence, fraud, threat, mistake, or misrepresentation, and obtained 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


after disclosing to the person giving consent, whether for themselves 
or in a representative capacity where necessary, all material 
information, including costs, risks, benefits, significant implications, 
and alternatives to the proposed health care, in a language and manner 
understood by such person; 


(I) “One District, One Medical Institution” means a scheme or 
initiative undertaken by the appropriate Government to ensure the 
establishment of at least one tertiary medical institution, with requisite 
health care facilities in each district to ensure equitable access to 
health care for the population, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(n) “public health” means the health of the population as a whole, 
especially as monitored, regulated, and promoted by the appropriate 
Government; 


(०) “public health care establishment” means a health care 
establishment as defined under clause (i) of section 2 of this Act, set 
up, financed, controlled, or managed by the Government; 


(p) “rare diseases” refers to diseases that affect a small percentage 
of the population, as defined and notified by the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare; 


(q “social audit” means an audit conducted by the community or 
stakeholders to evaluate the social, economic, and health-related 
dimensions of a policy, program, or institution or establishment; 


(r) “telemedicine” means the delivery of health care services, 
including consultation, diagnosis, treatment, and monitoring, through 
the use of information and communication technologies, in alignment 
with the Telemedicine Practice Guidelines, 2020, issued by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and as updated from time to 
time by the Ministry; and 


(s) “vulnerable groups” includes individuals or populations 
requiring special attention due to factors such as age, health 
conditions, socio-economic status, disability, or other marginalized 
circumstances, as may be notified by the appropriate Government in 
the Official Gazette. 


3. 0) With respect to health care services and other matters related thereto, Rights to 


every citizen shall have the,— we i 


(i) right to information,— which shall include the following, other matters 
namely— related thereto. 


(a) right to obtain adequate and relevant information regarding 
the nature and cause of illness, proposed investigations, treatment 
plans, expected outcomes, potential complications, and the 
associated costs of treatment and care; and 


(b) right to be informed of the rates or charges for each type of 
service and the facilities available at any health care establishment, 
including public and private institutions. 


(ii) right to free health care services, which shall include the 
following, namely— 


(a) right to avail free Out-Patient Department (OPD) and 
In-Patient Department (IPD) services provided by public 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


97 


health care establishments according to their level of care, 
including consultation, diagnostics, emergency transport, 
essential medicines, medical procedures, and emergency care, 
in such manner as may be prescribed; and 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause— 


(i) Out-Patient Department (OPD) services means medical 
consultations, diagnostic tests, minor medical procedures, 
and treatments that do not require hospital admission; and 


(ii) In-Patient Department (IPD) services means medical 
treatments, surgeries, and procedures that necessitate 
hospital admission and in-patient care. 


(b) right to immediate medical attention and critical care, in the 
event of a health emergency, without prepayment of requisite fees 
or charges, including but not limited to emergency obstetric care 
and treatment of medico-legal cases, provided by any health care 
provider, establishment, or facility, whether public or private; 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, "medico-legal case" refers to 
any medical case with legal implications, civil or criminal in nature, 
including but not limited to cases of accidents, assault, sexual assault, 
suicide attempts, poisoning, injuries due to domestic violence, injuries at 
workplaces, and similar incidents; 


Provided that health care providers and establishments shall not delay 
treatment in such cases due to pending police clearance or reports. 


(iii) right to access medical records, either by the patients 
themselves or by the authorised representatives of such patients, who 
are bedridden or incapacitated, either physically or mentally, including 
investigation reports, detailed itemized bills, treatment summaries, and 
other health-related documentation as may be maintained by the health 
care establishment, in such form and manner as may be prescribed; 


(iv) right to confidentiality, human dignity, and privacy during 
diagnosis, treatment, and care, in accordance with the standards, as 
may be prescribed by rules made under this Act or in accordance with 
the provisions of any law in this regard for the time being in force; 


(v) right to gender-sensitive care, which shall entitle a female 
patient to request and avail the presence of a female health care 
professional or attendant during any physical examination conducted 
by any health care establishment; 


(vi) right to alternative and safe care, including the right to— 


(a) choose alternative treatment options available at any 
health care establishment, in such manner as may be 
prescribed; and 


(b) safe, quality, and standard-compliant health care in 
accordance with the prescribed regulations. 


(vii) right to second opinion, including the right to obtain treatment 
records and information from the health care establishment in which 
treatment is being undertaken for the purpose of seeking a second 
opinion from another health care provider or establishment; 


(viii) right to emergency support, including the right to free 
transportation, free treatment, and free insurance coverage 
for injuries sustained in road accidents, in accordance 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


with the rules prescribed under this Act: 


Provided that the health care establishments shall provide referral 
transport for patients requiring transfer to another health care facility 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(ix) right to refuse treatment, including the right to choose whether 
to consent to medical treatment, to refuse it, or to choose from 
amongst the available treatments being offered, provided that such 
refusal does not endanger public health or violate the provision of any 
other law in this regard for the time being in force; 


(x) right to health standards, including the right to access and 
receive health care services conforming to the highest attainable 
standard of physical and mental health as guaranteed under this Act; 


(xi) right to leave against medical advice, which shall entitle 
patients leaving a health care establishment against medical advice 
with the right to receive a treatment summary and discharge records, in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed; 


(xii) right to access, including the right to have timely and quality 
access to facilities, goods, and services necessary to achieve the best 
health outcomes; and 


Explanation— For the purpose of this clause, access includes the 
components of coverage, quality and timeliness as may be prescribed. 


(xiii) right to informed consent, which shall entitle every patient or 
authorised representative(s) of such patients, who are bedridden or 
incapacitated, either physically or mentally, with the right to full 
disclosure of information regarding the following, but not limited to: 


(a) the condition, disorder, and disease that the individual is 
having or suffering from; 
(b) the necessity for further diagnostic test(s); 


(c) the natural course of the condition and possible 
complications; 


(d) consequences of non-treatment; 
(e) available treatment options; 
(f) potential risks and benefits of treatment options; 
(g) duration and approximate cost of treatment; and 
(h) expected outcome; 
so as to enable them to give their informed consent to avail the line of 


treatment suggested by the health care provider or establishment, in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that such information shall not jeopardize the patient's 
physical, mental, or emotional health. 


(2) No person shall be denied access to health care services, facilities, 
resources, goods, or information on any grounds of sex, class, 
economic status, place of birth, age, marital status, health status, 
sexual orientation, disability, occupation, religion, race, caste, social 
origin, or on any other ground that is unreasonable or arbitrary. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall take all necessary measures to 
ensure equal access to health care services and facilities to all citizens, 
and that, no citizen is discriminated against on any ground referred to 
in sub-section (2). 


Special 
provisions for 
specific 
vulnerable 
groups. 


Responsibilities 
of the Central 
Government. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


99 


4. 


The appropriate Government shall take all necessary measures to 
ensure that the health care needs of vulnerable groups including but 
not limited to the following, are met effectively and equitably:— 


(a) women and children, with a focus on maternal and child 
health care, reproductive health, nutrition, and immunization 
services; 


(b )persons with disabilities, by ensuring accessible health care 
services, specialized treatments, and assistive technologies as per 
their specific needs; 


(c) senior citizens and economically weaker sections, by 
providing subsidized or free health care services, geriatric care, 
and community-based health programs; and 


(d) individuals with rare diseases or genetic disorders, through 
the establishment of dedicated programs, access to affordable 
treatments, and research initiatives aimed at prevention and 
management of such diseases. 


The Central Government shall, within such time intervals as may be 
prescribed, take necessary measures to enhance health care resources 
so as to ensure the health and well-being of every citizen, and for the 
said purpose shall,— 


(a) formulate, in consultation with the National Health Care 
Services Authority, established under section 9 of this Act and 
implement a National Human Resource Policy for Health to 
ensure equitable distribution and _ availability of health 
professionals at all levels; 


(b) establish quality audit and grievance redressal mechanisms; 


(c) align health services and schemes to empower citizens with 
preventive, promotive and protective health care; 


(d) prescribe standards for the quality, accessibility and safety 
of health care at all levels; 


(e) ensure the availability of government-funded health care 
services taking into account factors such as distance, population 
density, and geographical area; 


(f) guarantee access to government-funded health care services 
without any discrimination; 


(g) mobilize financial and human resources and formulate 
policies for the implementation of the obligations under this Act. 


(h) establish coordination mechanism among departments 
and/or concerned authorities to ensure provision of adequate 
nutrition, safe drinking water, and sanitation to patients in 
healthcare establishments; 


(6) undertake measures to inform, educate, and empower 
citizens about health issues; 


@) formulate and implement a National Health Policy to ensure 
the realization of the right to health care services guaranteed 
under this Act; 


(k) provide financial and technical support to State 
Governments for health care development; and 


00 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


() formulate guidelines for quality assurance in health care 
services provided by health care establishments. 


6. Without prejudice to the responsibilities specified under other provisions 


of this Act, every State Government shall take all necessary measures for 
the effective implementation, administration, and regulation of health care 
services within its jurisdiction, including the urban local bodies and 
panchayati raj institutions under it and for this purpose shall,— 


(a) establish, as soon as may be after commencement of this Act, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, State Health Care Services 
Authorities, with such composition and in such manner, as may be 
prescribed, to work in coordination with the National Health Care 
Services Authority and to oversee the implementation of health care 
policies and services, ensure effective implementation by the heath 
care establishments in the State and to perform such other functions, as 
may be prescribed; 


(b) ensure the equitable distribution of health care resources, 
particularly in rural and remote areas, in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 


(c) formulate and implement state-specific health care programs 
that addresses local health needs and priorities; 


(4) collaborate with urban local bodies and panchayati raj 
institutions to strengthen local health governance, decision-making 
and implementation of health care services at the grassroot level; 


(९) promote awareness of health care rights among citizens to 
ensure their informed participation in health care services; 


(f) facilitate access to Government health schemes and ensure their 
effective implementation to eligible beneficiaries; 


(g) conduct social audits of health care services to assess their 
effectiveness, transparency, and accountability and take remedial 
measures in such manner as may be prescribed. 


7. 6) The appropriate Government shall take all necessary measures to 


strengthen health infrastructure across the country and _ for 
development of human resources in the health care field, with focus on 
equitable access and quality healthcare services to all citizens. 


(2) For the furtherance of this objective, the appropriate Government 
shall — 
(a) build and upgrade healthcare facilities in underserved 
areas, under the "One District, One Medical Institution" initiative 
to ensure district-level access to comprehensive medical care; 


(b) ensure the availability of free essential medicines, 
diagnostics, and other necessary healthcare services at public 
health care establishments in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(c) provide referral transport services for patients requiring 
specialized or emergency medical care at higher-level health care 
facilities; 

(d) establish specialized centres for the treatment of rare 
diseases, genetic disorders, cancer and such other medical 
conditions in major public hospitals by notification in the Official 
Gazette; 


Responsibilities 
of the State 
Governments. 


Appropriate 
Government to 
strengthen health 
infrastructure 
and for human 
resource 
development in 
the health care 
field. 


National and 
Regional 

Centres for rare 
and life- 
threatening 
diseases and 
genetic 
disorders. 


Constitution of 
National Health 
Care Services 
Authority. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


8. 


9. 


(e) set up telemedicine centres in rural and remote areas to 
ensure universal healthcare access through digital connectivity 
and consultation services, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(9 formulate and implement policies to address the shortage of 
health care professionals and ancillary health workers; 


(g) provide regular training and organise capacity-building 
programs for health care workers at all levels; 


(h) ensure equitable distribution of medical professionals and 
health care workers at all levels across all regions of the country, 
with priority given to underserved and remote areas, in 
accordance with the National Human Resource Policy for Health 
formulated and implemented by the Central Government under 
clause (a) of section 5; and 


(i) promote and support research and development in critical 
areas, including genetics, oncology, mental health, and other 
emerging health care fields. 


The appropriate Government shall, in such manner and within such 
time as may be prescribed, establish national and regional centres for 
rare and life-threatening diseases and genetic disorders, which shall— 


(a) provide financial assistance for the treatment of rare and 
life-threatening diseases and genetic disorders, to such needy 
patients, as may be determined in accordance with the prescribed 
norms; 


(b) promote research, innovation, and development of genetic 
therapies and for rare disease management; 


(c) ensure availability of specialized medical professionals, 
diagnostic facilities, and requisite medical equipment for the 
treatment of rare and life-threatening diseases and genetic 
disorders; and 


(d) undertake public awareness भाव capacity-building 
programs for early detection, prevention, and management of 
genetic disorders. 


(0) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute an independent body to be known as the National 
Health Care Services Authority, to exercise the powers conferred on, 
and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue 
or be sued. 


(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and the 
Authority may with the prior approval of the Central Government, 
establish offices at such other places in the country, as it may deem 
necessary, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(4) The Authority shall consist of the following, namely— 


(a) the Prime Minister of India, who shall be the Chairman, ex- 
officio; 


0] 


02 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


0. 


il. 


(b) the Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Government of 
India — Member, ex-officio. 


(c) the Minister of State for Health and _ Family 
Welfare, Government of India - Member, ex-officio; 


(d) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare - Member, ex-officio; and 


(e) three persons to be nominated by the President of India 
from amongst persons having specialized knowledge or 
professional experience in public health, public policy, or health 
administration, or allied disciplines, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(5) The Authority shall meet at least once every three months to carry out 
its functions effectively. 


(6) The salaries, or allowances, and other terms and conditions of 
service, of the Members of the Authority, shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


(7) The Authority shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 


(0) The Members of the Authority, other than the ex-officio Members, may, 
by writing given under their hand to the Central Government, resign from 
their office at any time. 


(2) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office, any 
Member, other than the ex-officio Members of the Authority, if such 
Member— 


(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or 


(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence 
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; or 

(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
competent court; or 


(d) refuses to act or has become physically or mentally incapable 
of acting in his official capacity; or 


(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Authority, 
absent from three consecutive meetings of the Authority; or 


(f) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his 
office as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the interest 
of office or the public interest: 


Provided that no person shall be removed from office under this 
clause, unless that person has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in the matter. 


(3) A vacancy caused under sub-sections (l) and (2) or otherwise shall be 
filled by fresh nomination: 
Provided that any Member nominated against a casual vacancy in the 


Authority shall hold office only for the remainder of the term of the 
Member in whose place he has been nominated. 


No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be questioned or shall be 
invalidated merely by reason of: 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 
Authority; or 


Resignation and 
removal. 


Vacancies, etc., 
not to invalidate 
the proceedings 
of the Authority. 


Officers and 
staff of the 
Authority. 


Functions of the 
Authority. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 03 


2. 


3. 


(b) any defect in the nomination of a person as Member of the 
Authority; or 


(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting 
the merits of the case. 


(7) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers 
and staff to the Authority, as may be necessary for the efficient 
discharge of its functions under this Act, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, and 
other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff, so 
appointed for the purpose of the Authority shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


(0) The Authority shall perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely,— 


(a) advise the appropriate Government on matters related to public 
health, including preventive, promotive, curative, and rehabilitative 
health measures, as well as occupational, environmental, and socio- 
economic health determinants; 


(b) formulate health goals and recommend measures to ensure 
integration of the goals into the mandates of panchayati raj institutions 
and urban local bodies; 


(c) develop strategic plans at the central level for the 
implementation of the rights guaranteed under this Act, including 
action on determinants such as access to healthy food, clean water, and 
sanitation; 


(d) establish mechanisms and systems for conducting regular 
medical, clinical, and social audits to ensure the delivery of good 
quality healthcare services at all levels; 


(e) constitute committees, scientific panels, or technical panels 
as may be deemed necessary for the effective discharge of its 
functions; 


(f) ensure provision of quality and cost-effective health and 
diagnostic services by private healthcare providers in accordance with 
the prescribed standards; 


(g) investigate and provide satisfactory resolution to complaints 
and grievances escalated to it under the Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism established under section 6 this Act, in such manner and 
within such time, as may be prescribed; 


(h) investigate cases of contravention of any of the provisions of 
the Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder and take 
necessary action thereon in such manner and within such time, as may 
be prescribed; 


(i) conduct periodic evaluations of health care services to assess 
their compliance with the provisions of this Act; 


(Gj) monitor the implementation and performance of the "One 
District, One Medical Institution" initiative; 


(09 prepare an annual report giving a full account of its activities 
and including therein the progress made and challenges encountered in 


46 of 2023. 


04 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


4. 


5. 


6. 


the implementation of the provisions of this Act, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed and forward a copy of the same to the 
Central Government; and 


(I) any other function for the furtherance of the objectives of this 
Act or as may be assigned to it by the Central Government. 


(2) The Authority, while discharging the functions under clauses (g) and 
(h) of sub-section (0), shall have the power to summon and examine 
witnesses, review documents, and issue orders for compliance, correction, 
or imposing penalty, as deemed necessary. 


(0) The Authority shall have the powers of a civil court under the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, while discharging its functions under 
clauses (g) and (h) of section 3, specifically to: 


(a) summon and enforce the attendance of any person; 
(b) require the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receive evidence on affidavits; 


(d) requisition any public record or copy thereof from any court or 
office; 

(e) issue commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents; and 


(9 any other matter which may be prescribed. 


(2) The Authority shall have the power to initiate proceedings for non- 
compliance of its orders. 


(0) Any person aggrieved by a decision or an order of the Authority may 
file an appeal to the Supreme Court within a period of sixty days from the 
date of such decision or order: 


Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant 
was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in time. 


(2) The decision of the Supreme Court on the appeal shall be final and 
binding. 


(0) The appropriate Government shall, within a period of three 
months from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, establish a Grievance Redressal Mechanism, in 
such form and manner, as may be prescribed, for the expeditious 
resolution of complaints relating to the denial of health care services or 
the violation of the rights guaranteed under this Act or contravention 
of any of the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Grievance Redressal Mechanism shall comprise a dedicated 
web portal and helpline centre to receive complaints and registration 
of grievances, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The web portal and helpline centre referred to in sub-section (2), shall 
forward the complaints and grievances received by them to the designated 
officer, as notified, and within twenty-four hours of the time of receipt and 
the designated officer shall respond to the complainant within twenty-four 
hours of the time of receipt of the complaint or grievance by him, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed: 


Powers of the 
Authority. 


Appeal. 


Grievance 
redressal 
mechanism. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 05 


Provided that if the complaint or grievance remains unresolved by the 
designated officer within the stipulated -twenty-four-hour period, the 
complaint or grievance shall be immediately escalated to the National or 
the State Health Authority, as the case may be, for resolution. 


Penalties. 7. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules and 
regulations made thereunder shall be punishable for the first contravention 
with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and for 
repeated contravention or default, with fine of five hundred rupees per day 
for each day of such contravention or default which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 


Offences by 8. (0) Where an Offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 

companies. every person who, at the time, the offence was committed was in charge of, 
or was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of the 
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section, shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment under this Act if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company, and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or 
is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, 
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary 
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,— 


(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm, or 
other association of individuals; and 


(b) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 


Crediting sums 9. All sums realized, by way of penalties, imposed by the Authority, shall be 


pealised Dy Way credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
of penalties to 


the 
Consolidated 
Fund of India. 


Sharing of 20. (6) The Central Government and the State Governments shall have 
आता  «. concurrent responsibility for providing funds for carrying out the 
responsibilities. f this Act 

purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and 
recurring expenditure for the implementation of the provisions of the 
Act. 


(3) The Central Government shall provide funds to the State 
Governments, as grants-in-aid of revenues, to meet such percentage of 
expenditure referred to in sub-section (2), as it may determine, from 
time to time, in consultation with the State Governments, to enable 
them to carry out the purposes of this Act. 


(4) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 


06 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


2i. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the 
Authority, as it may think fit, for the effective implementation and 
enforcement of the provisions of this Act. 


(5) The State Governments shall, after taking into consideration, the 
sums provided by the Central Government and its other resources, be 
responsible to provide funds for implementation of the provisions of 
this Act. 


(0) The Central Government shall cause the annual reports of the 
Authority referred to in clause(k) of sub-section(l) of section 3, to be laid, 
as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of 
Parliament. 


(2) Where any such report or any part thereof relates to any matter with 
which any State Government is concerned, the Authority shall forward a 
copy of such report or part thereof to such State Government, who shall 
cause it to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each 
House of the State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where 
such Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


(2) The Authority shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner and at 
such time of each financial year, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him 
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act 
shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection 
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall 
have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices 
of the Authority. 


(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, 
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the 
Central Government by the Authority. 


(/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may be 
necessary to remove the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of 
Parliament, as soon as possible after it is made. 


(0) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


Central 
Government 
lay Report. 


Accounts 
audit. 


Power 
remove 
difficulties. 


to 


and 


to 


Power to make 


rules 
regulations. 


and 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 07 


(2) The Authority may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, 
to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for 
the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 


(3) Every rule and every regulation made by the Central Government under 
this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament, as soon as may 
be after it is made, for a total period of thirty days, which may be 
composed in one session or in two or more successive sessions. If, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree to modify or annul the 
rule, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
stand annulled, as the case may be, without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 


(4) Every rule and every regulation made by a State Government or the 
Union territory, as the case may be and every notification issued by the 
State Government or the Union territory, as the case may be, under this 
Act, shall be laid as soon as may be, after it is made, before the State 
Legislature, or the Union territory Legislature, as the case may be, where it 
consists of two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, 
before that House. 


08 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Right to Health Care Services Bill, 2025, aims to establish a 
comprehensive legal framework ensuring equitable access to healthcare 
for all citizens of India. Despite significant advancements in healthcare, 
disparities in accessibility, affordability, and quality persist, particularly 
amongst marginalized communities. According to the National Health 
Accounts (NHA) Report 202, out-of-pocket expenditure constitutes 48.2 
per-cent. of the total health expenditure, leading to catastrophic health 
expenditures for millions. The Global Burden of Disease Study (2020) 
also highlights that India ranks 45" among 95 countries in healthcare 
access and quality, necessitating immediate legislative intervention. 


This Bill seeks to recognize healthcare as a fundamental right, 
aligning with Article 2i of the Constitution, which guarantees the right to 
life and personal liberty. By providing a statutory framework, it mandates 
universal access to essential healthcare services, ensuring financial 
protection through state-funded schemes. The Economic Survey 2022-23 
revealed that government health expenditure remains at 2.l per-cent of 
GDP, which is inadequate compared to the global average of 6 per-cent. 
Strengthening legal provisions through this Bill will enhance public 
healthcare infrastructure and reduce dependency on private sector 
healthcare, where 66 per-cent of India's population seeks treatment due to 
poor public health services (NSS 75“Round). 


The provisions proposed under this Bill focus on prohibiting 
discriminatory practices, ensuring accountability of private healthcare 
providers, and introducing a grievance redressal mechanism. Reports 
from NITI Aayog (202) indicate that 27 per-cent of urban households 
and 55 per-cent of rural households do not have health insurance 
coverage, necessitating a framework for affordable healthcare. 
Additionally, the Lancet Commission on Pollution and Health (208) 
found that environmental factors contribute to .7 million deaths annually 
in India, justifying the need for preventive healthcare policies. 


By integrating public health, digital health, and environmental health 
regulations, this Bill aligns with India’s commitments under the National 
Health Policy, 207, and Sustainable Development Goals (SDG 3: Good 
Health and Well-being). It also strengthens the implementation of 
Ayushman Bharat, ensuring seamless healthcare services to the 
economically weaker sections. The proposed Bill promotes transparent 
regulation of private healthcare institutions, enhanced penalties for 
medical negligence, and expands health insurance coverage, safeguarding 
citizens from financial distress. 


Given the urgency of healthcare reforms, this Bill aims to create a 
robust, accessible, and accountable healthcare system, prioritizing citizen 
welfare over commercial interests. By enacting the Right to Health Care 
Services Bill, 2025, the Government will reaffirm its commitment to 
universal health coverage, ensuring that every individual receives 
affordable, quality healthcare without discrimination. 


Hence, this Bill. 
ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 09 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill inter alia guarantees the right to health care 
services and emergency support to every citizen and provides that no 
citizen shall be discriminated against on any ground and that the 
Government shall ensure equal access to health care services and 
facilities to all citizens. Clause 4 provides that the appropriate 
Government shall make special provisions for ensuring the healthcare 
needs of specific vulnerable groups. Clause 5 stipulates the 
responsibilities of the Central Government to enhance health care 
resources and ensure the health and wellbeing of every citizen as 
guaranteed under the Bill. Clause 7 provides that the appropriate 
Government shall take all necessary measures to strengthen health 
infrastructure across the country and for development of human resources 
in the health care field. Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the establishment 
of national and regional centres for the treatment of rare, life-threatening 
diseases and genetic disorders and to provide financial assistance for the 
treatment of such diseases. Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the 
constitution of the National Health Care Services Authority and for the 
salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of the Members of the Authority. Clause 2 provides for the 
officers and staff of the Authority and the salaries and allowances payable 
to them as well as their terms and conditions of service. Clause 3 
provides for the functions of the Authority and inter alia specifies that the 
Authority shall constitute committees, scientific panels, or technical 
panels for the effective discharge of its functions. Clause 6 provides for 
the establishment of a Grievance Redressal Mechanism for the 
expeditious resolution of complaints relating to the denial of health care 
services or the violation of the rights guaranteed under this Act or 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act. Clause 20 of the Bill 
provides that the Central and State Government shall have concurrent 
responsibility for providing funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill 
and that the Central Government shall provide funds to the State 
Governments, to meet such percentage of expenditure, as may be 
determined, from time to time, in consultation with the State 
Governments, as grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out 
the purposes of this Bill. The said clause also provides that the Central 
Government shall grant such sums of money to the Authority for the 
effective implementation and enforcement of the provisions of the Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at 
this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be 
involved. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
provisions by an order to remove any difficulties that might arise in giving 
effect to any of the provisions thereof. Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the 
appropriate Government to make rules and regulations and the National 
Health Care Services Authority to make regulations for carrying out the 
purposes of this Bill. As the rules, regulations and order(s) will relate to 
matters of details only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ll] 


XVI 


Bill No. LVI of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the prevention of harm to human beings and loss of lives and 
property from stray and wild animal attacks, establish mechanisms 
for rapid emergency response and victim compensation, and 
to regulate the welfare, population control, vaccination, 
sheltering, and rehabilitation of such animals 
through humane and scientific practices, 
and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 


CHAPTER I 

PRELIMINARY 
l. (29) This Act may be called the Stray and Wild Animal Attacks (Prevention Short title and 
and Welfare) Act, 2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Establishment of 
Stray and Wild 
Animal 
Response Unit. 


2 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(a) “appropriate Government” means, in the case of a State, the Government 
of that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) “designated officer” means an officer appointed by the Central 
Government or the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette, 
for such local area or for such functions as may be specified in the 
notification; 


(c) “domestic or pet animal” means any animal that is tamed or bred in 
captivity and is ordinarily kept or intended to be kept in a household, farm, 
or other human environment for companionship, work, utility, or livelihood; 


(d) “Fund” means the Stray and Wild Animal Victim Compensation Fund 
established under section 4 of this Act; 


(० “incident” means any reported case of injury, fatality, or medically 
verified threat to a human being caused by an attack or aggression by a stray 
or wild animal; 


(f) “local authority” means,— 


(i) a Municipality or a Panchayat, as defined in clauses (e) and (9 
of article 243P of the Constitution, which is responsible for sanitation 
in its area of jurisdiction; 


(ii) a Cantonment Board constituted under section l0 of the 
Cantonments Act, 2006; and 


(iii) a railway authority of that sub-division, district, or any such 
part of India; 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed under the rules made under this Act; 


(h) “Scheme” means the Scheme for payment of compensation to persons 
affected by incidents under this Act framed under section 0; 


(i) “shelter home” means a facility established, maintained, or recognised by 
the State Animal Welfare Board, or in the case of a Union Territory, by the 
Union Territory Administration or the Animal Welfare Board of India, for 
the temporary or long-term housing, medical treatment, post-operative care, 
quarantine, and rehabilitation of stray animals, in accordance with the 
standards and guidelines prescribed under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder; 


6) “stray animal” means a dog, or any other animal species as may be 
notified by the Central Government from time to time, found in a public 
place without supervision, care, or identifiable ownership; 


(9 “Unit” means the Stray and Wild Animal Response Unit established by 
the appropriate Government in every district of the country under section 3; 
and 


( “wild animal” means any animal as defined under the Wildlife 
(Protection) Act, 972, which is found in human-inhabited or developed 
areas outside its notified or natural habitat. 


CHAPTER II 
STRAY AND WILD ANIMAL RESPONSE UNIT 


(7) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, establish, in every district, a Stray and Wild Animal Response 
Unit within six months from the date of commencement of this Act, to 
carry out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Unit shall function as a nodal body for coordination between the 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services, the Forest 
Department, the Health Department, local authorities, and such other 
authorities and stakeholders, as may be required from time to time for the 
effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


4] of 2006. 


53 of 972. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY i3 


(3) The composition of each Unit shall be as follows— 


(a) a veterinary practitioner registered under the relevant law 
for the time being in force, to be nominated by the District 
Administration in such manner as may be prescribed, who shall serve 
as the Chairperson; 


(b) one officer not below such rank as may be prescribed, from 
the Forest or Wildlife Department to be nominated by the 
appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(c) one representative from the Health Department in the 
appropriate Government not below the rank of Block Medical 
Officer or equivalent, to be nominated by the appropriate 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) one representative from the Police Department or Civil 
Defence, not below such rank as may be prescribed, to be nominated 
by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed; and 


(e) one representative of a Animal Welfare Organisation 
registered under any law for the time being in force and having 
such experience in stray or wild animal management, to be appointed 
by the appropriate Government, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) The Unit shall work in coordination with the Animal Welfare Board of the 
State, in the case of a State, or the Animal Welfare Board of India, in the case 
of a Union Territory, and any other relevant local body, as may be prescribed. 


(5) The term of office of, the salary and allowances payable to, and other 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the 
Unit shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(6) The Unit shall function in such manner and the procedure with regard to 
transaction of its business shall be regulated in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate Government. 


(I) The appropriate Government may appoint such number of officers 
and staff to the Unit, as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of 
its functions under this Act. 


(2) The method of recruitment, the salaries and allowances payable to, 
and other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff, so 
appointed for the purpose of the Unit shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


CHAPTER II 
PREVENTION AND SAFETY MEASURES 


(J) No person who owns or is in charge of a domestic or pet animal shall 
abandon such animal in any public place, private property, or any other 
location, whether temporarily or permanently, in a manner that renders the 
animal stray or without care. 


(2) Every person who owns or has acquired any domestic or pet animal 
shall, within a period of one month from the date of such acquisition or 
ownership, make an application for its registration to the respective local 
authority having jurisdiction: 


Provided that every person who, before the commencement of this Act, 
owns or is in charge of a domestic or pet animal shall, within such period 
from the date of commencement of this Act, as may be prescribed, apply for 
registration as provided under this Act. 


(3) The procedure for registration, including application forms, required 
documents, fees, and maintenance of a digital or physical register of such 
registration under sub-section (2), shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Officers and 
staff of the 
Unit. 


Prohibition of 
abandonment 

and mandatory 
registration of 
owned animals. 


Risk zoning 
surveillance. 


Prevention 
protocols. 


Emergency 
reporting 
response. 


Handling 
aggressive 
dangerous 
animals. 


and 


and 


of 
or 


4 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(4) The local authority shall maintain a register of all animals registered 
under sub-section (2), including the name and contact details of the owner, 
species and breed of the animal, and such other particulars as specified in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(5) Any person who, in contravention of this section — 


(a) fails to register their domestic or pet animal within the 
stipulated time; or 


(b) abandons an animal; 


shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both. 


(7) Local authorities shall, in consultation with the concerned Unit, identify 
and notify high-risk zones based on the frequency, severity, recurrence of 
incidents and such other factors in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) In such notified zones, the local authority shall implement appropriate 
surveillance and deterrent measures, which may include CCTV installation, 
animal tagging, and installation of physical barriers, subject to technical 
feasibility and ecological compliance. 


(3) The Central Government may issue model guidelines for standardising 
the risk assessment criteria and minimum safety infrastructure required in 
high-risk zones. 


(7) The local authority shall implement mandatory sterilization and anti- 
rabies vaccination drives in areas notified as high-risk zones under section 
6, at such regular intervals as may be prescribed. 


(2) The local authority and the Forest Department shall install physical 
barriers and warning signage in identified human-animal conflict zones in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) Public advisories and safety protocols shall be disseminated through 
signage, community channels, digital platforms and such other forms of 
communication as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER IV 
INCIDENT MANAGEMENT AND HUMAN SAFETY 


(7) The Central Government shall establish and maintain a 2457 
national toll-free helpline for reporting incidents. 


(2) Each local authority shall maintain at least one operational animal 
ambulance and a designated first-response team to respond to stray and wild 
animal attacks as expeditiously as possible. 


(3) All emergency calls involving a threat to human life shall be responded 
to within two hours in urban areas and six hours in rural areas, to the extent 
administratively possible. 


(4) The national helpline and district response data shall be centrally 
recorded and reported quarterly to the State Government and the Central 
Government, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(7) Where any stray or wild animal is reported to pose an imminent danger 
to human life, the Unit shall ensure the capture of such animal and conduct 
a medical and behavioural evaluation of such animal within twenty-four 
hours of such capture by a registered veterinary practitioner in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 


(2) No animal shall be euthanised unless— 


(a) in the case of a stray animal, a certification by a registered 
veterinary practitioner is obtained that the animal is terminally ill or 


53 0ए972. 


59 0960. 
53 0ए972. 


45 of 2023. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


0. 


suffering from an incurable condition causing prolonged suffering or 
where a designated officer, after risk assessment in accordance with the 
rules made under this Act, certifies that the such animal constitutes a 
continuing and imminent threat to public safety; and 


(b) in the case of wild animals, the Chief Wildlife Warden or 
such other officer authorised under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 
972, permits such action in accordance with the section | of that 
Act: 


Provided that if euthanasia is being resorted to, then it shall be 
done in as humane a manner as possible. 


(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), every effort shall be made, 
wherever feasible to relocate, rehabilitate, or quarantine such animal, as an 
alternative to euthanasia. 


(4) All actions under this section shall comply with the provisions of the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 960, the Wildlife Protection Act, 
972, and the Animal Birth Control Rules, 2023 and any other law in this 
regard for the time being in force. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, — 


(a) “euthanasia” means the humane termination of life of an 
animal by or under the supervision of a registered veterinary 
practitioner, by such method as may be prescribed. 


(b) “imminent threat” means a situation where an animal is likely 
to cause immediate and serious harm to human life or health, as may be 
assessed in such manner based on such parameters, as may be 
prescribed. 


CHAPTER V 
COMPENSATION AND DATA MANAGEMENT 


(7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, frame a Scheme for payment of compensation to persons 
affected by incidents under this Act. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (7), the Scheme 
shall provide for— 


(i) payment of compensation of not less than rupees four lakh 
to the next of kin in the event of death of an individual; 


(ii) payment of compensation ranging from rupees one lakh to 
rupees two lakh in cases of grievous hurt as defined under section 
6 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or any other serious 
injury resulting in permanent disability, disfigurement, or 
prolonged hospitalization as may be certified by a registered 
medical practitioner; 


(iii) an insurance scheme for individuals residing in high-risk 
zones; and 


(iv) compensation for damage or loss to property or livestock. 


(3) The Scheme referred to in sub-section (7) shall be administered by such 
authority, not lower in rank than the District Collector, as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government. 


(4) The Central Government shall make rules for the implementation of the 
Scheme and the determination, procedure, and manner of disbursement of 
compensation. 


Compensation 
Scheme. 


Central 
database and 
reporting. 


Public 
awareness and 
education 
programmes. 


Capacity 
building 
programmes. 


Establishment 
of the Stray and 
Wild Animal 
Victim 
Compensation 
Fund. 


6 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


il. 


2. 


3. 


4. 


(7) The Central Government shall establish and maintain a dedicated 
digital portal for the collection and tracking of incidents, nationwide. 


(2) Every local authority, Unit, shelter home, and veterinary institution or 
any other entity as may be notified, shall mandatorily record and upload 
data relating to such incidents to the portal, in such form, manner, and at 
such intervals as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Central Government shall publish an annual report based on such 
data referred to in sub-section (2) and upload the same on the dedicated 
digital portal for public access. 


CHAPTER VI 
COMMUNITY AWARENESS AND CAPACITY BUILDING 


(I) The appropriate Governments shall organise regular public 
awareness campaigns on safe coexistence and human-animal conflict 
prevention. 


(2) The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) 
and other relevant institutions shall develop age-appropriate modules on 
human-animal conflict prevention for inclusion in the curricula and training 
programmes of all educational institutions. 


(7) The appropriate Government shall organise and conduct regular 
training programmes for officers and organisations engaged in the 
implementation of this Act. 


(2) The Central Government shall prescribe model guidelines and training 
modules for such programmes. 


CHAPTER VII 
FUNDING AND PENALTIES 


(7) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, establish a fund to be called the "Stray and Wild Animal 
Victim Compensation Fund" for the purpose of _ providing 
compensation to victims of attacks by stray and wild animals, including 
in cases of injury, disability, or death, as provided under section 0. 


(2) The Fund shall be financed through equal contributions made by the 
following, namely— 


(a) grants or allocations by the Central Government, from 
time to time, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf; 


(b) grants or allocations by the State Government, from time to 
time, after due appropriation made by the State Legislature by law in 
this behalf; and 


(c) the local authority having jurisdiction over the area where the 
incident occurred. 


(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund the following, namely: — 


(a) the amount of fines collected by way of imposition of 
penalties under sections |5 and 6; and 


(b) moneys received by way of voluntary donations from 
persons or companies or corporate entities as part of their Corporate 
Social Responsibility obligations under section 35 of the Companies 
Act, 20]3. 


(4) The Fund shall be utilized for providing financial assistance or 
compensation in the event of— 


8 of 203. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l7 


5. 


(a) physical injury resulting from an attack by a stray or wild 
animal; 


(b) permanent disability or disfigurement caused by such an 
attack; 


(c) death caused due to such an attack, in which case 
compensation shall be payable to the legal heirs or dependents of the 
deceased; and 


(d) such other losses as may be notified by the appropriate 
Government through rules. 


(5) The Fund shall be administered and managed by the appropriate 
Government and disbursed through such authority as referred to in sub- 
section (3) of section l0, in coordination with the concerned local 
authorities. 


(6) The appropriate Government shall frame detailed guidelines, including 
eligibility conditions, assessment procedures, timelines for disbursal, 
grievance redressal mechanisms, and auditing provisions, for the effective 
and transparent administration of the Fund. 


(7) The local authority shall be responsible for— 


(a) initial verification and documentation of claims within its 
jurisdiction; 

(b) submission of verified claims and reports to the appropriate 
Government for final sanction; and 


(c) maintaining local records of all such incidents and 
compensations disbursed. 


(8) The appropriate Government shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts of the Fund in 
such form and manner and at such time of each financial year as may be 
prescribed. 


(9) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited and certified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India or by any other person appointed 
by him in this behalf at such intervals and shall be laid annually, as the case 
may be, before each House of Parliament or before the State Legislature, 
where it consists of one House and before each House of the State 
Legislature, where it consists of two Houses. 


(209) The Central Government may issue model guidelines for the uniform 
implementation of this provision across States and Union territories, without 
prejudice to the autonomy of appropriate Government in the administration 
of the Fund. 


(J) Where any local authority or any official authorised by it fails to take 
reasonable preventive measures to regulate, control, or manage stray or wild 
animals within its jurisdiction, resulting in an increase in animal attacks 
causing injury, harm, or threat to public safety, such local authority or the 
authorised official, as the case may be, shall be liable to penalty in 
accordance with sub-section (2). 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (/), the designated 
officer or person-in-charge of animal control in the local authority shall, 
upon the first offence, be liable to: 


(a) a fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but 
may extend to two lakh rupees; and 


Penalty and 
liability for 
negligence in 
prevention of 
animal attacks. 


Penalties and 


enforcement. 


Application of 


other laws. 


Power to make 
tules. 


8 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


6. 


7. 


8. 


(b) mandatory suspension from duty for a minimum period of 
thirty days or until completion of the inquiry, whichever is longer. 


(3) In the case of a second or subsequent offence, such officer shall be liable 
to;— 


(a) imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months; or 
(b) fine not less than two lakh rupees; and 


(c) disqualification from holding any _ public office or 
administrative post related to urban governance or animal control for a 
period of five years. 


(4) The liability under this section shall be without prejudice to any civil or 
criminal liability under any other law for the time being in force. 


(5) The Central Government may prescribe, by rules, the manner of 
determination of responsibility, inquiry procedures, and additional 
safeguards for enforcement under this section. 


(J) Any person who obstructs any officer or person authorised under this 
Act in the lawful discharge of their duties shall be punishable with,— 


(a) fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees; or 
(b) imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month; or 
(c) both. 


(2) In the event of a subsequent conviction, the offender shall be punishable 
with fine of not less than fifteen thousand rupees or with imprisonment 
which may extend to three months, or with both. 


(J) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation 
of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), in the event of 
any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this Act and any 
other law, including the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 972 and the Prevention 
of Cruelty to Animals Act, 960, the provisions of this Act related to the 
establishment of Units emergency reporting and response mechanisms, 
victim compensation, and data management shall prevail. 


(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government or the Union territory 
Government with Legislature, as the case may be, under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State 
Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


53 of 972. 
59 of 960. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


9. 


(2) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear 
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

India faces a growing challenge at the intersection of public safety and animal 
welfare. Official data highlights the scale of this issue, with over 3.04 million dog 
bite cases reported in 2023 leading to at least 286 deaths. In 2024, approximately 
2.2 million dog bite cases and 48 rabies fatalities were recorded, alongside over 
500,000 incidents involving other animals. These attacks are frequent in populated 
areas, leading to avoidable injuries, deaths, and public fear. Independent surveys 
suggest that the true burden is much higher, with estimates of 9.! million animal 
bite incidents annually. India accounts for nearly 36 per cent. of the world's rabies 
fatalities. 


Currently, India lacks a dedicated legal framework to holistically manage 
animal attacks on humans. Existing laws like the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
Act, 960, and the Wildlife Protection Act, 972, are vital for animal rights but do 
not provide for coordinated emergency response, victim compensation, or scientific 
population management, leading to administrative confusion. 


This Bill seeks to address this critical gap by balancing the constitutional right 
to life guaranteed to the citizens of the country under Article 2] of the Constitution 
with compassion for living beings. It proposes a humane and evidence-based 
framework by: 


e = Establishing district-level Stray and Wild Animal Response Units for 
coordinated action. 


e Mandating a 24x7 national emergency helpline, time-bound response 
protocols, and a victim compensation scheme. 


e Strengthening preventive measures through systematic animal birth 
control, vaccination, and a central digital database. 


e Introducing structured public awareness campaigns, educational 
modules, and capacity-building programmes. 


e Creating a dedicated Stray and Wild Animal Victim Compensation Fund 
supported by governmental allocations, contributions by local authorities, 
amount of fines imposed by way of penalties provided under the Bill, 
CSR, and public donations. 


This legislation offers a forward-looking solution, recognising that protecting 
human lives and ensuring animal welfare are shared societal obligations. It also 
aligns with global public health goals, such as the WHO's target to eliminate dog- 
mediated rabies by 2030. 


Hence, the Bill. 
ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Stray and Wild Animal 
Response Units in every district of the country, which shall function as nodal 
bodies for the prevention and coordinated response to animal attack incidents, and 
shall consist of veterinary professionals, officials from Forest, Health, Police 
Departments, and representatives from Animal Welfare Organisations, the 
composition of the Units and the salaries and allowances and other service 
conditions of the Chairperson and Members thereof. Clause 4 provides for the 
appointment of the officers and staff of the Unit and their salaries and allowances 
and other service conditions. Clause 8 mandates the establishment of a 24x7 
national toll-free emergency helpline for reporting incidents of stray and wild 
animal attacks. Clause l0 provides that the Central Government shall frame a 
Scheme for payment of compensation to persons affected by stray and wild animal 
attacks, including provisions for compensation in cases of death, permanent 
disability, serious injury, or property loss. Clause |l empowers the Central 
Government to establish a dedicated digital portal for real-time reporting and 
national-level data aggregation of incidents. Clause 2 provides that the 
appropriate Government shall organise regular public awareness campaigns on safe 
coexistence and conflict prevention, whereas, sub-clause (/) of Clause |3 provides 
for the organization and conduct of regular training programmes for officers and 
organisations engaged in the implementation of this Act. Clause 4 provides for the 
establishment of a “Stray and Wild Animal Victim Compensation Fund” with 
contributions from the Central Government, State Governments, local authorities, 
CSR and public donations etc. to be used exclusively for compensation and welfare 
measures under this Act. 


The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring and non- 
recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a 
recurring expenditure of approximately one hundred crore rupees per annum will 
be involved. A non-recurring expenditure of approximately fifty crore rupees is 
also likely to be involved. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules to 
carry out the provisions of the Act. Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Government to make such provisions through an order for removing any difficulty 
that might arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. 


As the rules or orders will relate to matters of administrative and procedural 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


XVII 


Bill No. LIT of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for 
Men to safeguard the rights and welfare of men, to inquire into 
grievances and recommend redressal mechanisms, to review existing 
laws and policies affecting men, to promote awareness and 
preventive outreach on issues impacting men’s 
physical, mental and social well-being, 
and to ensure institutional support 
through legal aid, counselling, 
and research, and for matters 
connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
l. (4) This Act may be called the National Commission for Men Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Definitions. 


~ 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires — 


(a)“Commission” means the National Commission for Men 
constituted under section 3; 


(b)“Member” means a Member of the Commission and 
includes the Member-Secretary; 


(c)“men” means a person of any age, who is biologically male 
by birth and has not identified himself otherwise in accordance with 
any law for the time being in force; 


(d)“prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; and 


(e)“State Commission” means the State Commission for Men 
that may be constituted by any State Government under section 3. 


CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MEN 


ee (6) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
0 the 


aienal Gazette, constitute a Commission to be known as the National 
Ghaaissian Commission for Men to exercise the powers conferred on, and to 
for Men. perform the functions assigned to it under this Act. 


Sag 


(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable 
and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi and the 
Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government, 
establish office(s) at such other place(s) in the country, as it may deem 
fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(4) The Commission shall consist of the following Members to be 
appointed by the Central Government, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, namely, — 


(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence in 
the field of law, public administration, gender studies, sociology, 
psychology, or social work, with at least fifteen years of relevant 
experience and committed to the cause of men and gender 
equality; 


(b) a Vice-Chairperson, possessing qualifications and 
experience similar to that of the Chairperson; 


(c) five Members, to be appointed from amongst persons 
of ability, integrity and standing, having special knowledge of, 
and professional experience in, one or more of the following 
fields, such as — 


(i) law and justice, 

(ii) men’s rights and welfare, 

(iii) mental health and counselling, 
(iv) family and child welfare, or 

(vy) human rights and public policy; 


Provided that at least one Member each shall be from amongst 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes 
respectively. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


Provided further that at least one Member shall be from amongst 
persons below the age of forty years, at the time of such appointment; 
and 


(d) a Member-Secretary, who shall be an officer not below 
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, 
possessing appropriate administrative experience and 
knowledge of the issues pertaining to gender or social justice. 


(5) The Commission may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Government, co-opt not more than two persons having special 
knowledge or practical experience in any relevant field as experts or 
consultants, from any relevant field for such period and on such terms 
and conditions, as may be prescribed: 


Provided that such experts or consultants shall not be entitled to 
vote at any meeting of the Commission. 


4. 0) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and every Member of the Term of office 
Commission shall hold office for a term not exceeding three years from the and.» 0 700 

है is offi Ries f . of service of the 

date on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for reappointment Chairperson and 

for a further term not exceeding three years: Members of the 


Commission. 
Provided that no person shall hold office as Chairperson, Vice- 


Chairperson, or Member for more than two consecutive terms. 


(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and 
Members as well as remuneration payable to experts and consultants co- 
opted to the Commission, shall be such as may be prescribed by rules 
made under this Act: 


Provided that until such rules are made in this behalf, they shall 
be entitled to such remuneration and benefits as are admissible to 
persons holding equivalent post in the Central Government. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (), the Chairperson, 
Vice-Chairperson, or any Member other than the Member-Secretary, 
appointed under clause (d) of sub-section (4) of section 3 may resign from 
his office by giving a notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Central 
Government, and such resignation shall take effect from the date on which it 
is accepted; 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (), a person shall be 
disqualified for being appointed as, or for continuing as the Chairperson, 
Vice-Chairperson, or a Member, other than the Member-Secretary, appointed 
under clause (d) of sub-section (4) of section 3, if such person— 


(a) is adjudged an undischarged insolvent; 


(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence 
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; 


(c) has engaged, during his term of office, in any paid 
employment or activity outside the duties of his office; 


(d) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, become unfit 
to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; 


(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused 
the position of Chairperson or Member as to render that person’s 
continuance in office detrimental to the public interest; or 


(9 has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to 
affect prejudicially his functions as a Member; 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(g) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or 


(h) is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in 
force: 


and the Central Government may, by order, remove from office, the 
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, or any Member, other than the Member- 
Secretary, appointed under clause (d) of sub-section (4) of section 3, in any 
of the above cases. 


Provided that no person shall be disqualified or removed under this 
sub-section e unless such person has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard. 


Provided further that a person disqualified or removed under this 
sub-section shall forthwith cease to hold office. 


(5) Any vacancy caused under this section or otherwise shall be filled by 
fresh appointment within a period of six months from the date on which such 
vacancy occurs. 


Officers and 5. (0)76 Central Government shall provide the Commission with such 
se en of officers and other employees to the Commission, as may be necessary for 
the the efficient performance of its functions under this Act; 

23875 (2) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, and 
the other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and other 
employees, so appointed for the purposes of the Commission shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 

Vacancies, 6. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be 

See invalidated on the ground merely by reason of, — 

invalidate 

oe (a)any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 

०0 e C 40203. aren 

Commission. OmMmss!0n,/08 

(b)any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson 
or Member of the Commission; or 

(c)any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not 
affecting the merits of the case. 

Committees 7. 0976 Commission may appoint such Committees as may be necessary for 

of the dealing with such special issues as may be taken up by the Commission from 

Commission. मु 

time to time. 

(2)The Commission shall have the power to co-opt as members of any 
Committee appointed under sub-section (/) such number of persons, who are 
not Members of the Commission, as it may think fit and the persons so co- 
opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the Committee and take 
part in its proceedings but shall not have the right to vote. 

(3) The persons so co-opted shall be entitled to receive such allowances 
for attending the meetings of the Committee as may be prescribed. 

Procedure to 8. 080) The Commission or a Committee thereof shall meet as and when 

i Pee necessary and shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think 

y e i 

Commission. it. 


(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure and the procedure of 
the Committees thereof. 


(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the 
Member-Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorised 
by the Member-Secretary in this behalf. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


9. 


CHAPTER III 


FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 


(0)706 Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely— 


(a) to investigate and examine all matters relating to — 


(i) violation or deprivation of rights of men and 
safeguards provided to them under the Constitution or any 
other law for the time being in force; and 


(ii) misuse or abuse of laws resulting in 
harassment, victimisation, or mental distress to men, 
including false or malicious prosecution in family and 
criminal law matters; 


(b) to study and recommend reforms in laws, rules, and 
policies that disproportionately or unjustly affect men, with a view 
to ensuring equitable access to justice; 


(c) to promote awareness and sensitisation regarding the 
rights, mental health, and social challenges of men, especially in 
relation to family disputes, workplace stress, and _ societal 
expectations; 


(d) to assist men in distress by providing legal aid, 
counselling, or rehabilitation services, directly or in 
coordination with legal services authorities, mental health 
professionals, or non-governmental organisations; 


(e) to undertake or sponsor research, studies, and data 
collection on issues specifically affecting men, including but not 
limited to male suicide rates, health disparities, unemployment, 
custodial rights, and domestic abuse; 


(f) to review the safeguards provided to men under the 
Constitution and other laws, and recommend measures for their 
effective implementation; 


(g) to inspect or visit, either independently or in association 
with other authorities, any jail, shelter home, mental health 
institution, or rehabilitation centre housing male inmates or 
patients, and to make recommendations for ensuring humane and 
dignified treatment; 


(h) to advise the Central Government on the planning, 
formulation, and implementation of social welfare schemes and 
affirmative action policies concerning men, boys, and male 
adolescents; 


(6) to coordinate with State Governments, State 
Commissions, if constituted in future, and other bodies working for 
men’s welfare, to ensure policy coherence and effective grievance 
redressal; 


(j) to present to the Central Government, annually and at such 
other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the 
working of the Commission and the safeguards provided for men 
under the Constitution and other laws including therein 
recommendations for the effective implementation of those 
safeguards and reforms in laws, rules and policies for improving the 
conditions of men by the Central Government or any State 
Government; and 


Functions of the 
Commission. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(k) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed or as 
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act or may be 
referred to it by the Central Government; 


(2) The Central Government shall cause all the reports referred to in clause 
() of sub-section (2) to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a 
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, 
if any of any of such recommendations; 


(3) Where any such report or any part thereof relates to any matter with which 
any State Government is concerned, the Commission shall forward a copy of 
such report or part to such State Government who shall cause it to be laid 
before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the 
action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the 
State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such 
recommendations. 


Educational 0. (6) The Commission shall, in consultation with the appropriate authorities 
nes and institutions, develop and promote educational programmes and 
ताली awareness campaigns aimed at— 


functions. . vie 3 
es (a)fostering gender sensitivity and mutual respect among boys 


and young men in schools, colleges, and Universities; 


(b)promoting the values of healthy masculinity, emotional 
intelligence, mental well-being, and non-violence;and 


(c)raising awareness on issues such as lawful conduct in 
relationships, consent, responsibility in family life, and respect for 
diversity. 

(2)For the purpose of sub-section (6), the Commission shall coordinate 
with— 

(a)the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE); 

(b)the National Council of Educational Research and Training 
(NCERT); 

(c)the University Grants Commission (UGC); 

(d)State Education Boards; and 

(e)such other academic or skill development bodies, as may 
be prescribed; 


(3) The Commission may recommend the inclusion of suitable modules, 
workshops, or resource materials on men's rights, mental health, legal 
awareness, and gender equality in school and university curricula. 


(4) The Commission shall also facilitate community-level outreach 
programmes, youth camps, and media campaigns to sensitise the public on 
issues affecting boys and men, with special focus on rural and underserved 
areas. 


Commission il. The Commission shall, while inquiring into any matter referred to it under 
2 have this Act, have the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 


owers of a a है . . . . मु 
जो Coun 908 while trying a suit and in particular, in respect of the following — 5 of 908. 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses or 
any person from any part of India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
court or office; 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and 
documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
2. (0) Nothing anything contained in this Act shall be construed as limiting or 


3. 


4. 


affecting the rights and protections accorded to women under the Constitution 
or any other law for the time being in force. 


(2) The Commission shall not intervene in or pronounce upon any complaint 
or matter in which a woman is the complainant, unless— 


(a) _ the competent court of law has, by a final and binding 
judgment, declared the complaint to be false, malicious, or an abuse 
of legal process; or 


(b) — the competent authority under any law has, after due 
inquiry, recorded a finding to that effect. 


(3) In cases involving cross-allegations by both parties, the Commission may 
render assistance to the male complainant only to the extent that such 
assistance does not impede or undermine the legal process being pursued by 
the woman complainant. 


(4)The Commission shall ensure that all actions taken in furtherance of its 
functions are in conformity with the principles of equality, non- 
discrimination, and gender justice. 


(0) Any State Government may, if it deems necessary, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the (name of the 
State) Commission for Men, to exercise such powers and carry out such 
functions within the State as may be prescribed by the State Government or 
as may be assigned to it under any State Act and to perform such other 
functions in coordination with the Commission, as may be delegated to it by 
the Central Government. 


(2)The composition of the State Commission, the qualifications and 
experience, term of office, salary and allowances of the Chairperson and 
Members of the State Commission as well as the regulation of its procedure 
shall be such as may be prescribed by the respective State Government. 


(3)The State Commission shall, at such intervals and in such form and 
manner, as may be prescribed, submit periodic reports to the Commission 
and to the respective State Government, on matters within its jurisdiction and 
the State Government, shall cause such reports to be laid, as soon as may be 
after they are received, before both Houses of the State Legislature, where it 
consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, 
before that House. 


(6) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission, by way of 
grants such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for 
being utilised for the purposes of this Act: 


Provided that the Commission may spend such sums as it thinks 
fit for performing the functions assigned to it under this Act and such 
sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants referred 
to in sub-section (). 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the expenditure 
towards salaries, allowances, and pensions payable to the Chairperson, 
Vice-Chairperson, Members, officers, and other employees of the 
Commission shall be met from a separate head of account under the 
Union Budget, as may be specified by the Central Government in this 
behalf, and shall not form part of the grants-in-aid provided by the 


Safeguard to 
protect the 
rights of 
women. 


Constitution of 
State 
Commissions 
for Men. 


Separate 
Grants for 
Salary and 
Functional 
Expenditure 


Accounts 
and audit. 


Annual 
report. 


Annual 
report and 
audit report 
to be laid 
before 
Parliament. 


Chairperson, 
Members, 
officers and 
other 
employees of 
the 
Commission 
to be public 
servants. 
Central 
Government 
to consult 
Commission. 
Power to 
make rules 
and 
regulations. 


30 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


5. 


6. 


7. 


8. 


9. 


20. 


Central Government for the discharge of the functions of the 
Commission under sub-section (). 


(3)The Commission shall maintain separate accounts for each such grant 
received under sub-section (l) and each such expenditure referred to in sub- 
section (2) and shall utilize the same only for the purposes for which they 
are allocated, subject to audit and oversight as prescribed. 


(0)706९ Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India. 


(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 


(3)The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him 
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this 
Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection 
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall 
have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the Commission; 


(4)The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together 
with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central 
Government by the Commission. 


The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for each 
financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account 
of its activities during the previous financial year and forward a copy thereof 
to the Central Government. 


The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a 
memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, in 
so far as they relate to the Central Government, and the reasons for the non- 
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations and the audit report to 
be laid as soon as may be after the reports are received, before each House of 
Parliament. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 


The Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson, the Members, officers and other 
employees of the Commission shall be deemed to be public servants within 
the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita. 


The Central Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy 
matters affecting men. 


(0) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all 


45 of 2023. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3] 


2i. 


22. 


matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purposes of 
implementing the provisions of this Act. 


(3) Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made 
by the Commission under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both the Houses agree 
that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule 
or regulation. 


(0) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any 
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have over riding effect on the 
provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Constitution of India guarantees equality before the law and equal 
protection of the laws to all persons. While women have historically faced, and 
continue to face, deep-rooted discrimination and violence—which justifies the 
existence of a robust institutional framework for their protection—recent socio-legal 
trends and empirical data highlight those men too are increasingly experiencing 
challenges that warrant dedicated institutional attention. 


Numerous studies, public interest litigations, and judicial pronouncements 
have drawn attention to the rising instances of false accusations under matrimonial and 
gender-specific laws, including the misuse of Section 85 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 (earlier Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code) and provisions under 
domestic violence laws. While the Hon’ble Supreme Court has acknowledged such 
misuse and issued procedural safeguards, there remains no statutory authority to offer 
institutional support to falsely accused men, many of whom suffer from social stigma, 
mental trauma, and unjust incarceration. 


A petition filed in recent years brought forth compelling data, citing the 202] 
National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) figures: out of ,64,033 total suicides, 8,063 
were committed by married men, compared to 28,680 by married women. The petition 
also noted that 33 per cent. of male suicides were linked to family-related issues, and 
4.8 per cent. specifically to marital stress. These figures reflect an alarming mental 
health and societal crisis that remains unaddressed in national policy. 


The petition further highlighted the absence of any mechanism for addressing 
domestic violence against men, despite the growing number of cases involving 
psychological abuse, physical harm, and marital breakdowns affecting men’s well- 
being. The petitioner sought the creation of a National Commission for Men, 
analogous to the National Commission for Women, and requested the formulation of 
guidelines for police stations to accept complaints of domestic abuse from men and 
refer them to the State Human Rights Commissions or other competent forums. It was 
also urged that the Law Commission of India be tasked with studying the legal and 
psychological effects of marital distress and suicides among men, with a view to 
recommending structural reform. 


Additionally, the petition urged the National Human Rights Commission 
(NHRC) to accept and act on complaints submitted by men experiencing domestic 
violence or family-related stress. Despite the rising demand and genuine public 
concern, the lack of a statutory framework has led to judicial reluctance to intervene, 
with courts consistently noting that the creation of such a body lies within the 
legislative domain. 


Various scholars, legal experts, and civil society organisations have 
supported the view that gender justice must be inclusive, and that the presence of 
institutions like the National Commission for Women must not negate or overshadow 
the legitimate needs of men—particularly in the spheres of family law, custody 
disputes, workplace harassment, and mental health. 


Therefore, it is proposed to establish a National Commission for Men, a 
statutory body entrusted with powers to investigate complaints, recommend legal and 
policy reforms, coordinate with State authorities, conduct awareness campaigns, and 
provide institutional support through legal aid, mental health counselling, and research. 
The Commission shall also maintain full respect for women’s rights and will intervene 
only in matters where a competent court or authority has determined that a complaint 
made by a woman was false, malicious, or an abuse of process. 


The Bill provides for the constitution of the Commission, including its 
structure, powers, and functions; grants the Commission quasi-judicial powers akin to 
a civil court; and mandates the creation of State Commissions for Men. It also ensures 
financial transparency, with separate allocations for salary and functional expenditure, 
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General, and annual reporting to Parliament. 
It further provides for preventive and educational outreach, promoting healthy 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


masculinity, lawful conduct, emotional resilience, and gender equality through 
collaboration with bodies like CBSE, NCERT, UGC, and other stakeholders. 


This Bill seeks to institutionalise a gender-balanced and constitutionally 
sound framework for the recognition, protection, and empowerment of men and boys 
in India, thereby ensuring justice for all genders without in any way diluting or 
compromising the rights and protections guaranteed to women under law. 


Hence, this Bill. 
ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National 
Commission for Men, which shall consist of a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson, five 
Members, and a Member-Secretary. Clause 4 provides for the tenure, salary and 
allowances and other service conditions of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and 
Members as well as the remuneration to experts and consultants appointed to the 
Commission. Clause 5 empowers the Central Government to appoint officers and staff 
necessary for the functioning of the Commission and provide for their salaries and 
allowances and other service conditions. Clause 7 provides for allowances to persons co- 
opted to the Commission for attending meetings thereof. Clause 9 lays down the 
functions of the Commission, which inter-alia, include providing legal aid, counselling, 
or rehabilitation services to men in distress directly or in coordination with legal services 
authorities, mental health professionals, or non-governmental organisations and 
undertaking or sponsor research, studies, and data collection on issues specifically 
affecting men. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate 
funds to the Commission to be utilised for the purposes of the Bill and mandates a separate 
budgetary head under the Union Budget for meeting the expenditure incurred on salaries, 
allowances and pensions of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Members, officers and 
other employees of the Commission. 


The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of recurring and non- 
recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of approximately rupees one hundred crore per annum will be involved. A 
non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be involved. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules and the 
National Commission for Men to make regulations to carry out the provisions of the 
Act. Clause 2 empowers the Central Government to make such provisions through 
an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the provisions 
of the Bill. 


As the rules or regulations or orders will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


xXVUl 


Bill No.XXVII of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (4) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force at once. 
2. Inarticle 9 of the Constitution, 


(0) _ in clause (), after sub-clause (g), the following sub- 
clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(h) to access internet, telephonic and digital 
communication, mass media and newspapers.” 


(2) in clause (2), after the words, “sub-clause (a)” the words 
“and sub-clause (h)”, shall be inserted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
article 9. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The guarantee to access to the means of communication is essential to 
preserve the rights of freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by the 
Constitution. There are many parts in the country where internet and other 
means of communication are difficult to avail and even in many well- 
connected cities there are individuals who are unable to access these means of 
communication. 


In order to be a true democracy, there is a need to ensure that people are 
able to voice their opinions and concerns. 


The Bill proposes to make the right to access means of communication 
as part of the fundamental rights of the citizen. 


The proposed legislation, hence, is required to ensure right to freedom 
which is essential for a fruitful life. 


The Bill seeks to achieve this objective. 


V. SIVADASAN. 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


xXIX 


Bill No. XXIII of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 972. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 


l. 8) This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2025. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force at once. 


53 of 972. 2. Insection of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 972 (hereinafter referred to Amendment of 
as the principal Act), in clause (2), in sub-clause (a), the first and second section. 7; 
provisos and the Explanation shall be omitted. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


Substitution of 3. For section 62 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, 
section 62. namely:— 

Declaration of “The Central Government may, on the recommendations of the 
certain wild S G b Tae dack ld animal Tal 
गा डि dar Be tate Government, by noti ication, eclare any wild animal specifie 
vermin. in Schedule I and II to be vermin for any area and for such period as 


may be specified therein; and so long as such notification is in force, 
such wild animal shall be deemed not to be included in Schedule I or 
Schedule I, as the case may be, for such area and for such period as 
may be specified in the notification.” 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The number of attacks on human beings by wild animals is increasing 
exponentially. The existing Wild Life Protection Act with its extremely rigid 
provisions has made the removal of dangerous wild animals an impossibility. The 
amendments to the act in 2002 have further increased its rigidity resulting in a 
situation in which the Wild Life wardens are unable to act to protect human lives. 
There is an urgent need to correct this anomaly. 


The extreme diversity of India also demands decentralisation in forest 
management practices and the States should be given the power to decide upon the 
declaration of any animal as vermin if it becomes a threat to human life, livelihood 
and property. 


Hence, this Bill. 
V. SIVADASAN. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4] 


Bill No. XLI of 2025 


A Bill to guarantee free access to libraries within the country to all citizens in 
a non-discriminatory manner and develop and maintain a comprehensive public 
library system within the country to cater to the general 
and specialised needs of the members of the community 
and for matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto. 

WHEREAS, it is necessary to guarantee equitable access to 
reading infrastructure for all citizens, above and beyond educational facilities, to 
empower all citizens by providing life-long learning resources to support 
creativity, innovation, research and development, allowing them to satisfy 
intellectual curiosities for self-improvement and social progress to drive the 
sustenance of Indian democracy; 


AND WHEREAS, a public library, in particular, a physical public 
library space that is freely accessible to all citizens, as the living force for 
education, culture and information, is an indispensable institution to achieve 
the above-mentioned multi-faceted and interconnected objectives; 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


AND WHEREAS, large sections of the citizens in the country, oppressed 
historically by caste as well as by other intersecting inequalities, have been 
excluded from resources and opportunities for reading, education, life-long self- 
improvement and self-expression as also opportunities to be connected in a 
community cutting across identities, and establishment of a public library 
institution can play a crucial role in challenging such historic exclusion and 
inhumane division of society as well as promote research, innovation, and 
economic progress; 


AND WHEREAS, several States have varying public library systems without 
any common definition of a public library or interconnection between such public 
libraries, it is desirable to provide a common minimum framework for 
establishment and operation of an extensive and expansive public library system 
across the country that is responsive to the evolving needs of the public, while 
ensuring a degree of autonomy to the States in establishing their own public library 
institutions; 


AND WHEREAS, the current support provided by the Union as well as the 
State Governments for existing libraries in the country and respective States, needs 
to be augmented to support the aspirations of the public, especially in providing 
financial support, permanent library staff, dynamically tracking changes in reading 
habits and pertinent transformations in the culture of the society in the wake of 
technological changes, maintaining and publishing official statistics on libraries, 
and enabling an equitable and freely accessible system of exchange of library 
services with libraries, both within and outside India. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title and l. (J) This Act may be called the Right to Read Act, 2025. 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “aided library” means libraries receiving grant-in-aid from the 
appropriate Government/ local authority according to prescribed rules and 
includes libraries receiving aid in the form of subsidised access to resources 
including land, books, other library services of institutions which are 
established or maintained or run directly or indirectly, or funded wholly or 
partially by the appropriate Government or by any local authority. 


(b) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government 
of that State and in all other cases, the Union Government; 


(c) “citizen” means any person living within the territory of India with 
Indian citizenship according to the laws in this regard for the time being in 
force; 


(व) “District Authority” means the authority of a revenue District; 


(e) “extension service” means activities pertaining to preservation and 
promotion of cultural heritage and includes activities which seek to 
encourage the intellectual, literary, historic, scientific and social scientific 
character of the community; 


(f) “government public library” means all public libraries that are funded 
wholly, whether directly or indirectly, and/or entirely controlled by the local 
authority or the appropriate Government or any one of its authorities or 
institutions; 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


(g) “library” means any centre within the territory of India, whether 
virtual or physical, which maintains a collection of books or permits deposit 
of books, and provides library service or extension service, and includes a 
mobile library/ library-on-wheels; 


(h) “Library Fund” means the State Public Library Fund constituted 
under section 6; 


(i) “library service” means and includes providing reading facilities and 
lending out books to the users and/ or assisting the users to procure a book 
including providing relevant information to them to enable them to know, 
locate and consult books and other materials and to secure from such 
books and materials information relevant to their purpose; 


(j) “local authority” means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal 
Council or Zila Parishad or Nagar Panchayat or Gram Panchayat, by 
whatever name called and includes such other authority or body having 
administrative control or empowered by, or under any law for the time being 
in force, to function as a local authority in any city, town or village; 


(k) “outlier library” means any library that is not a part of the public 
library system; 


(I) “public library” means any library established or maintained or run 
directly or indirectly, or funded wholly or partially by the appropriate 
Government or by any local authority, and includes 


(i) an aided library; and/or 


(ii) any library that is notified by the appropriate Government 
as per rules prescribed, as a public library. 


(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


(n) “public library system” means an organic interlinking of all 
libraries in the country into a network to facilitate library and/ or extension 
services in a systematic and organised manner; and 


Explanation.- All public libraries within the State shall 
automatically be considered part of the public library system. 


CHAPTER II 


RIGHT OF FREE ACCESS TO PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND LIBRARY SERVICES 


Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law for the time 
being in force — 


(/) Every citizen shall have the right of free access to a public 
library and its services in a non-discriminatory manner. 


Explanation ॥.- No public library shall charge from any citizen, 
any kind of fee or charges or expenses in any form such as 
registration fee, membership fees, security deposit or maintenance 
fees, or otherwise in lieu of such right of access. 


Explanation 2.- No public library shall practice any kind of 
segregation in giving access to its library services on the grounds of 
caste, gender, class and/or income group, disability, sexuality, religion, 
ethnicity, age, race or any other identity, meaning thereby that every 
citizen shall have the right to access the library and its library services 
and/ or extension services in a non-discriminatory and integrated 
manner: 


Right 
free 
inclusive 
libraries. 


to 
and 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Provided that, nothing stated in Explanation 2 shall preclude a 
public library from holding special library services / programs for: 


(a) women and/ or children for their educational, social or 
personal development; 


(b) serving the cultural and educational needs of minorities 
to conserve their language, script, or culture; or 


(c) serving the cultural and educational needs of socially 
and/or economically disadvantaged communities. 


(2) Every citizen shall have the right to be a member of any public library 
situated anywhere within the territory of India. 


(3) Every citizen shall have the right to a public library within reasonable 
distance from their place of ordinary residence. 


Membership 4. No citizen shall be required to provide any documentation in order to 

criteria not to be become a member of or enjoy free access to a public library and its services, 

ODETOUS: other than documentation that allows the public library to reasonably 
identify and contact the user: 


Provided that, no citizen shall be denied access to a public library and 
its services which are provided within the physical premises of such library, 
only on the ground that such documentation has not been furnished. 


CHAPTER III 


POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS 


State 5. Every State Government, and where the context otherwise requires, the local 
enforcement authority, shall — 
mechanism. 


(2) formulate a State Public Library Policy for application to its own 
State, which shall provide for all aspects necessary to support the 
establishment of public library institutions within the State, and shall 
include, but may not be limited to the following — 


(a) establishment of library institutions to contribute to the 
personal development and improvement of social opportunities of 
the citizens, which shall include, but may not be limited to the 
following — 


(i) making knowledge and information available; 


(ii) providing opportunities for development and 
education; 


(iii) promoting reading and introducing first-generation 
or first-time readers to literature; 


(iv) organizing meetings and debates; and 


(v) providing opportunities for exploration, 
preservation and promotion of art and culture; 


(b) establishment of a networked public library system such 
that the resources and services of each public library within the 
State may be accessible to all citizens from any public library 
within the State and maintain a regularly updated database of all 
libraries including outlier libraries within the State and 
separately for those which are part of the public library system, 
along with the resources and facilities available therein, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


(c) establishment of a tiered system of libraries including a 
State Public Library, along with its regional branches, if any, 
District Public Library and village/ panchayat level public 
library, with their own powers, functions and responsibilities for 
maintaining public library institutions in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 


(d) prescribing standards of library facilities and services of 
public libraries, depending on the type of library and the needs 
of the community that the public library serves; and 


Explanation - Needs of communities shall include needs 
of local communities affected by factors such as but not 
limited to diversity of terrain, extent of accessible road 
networks and availability of public transport, culture, density 
of population, and evolving climatic conditions. 


(e) developing programs for teaching and training of 
personnel in library and information science towards building 
library professionals and researchers in order to meet the needs 
of public library institutions of the State; 


(2) constitute, by notification in the Official Gazette, a State 
Library Directorate, which shall be a department of the State 
Government with adequate staff with such salary and allowances and 
other terms and conditions of service similar to those of other State 
Government Departments and to be recruited in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 


(3) constitute, by notification in the Official Gazette, a State 
advisory body, by whatever name called, on matters concerning the 
management and development of public library system including public 
library institutions and library and/or extensions services in the State, 
formulation of policies, including training policies, and programmes in 
relation to such system and such other matters relating thereto, in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the membership of such a State advisory body shall 
necessarily include persons having life experience in respect of writing 
or publishing or promoting literature, science, art and/ or social sciences 
or having special knowledge of these subjects, eminent scholars, library 
science experts, representatives of libraries of eminent institutions, 
representatives from other public libraries, organic intellectuals, 
eminent journalists, reader members of such public libraries and such 
other persons, as may be prescribed; 


Provided further that, eminence in scholarship or expertise in any 
of the above matters or subjects shall be determined in a holistic manner 
and shall not be determined solely by formal modes of recognition and 
similar signifiers of social capital; 


(4) ensure that all government public libraries are staffed with 
adequately qualified and trained full-time public library employees and 
lay down the qualifications, the manner of recruitment and other terms 
and conditions of service for such employees, including rules of 
reservation for socially and economically disadvantaged sections of the 
society, which shall be similar to those of the employees of other 
Government Departments; 


(5) prepare and publish, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, the following reports and/ or plans — 


(a) annual, short-term and/or long-term plans for the 
development of libraries within the State; 


Autonomy रण 


State 
Governments. 


Constitution of a 
National level 
Advisory Body 
to promote a 
comprehensive 
public library 
institution in the 
country. 


Integrated 
Public Library 
System. 


46 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(b) a regularly updated database of all libraries, including 
outlier libraries, within the State, and separately for those which 
are part of the public library system, along with the resources and 
facilities available therein; 


(c) descriptive and statistical reports on the working of all 
public libraries within the State; and 


(6) ensure that all government public libraries are equipped with 
adequate facilities and provisions for reading materials, entertainment, 
and audio-visual materials, in physical and digital form, computers and 
network access with requisite cyber security infrastructure, and 
adequate seating for free use of their members including special 
provisions for persons with disabilities. 


Except where stated otherwise in any other provision in this Act, every State 
Government shall have complete autonomy in developing its own public 
library policy and establishing, managing and supervising its own public 
library institutions. 


CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 


(7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish a national-level advisory body, by whatever name 
called, for the purposes of promoting a comprehensive public library 
institution in the country, advising various Departments and Ministries 
and ensuring necessary coordination amongst them for strengthening 
the establishment of a comprehensive public library institution, 
including for the purposes of assessing and addressing the general and 
special learning needs of the community, enabling access to libraries 
situated outside the territory of India, and facilitating a networked 
system of public libraries across all States, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) The membership of the national-level advisory body shall comprise: 


(a) one representative each to be nominated by each State from 
amongst persons having life experience in library activism or 
library profession, library science experts, representatives of 
libraries of eminent institutions, and representatives from other 
public libraries and such other persons, in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 


(b) five persons to be nominated by the Central Government, 
from the fields of art, literature, library activism, library science 
research and social work, in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the Chairperson of the body shall be elected by 
the members annually and every member shall have the right to be elected 
as the Chairperson; 


Provided further that experience in the profession or expertise in 
any of the above subjects shall be determined in a holistic manner and 
shall not be determined solely by formal modes of recognition and 
similar signifiers of social capital. 


(3) The term of office, the salary and allowances payable to and other 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the 
national-level advisory body shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(7) The Central Government shall establish a mechanism to enable 
libraries situated within the territory of India to have access to libraries 
and services of libraries situated outside the territory of India, whether 
on the basis of reciprocity or any international exchange agreements or 
otherwise. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


0. 


iI. 


2. 


(2) The Central Government shall facilitate interlinking of public 
library systems across and within the States including providing 
necessary technical infrastructure, logistical support and financial 
assistance. 


(7) The Central Government shall maintain database of all public 
libraries in the country and ensure that the database is updated on an 
annual basis and is freely accessible to the citizens. 


(2) The database maintained under sub-section (/) shall include information 
regarding the resources available in such libraries, and the library services 
provided therein. 


(2) The Central Government shall prepare and publish an Annual Report on 
the implementation of the Act, working of public libraries included in the 
database under section 9 and working of the public libraries established 
across the States, including therein the audited accounts of State Public 
Library Funds under section ॥7, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) A copy of the Annual Report under sub-section (/) shall be laid before 
each House of Parliament. 


CHAPTER V 
POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT 


For implementing the provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government 
shall— 


(i) notify any library within its territorial jurisdiction, whether 
established or maintained or run directly or indirectly or funded wholly 
or partially by the appropriate library or an aided library or any other 
library, as deemed fit, as a public library; and 


(ii) where the number of public libraries in any area or limits 
of neighborhood under its territorial jurisdiction is found 
insufficient to meet the needs of the community, establish, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, within such area or limits of 
neighborhood under its territorial jurisdiction, such number of 
free and inclusive public libraries, as per a time-bound action plan 
in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that any outlier library that is open to the public and 
ensures free access to its library and extensions services to such public, 
may apply to the appropriate Government to be notified as a public 
library, in such form and manner as may be prescribed; 


Provided further that the appropriate Government, may out of its 
own accord or on receipt of such application and after following such 
due procedure as may be prescribed, notify an outlier library as a public 
library. 


(/) A public library notified under section |l may be required to adhere to 
such conditions as may be prescribed; 


Provided that, any condition prescribed under this sub-section shall be 
limited to enable the appropriate Government to ensure that such notified 
public library:- 


(a) allows free access to the citizens to itself and its services; 
(b) is enabled to be integrated into the public library system; and 


(c) is not in violation of any provisions of this law or any other 
law in force: 


Maintenance of 
library database. 


Annual Report. 


Notification of 
libraries as 
public libraries. 


Autonomy of 
notified 
public 
libraries to 
remain intact. 


Incubation रण 
public libraries. 


Safeguard 
against 
discrimination. 


Sharing of 
financial 
responsibilities. 


State Public 
Library Fund. 


48 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


3. 


4. 


5. 


6. 


Provided further that, any condition prescribed under this sub- 
section shall not have the effect of requiring such notified public library 
to give up autonomy in ownership and decision-making of the running 
of the library, including constitution of management and appointment 
of staff, nature of library and/or extension services, book collection, 
mode of acquisition, curriculum, etc. 


(2) A public library notified under section l] shall be entitled to receive 
funds in such manner and for such purposes as may be prescribed; 


Provided that the receiving of funds shall not be subject to the condition 
that the public library shall have to give up autonomy in ownership and 
decision-making of the running of the library, including constitution of 
management and appointment of staff, nature of library and/or extension 
services, book collection, mode of acquisition, curriculum, etc. 


(3) Nothing in this section shall preclude a notified public library from 
receiving gifts, donations or funds from any other source, including 
individuals, charities, or Corporate Social Responsibility initiatives, to 
further enhance their library and/or extension services. 


(7) The appropriate Government shall facilitate development of 
libraries into free and inclusive public libraries through an enabling 
system of training programmes, guidance notes on establishing libraries, 
access to other public libraries within the public library system, access 
to eminent library specialists, creating linkages with universities or 
colleges offering library and/or information science courses, financial 
assistance and such other programmes, as may be prescribed, as part of 
such an enabling system. 


(2) It shall be open to any library to apply to the appropriate Government 
for access to such an enabling system as mentioned in sub-section (J), in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


Subject to the provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government shall 
ensure that no public library shall practice any form of discrimination and/ 
or segregation on the grounds of caste, gender, class and/or income group, 
disability, sexuality, religion, ethnicity, age, race or any other identity, in 
provision of its services. 


CHAPTER VI 
FINANCING AND AUDITING OF ACCOUNTS OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES 


(7) The Central Government and the State Governments shall have 
concurrent responsibility for providing funds for implementing the 
provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and 
recurring expenditure for the implementation of the provisions of the 
Act. 


(3) The Central Government shall provide to the State Governments, as 
grants-in-aid of revenues, such percentage of expenditure referred to in 
sub-section (2) as it may determine, from time to time, in consultation 
with the State Governments. 


(4) The State Governments shall, after taking into consideration, the 
sums provided by the Central Government and its other resources, be 
responsible to provide funds for implementation of the provisions of this 
Act. 


(/) Every State Government shall constitute a fund, to be called the State 
Public Library Fund, for establishment of public libraries at the State, District 
and Village level. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


7. 


8. 


(2) There shall be credited into the Library Fund:- 


(a) amounts provided by the State Government, District 
Authority, and/or local authority for development, improvement and 
maintenance of public library institutions in the State; 


(b) funds received from the Central Government; 


(c) any special grant, which the Central or a State Government 
may make for any specific purposes; 


(d) any amounts diverted from other funds available with the 
Central or State Government or District Authorities and/or local 
authority, especially where such funds are earmarked for purposes 
intrinsically connected to public libraries including education, 
promotion of science, arts, language, culture, technology, 
infrastructure and setting up of innovation labs and/or incubation of 
start-ups; 


(e) any amount received as gift, contribution or endowment for 
the development of public libraries in the State including from public 
sector enterprises, private sector, philanthropist organisations, 
foundations or international bodies; 


(f) any loans that the State Government, District Authority 
or local authority may raise; 


(g) any income from investment of the amounts received by the 
Library Fund; and 


(h) such other sources as may be prescribed. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, the unutilised sums of money, if any, in the Library Fund shall not 
be diverted for any purposes other than the purposes of achieving the 
objectives of this Act. 


(4) The State Government and or/ local authority, as the case may be, shall 
make appropriate arrangements to ensure investment of unutilised amounts 
in the Library Fund to further enhance the functioning of public libraries. 


(/) The accounts of the Library Fund shall be maintained in the prescribed 
form and manner. 


(2) The accounts of the Library Fund shall be audited annually by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India or by any such officer or authority 
as may be appointed by him in this behalf and a copy of the audit report, as 
certified by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India or any other person 
appointed by him, shall be submitted to the State Government in the 
prescribed manner, who shall cause it to be laid before each House of the 
State Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


(3) The sanction, allocation and utilization, whether by the Central or State 
Government or local authority, of all funds, grants, or any other financial 
arrangements meant for the purposes of establishing public library 
institutions, shall be made available to the public in real-time in an accessible 
format, by the appropriate Government and/or local authority, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER VII 
POWER TO MAKE RULES 


(/) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government 
may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


Accounts and 
Audit of 
Accounts of the 
Library Fund. 


Power of 
appropriate 
Government to 
make rules. 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may be made to provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:— 


(a) the eligibility, procedure for application and conditions for 
grant-in-aid to aided libraries; 


(b) the manner of establishment of a tiered system of libraries 
along with their constitution, functions and powers under clause (c) 
of sub-section (/) of section 5; 


(c) the manner of constitution of the State Library Directorate, 
the posts and job descriptions therein, the specific functions of the 
Directorate and its offices, the strength, qualification, training, 
manner of appointment, and terms and conditions of service of its 
staff, including conditions of absorption of existing staff under sub- 
section (2) of section 5; 


(d) the manner of constitution of the State advisory body, 
membership and designation of members thereof, their term of office, 
procedure for filling in vacancies, its functions, holding of meetings and 
the procedure to be observed therein under sub-section (3) of section 5; 


(2) the manner of establishment of and nomination of the 
Chairperson and members of the national-level advisory body, their 
term of office, the salary and allowances payable to them and their 
other terms and conditions of service, procedure for filling in 
vacancies, its functions, holding of meetings and the procedure to be 
observed therein under section 7; 


(f) the manner of establishment of public libraries in any area or 
limits of neighborhood and the form and manner of application as 
well as the procedure for notification of an outlier library as a public 
library under section |]; 


(g) the conditions and the manner of grant of funds and the 
purposes for which such grant is made to a library notified as a public 
library under section |2; 


(h) the form and manner of incubation of public libraries under 
section |3; 


(i) the sources from which funds may be credited into the 
Library Fund under section 6; 


(j) the form and manner of maintenance and audit of the 
accounts of the Library Fund and submission of audit report to the 
State Government as well as the manner of making available to the 
general public information pertaining to the sanction, allocation and 
utilization by the State Government or local authority, of all funds, 
grants, or any other financial arrangements meant for the purposes of 
establishing public library institutions under Section 7; 


(k) the procedure for establishment of a networked public library 
system, including the coordination or centralisation of technical work 
in the public library system of the State and manner of maintenance 
of database of all libraries in the State under clause (b) of sub-section 
(/) of section 5, 


(2) the form and manner of preparation and publication of annual 
reports and/or plans on the development and functioning of public 
libraries under sub-section (5) of section 5; and 


(m) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under 
this Act, or is deemed necessary by the appropriate Government to 
discharge its functions under and implement the provisions of this 
Act. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5] 


9. 


20. 


2i. 


22. 


Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the Parliament, while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the successive session aforesaid, the 
House agrees in making any modification in the rules or the House agrees 
the rules should not be made, they shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such 
modification or amendment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under this rules. 


Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature 
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one 
House, before that House. 


(2) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of two years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force. 


Rules made by 
Central 
Government to 
be laid before 
Parliament. 


Rules made by 
State 

Government to 
be laid before 


the State 
Legislature. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 

Act to 


supplement 
other laws. 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Historians tell us that his insatiable quest for books led Dr. 
Ambedkar during his New York days, away from Manhattan down to 4274 
street on Fifth Avenue in the city. During his stay in New York in the early 
900s, the imposing beaux-arts styled New York Public Library had recently 
opened its doors, and opened them to all — importantly, including to black 
people and to women. Historical record shows that Dr. Ambedkar was 
extremely impressed with the public library. Later, upon learning of the death 
of Sir Pherozeshah Mehta in Bombay, and the Bombay municipality’s plan 
to prominently erect his statue, Dr. Ambedkar wrote for the Bombay 
Chronicle, the English-language weekly that Mehta had himself launched in 
9l0, that the city should build a Public Library and not a statue. 
Ambedkar is said to have argued in his letter that erecting a public library 
in Bombay instead of a ‘trivial and unbecoming’ statue would be more 
appropriate than wasting resources on statues: 


“It is unfortunate that we have not as yet realized the value of the 
library as an institution in the growth and advancement of a society. 
But this is not the place to dilate upon its virtues. That an enlightened 
public as that of Bombay should have suffered so long to be without 
an up-to-date public library is nothing short of disgrace and the earlier 
we make amends for it the better. There are some private libraries in 
Bombay operating independently by themselves. If these ill-managed 
concerns be mobilized into one building, built out of the Sir P.M. 
Mehta memorial fund and called after him, the city of Bombay shall 
have achieved both these purposes...” 


Bombay Chronicle, Tuesday, 28th March, 96. 


No person can be a full participant in political democracy unless they are also 
a participant in social and educational democracy. The ability to read, to think, and 
to inquire—these are not mere ornaments of the privileged; they are the instruments 
by which liberty, equality, and fraternity are made real for all. In the Constitution 
of India, the framers affirmed the Freedom of Speech and Expression under Article 
9(l)(a). They affirmed the Right to Life and Dignity under Article 2. We have 
the Right to Education under Article 2lA. But the exercise of these rights requires 
certain preconditions. And predominant among them is the availability of 
institutions where the people—all the people—may access knowledge, culture, and 
community. That institution is the public library. 


It is a proven fact that public libraries serve not only as supportive third space 
for promoting economic growth, scientific innovation, and social mobility, they are 
essential elements of great civilizations. A nation cannot truly democratize 
opportunity without democratizing access to knowledge. 


Around the world, public libraries are recognized as essential to democratic 
life. In many democracies worldwide, public libraries are legally guaranteed, 
digitally networked, and spatially integrated with other public services. Yet, in 
India, access to libraries—those most vital of civic institutions for building and 
sustaining robust democratic societies—remains severely inadequate, unequal, and 
unguaranteed, let alone developing a country-wide interconnected system of public 
libraries. 


Current data reveals: 
@ India spends a mere 7 paise per person per year on libraries. 
@ Many districts lack even one functional library. 


@ Despite our famous Digital Public Infrastructure, we have no 
official statistics on our public library ecosystem. 


@ Only 4 State Governments have managed to put in place a 
sustainable financial arrangement for libraries under their purview. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


In addition to this historical neglect, today India has among the highest 
numbers of first-generation learners in the world. It also has vast disparities in 
access to quality reading material beyond school curricula, particularly in local 
languages. Although the digital age has opened up new frontiers, it has also 
exacerbated inequalities: for every smartphone user, there are many who lack 
digital literacy, stable connectivity, or the resources to participate in the knowledge 
economy. For those who can afford smartphones and internet, without supportive 
reading communities of trained librarians and peers, they are as unlikely to take 
advantage of learning opportunities as those without. 


In any country calling itself a democracy, the means of mental uplift must be 
placed at the disposal of all. Education does not end with the school-leaving 
certificate, diploma, or a college degree. Nor is learning the sole business of the 
elite. In the villages of India, in the bastis and chawls of the cities, there are Indians 
with minds as sharp and souls as hungry for knowledge as any who sit in Parliament 
or the few of our fellow citizens who have inherited financial and social capital to 
afford personal libraries. If they are deprived of access to libraries, then they are 
deprived not only of books—but of opportunity, self-respect, and citizenship itself. 


History has shown us what happens when access to knowledge is controlled 
by the few. Such societies become pyramids of oppression—where those at the top 
read and rule, and those at the bottom are left to obey in darkness. Importantly, we 
learn that in such circumstances, even the tiny minority of elites eventually struggle 
to thrive. 


This Bill seeks to demolish that pyramid and replace it with a sphere of 
associated living: where all citizens may meet, think, learn, and grow as equals. 


As the planet hurtles through the polycrises of climate change, 
transformations in the global order of power among nations, and financial and trade 
relations, and the promises and perils of Artificial Intelligence, India as a country 
is poised to reclaim its lost glory. But this glory will not be served to us on a silver 
platter. We must mobilize the country’s demographic dividend to usher in a long 
period of abundance. Public Libraries are absolutely central towards meeting this 
objective. India is already 75 years late, we cannot afford to waste any more time. 


It thus follows, that in a democracy premised on justice, equality, and liberty, 
the right to read is not a luxury—it is a foundational necessity. The right to public 
libraries must therefore be secured as a fundamental civic right, and their access 
must therefore necessarily be free, as they are as basic to survival and human life 
and dignity as food, water, air, clothing and shelter. 


Let it be said that in the 76th year of our independence, we remembered what 
the Constitution demanded: not merely freedom in theory, but equality in practice. 
By declaring access to public libraries as a legal right, this Parliament would be 
taking a historic step to ensure that the Republic of India is also a republic of 
readers. 


The objectives of the Bill are fivefold: 


@ To give legislative form to a fundamental proposition - that the right 
to read is intrinsic to the right to be a citizen. 


@ To give legislative framework to develop 8 well-funded, 
decentralised, and inclusive public library network that is 
professionally staffed, and culturally inclusive and serves as a crucial 
leveller to fill the gap of public learning environments, community 
resource centres, quiet civic spaces, and cultural anchors which can 
nurture, strengthen, and sustain Indian democracy and economy. 


@ To provide legislative backing to State Government led networks of 
autonomously run public libraries through which all persons, 
regardless of their background, have assured access to inclusive, 
community-based, and resource-rich public libraries, supported 
through a just and accountable public finance system. 


54 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


To mandate the establishment of a national framework for public 
library infrastructure, with minimum standards to be met by each state 
and district, including libraries in local languages and formats 
accessible to persons with disabilities. 


To mandate provision of finances in annual budgets, grants by the 
Central Government to State Governments and establishment of 
specific funds to support the development and maintenance of public 
libraries, particularly in historically underserved and marginalised 
regions. 


To institutionalise the training and employment of library workers, 
especially from Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Minority 
communities, so that the management of knowledge becomes a task of 
the people themselves. 


Hence, this Bill. 


V. SIVADASAN. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 55 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every citizen shall have right of free access 
to a public library and its services in a non-discriminatory manner and that no 
citizen shall be liable to pay any kind of fees or charges or expenses in lieu of such 
right of access. 


Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a national-level 
advisory body for promoting a comprehensive public library institution in the 
country and such other functions as specified and for the membership thereof as 
well as the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and Members of the advisory body. Clause 8 provides 
that the Central Government shall establish a mechanism to enable libraries situated 
within the territory of India to have access to libraries and services of libraries 
situated outside the territory of India and to facilitate interlinking of public library 
systems across and within the States including providing necessary technical 
infrastructure, logistical support and financial assistance. Clause 9 provides that 
the Central Government shall maintain a database of all public libraries in the 
country. Clause |] provides that the appropriate Government and local authority 
shall establish such number of free and inclusive public libraries within such area 
or limits of neighbourhood under its territorial jurisdiction in accordance with a 
time-bound action plan, where the number of such libraries is found insufficient. 
Clause |3 provides that the appropriate Government shall facilitate development 
of libraries into free and inclusive public libraries through an enabling system of 
training programmes, guidance notes, access to other public libraries within the 
public library system, access to eminent library specialists, creating linkages with 
universities or colleges offering library and/or information science courses, 
financial assistance and such other programmes. Clause I5 provides that the 
Central Government and the State Government shall make available funds for 
implementing the provisions of the Bill and that the Central Government shall 
prepare the estimates of capital and recurring expenditure and provide to the State 
Governments, as grants-in-aid of revenues, such percentage of expenditure as it 
may determine from time to time, in consultation with State Governments. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is, however, not 
possible at this stage to estimate the exact quantum of expenditure likely to be 
involved at this stage. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |8 of the Bill inter alia empowers the Central Government to make 
tules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the 
Central Government may, make such provisions, by order, as may be necessary for 
removing any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this Bill. 


As the matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure 
and administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a 
normal character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 57 


Xx!I 


Bill No. XXIX of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 988 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2025. Short Title and 
commencement. 

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 

notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be 

appointed for different States and any reference in this Act to the 

commencement of this Act shall, in relation to a State, be construed as a 


reference to the coming into force of this Act in that State. 


Amendment 
section 2. 


Amendment 
section 4]. 


Amendment 
section 56. 


Amendment 
section 64. 


Amendment 
section 84. 


Amendment 


section 09. 


Amendment 
section 0. 


of 


of 


of 


of 


of 


of 


of 


58 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


In the Motor Vehicles Act, 988 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
Act), in section 2, after clause (7), the following new clause shall be 
inserted, namely— 


“ (7A) “dashboard camera” means a video recording device installed 
on the dashboard, windscreen, or any other suitable location within a 
motor vehicle, designed to continuously record video footage of the 
view through the vehicle’s front or rear windscreen or the interior of the 
vehicle, meeting such specifications as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government, which may include, but not limited to, minimum 
resolution, storage capacity, tamper-proof design, and shall be capable 
of operating during the vehicle’s use for the purposes of road safety, 
evidence collection, and ensuring accountability.” 


In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following new 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(2A) No application for the registration of a motor vehicle shall be 
accepted unless the vehicle is equipped with a functioning dashboard 
camera installed by the manufacturer in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.”. 


In section 56 of the principal Act, after sub-section (ध), the following new 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(43) The installation and proper functioning of a dashboard camera 
in the manner and as per the standards prescribed by the Central 
Government shall be a mandatory condition for the issuance or renewal 
of the certificate of fitness for all motor vehicles.” 


In section 64 of the principal Act, after clause (a), the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(aa) the specifications, standards, manner and procedure of 
installation, functioning, maintenance, and certification of dashboard 
camera in motor vehicles as a mandatory safety feature;” 


In section 84 of the principal Act, after clause (g), the following new clause 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(h) that the vehicle must be equipped with a functioning dashboard 
camera, which shall record video footage during operation of the 
vehicle, and such footage shall be preserved for a minimum period of 
time as prescribed under the rules to be framed in this regard.” 


In section 09 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following new 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(2A) Every motor vehicle, including private, public, commercial 
and law enforcement vehicles, shall be so constructed and so maintained 
as to have mandatory dashboard camera installed as per the 
specifications, standards and conditions as prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


Provided that it shall be incumbent upon the manufacturers of motor 
vehicles to ensure that the dashboard camera is pre-installed in all motor 
vehicles before they are sold, in compliance with the specifications, 
standards and conditions as prescribed by the Central Government.” 


In section 0 of the principal Act, — 


(i) in sub-section (), after clause (०), the following new clauses shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“(OO) specifications and technical standards for dashboard 
camera including the type, resolution, field of view, storage 
capacity, and tamper-proof design; 


59 of 988. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


9. 


0. 


(000) the placement and mounting of dashboard camera in all 
motor vehicles, either on the dashboard or within a specified range 
above or below the windshield, as per standards set by the Central 
Government, ensuring that they do not obstruct the driver's field of 
vision or hinder visibility of highway signs or signals”; 


(ii) after sub-section (/), the following new sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely — 


“843) The Central Government may also make rules governing 
the following matters:— 


(a) the minimum period of retention of video footage 
recorded by dashboard camera, and that access to such footage 
shall be granted only to authorized personnel, on a written 
request in the prescribed form, in compliance with the data 
privacy and protection laws for the time being in force; 


(b) penalties for failure to install or maintain dashboard 
camera in a functional state, including fines and suspension of 
vehicle registration; 


(c) the protection and confidentiality of video footage 
recorded by dashboard camera, preventing unauthorized access 
or misuse, and defining conditions under which such data can be 
accessed or shared by the authorities.” 


After section 0B of the principal Act, the following new sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“l0C. 0) The manufacturer of the motor vehicle shall be 
responsible for ensuring the proper installation and initial functioning of 
the dashboard camera, while the owner or operator of the vehicle shall 
be responsible for the maintenance and operation of the dashboard 
camera at all times while the vehicle is in use. 


(2) The footage of the dashboard camera shall be securely stored 
for a minimum period of time as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government under the rules to be framed in this regard and made 
available to law enforcement agencies or authorized personnel upon 
receipt of a written request in the prescribed form, in compliance with 
data privacy and protection rules for the time being in force. 


(3) Any failure to ensure the continuous operation of the dashboard 
camera, tampering with the device, or deletion of footage before 
completion of the prescribed retention period shall be punishable with 
fines or suspension of the vehicle’s registration or permit or both, as 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


In section 6! of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the following new 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(5) The footage of the dashboard camera, if available and stored in 
accordance with the prescribed rules, shall be admissible as evidence in 
investigations, court proceedings, or determinations of liability and 
compensation related to road accidents, traffic violations, or criminal 
cases involving motor vehicles, subject to the discretion of the presiding 
Judge regarding its admissibility and relevance to the case.” 


Insertion of new 


section i0C. 


Responsibilities 
for Installation, 


Maintenance, 


and Operation of 


dashboard 
camera. 


Amendment 
section 6. 


of 


60 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


India continues to face a severe road safety crisis, with a sharp rise in road 
accidents, particularly hit-and-run cases, which have increased by 7.4 per cent. 
between 202 and 2024. In this context, dashboard cameras (dashcams) offer a vital 
solution, providing real-time, tamper-proof evidence in the event of accidents or 
traffic violations. Dashcams play a crucial role in accurately determining fault, 
expediting legal proceedings, and ensuring fair insurance settlements. 


In addition to their role in accident investigations, dashcams help prevent 
wrongful accusations, such as false claims of police misconduct or staged 
encounters. They serve as impartial witnesses, reducing incidents of evidence 
tampering and corruption that have long plagued India’s law enforcement and 
judicial processes. By promoting transparency, dashcams also serve as a deterrent 
to unethical practices, upholding citizens' rights under Article 2 of the Indian 
Constitution, which guarantees the right to life and personal liberty. 


Furthermore, the mandatory use of dashcams would foster responsible 
driving behavior. The awareness of being recorded encourages compliance with 
traffic rules, potentially leading to a reduction in reckless driving and road safety 
violations. This measure would complement India's ongoing efforts to enhance 
road safety and enforce stricter traffic regulations. 


The insurance sector, too, stands to benefit from this initiative. Dashcam 
footage offers clear, reliable evidence in road crash cases, helping insurers resolve 
claims more fairly and efficiently, while also curbing fraudulent claims. 
Additionally, the use of dashcams aligns with global best practices, as several 
countries have already recognized their value in accident investigations, legal 
proceedings, and road safety enhancements. 


Given these factors—the rise in road accidents, the persistent issue of 
evidence tampering, and the broader societal benefits—this Bill seeks to mandate 
the installation of dashcams in all motor vehicles. By doing so, it aims to strengthen 
road safety, promote accountability, and safeguard citizens' rights, contributing to 
a more just and transparent system. 


Hence, this Bill. 
FAUZIA KHAN 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l6l 


XXII 


Bill No. XXX of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education Act, 2009. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (4) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Short title and 
Education (Amendment) Act, 2025. commencement 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


62 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Amendment 2. In the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, 35 of 2009. 
ot secon, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2 — 


(i) after clause (a), the following new clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(aa) “Balvatika” means a preparatory class before 
class I, aimed at providing play-based, foundational learning 
to children between the ages of three to six years, to ensure 
their school readiness;” 


(ii) after clause (ee), the following new clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(eee) “early childhood education” means play-based 
education provided to children from birth to the age of six 
years, including pre-primary classes, with focus on cognitive, 
psycho-social, emotional, motor and physical development;” 


(iii) For clause (f), the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(f) “elementary education” means pre-school and 
school education for children aged three to fourteen years;” 


(iv) after-clause (f), the following new clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“(ff) “foundational literacy and numeracy” means the 
basic ability to read and understand simple texts, and to 
perform basic arithmetic operations such as addition, 
subtraction, multiplication, and division, typically 
achieved by the stage of class III ;” 


Amendment 3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the word “six”, 
शी 3; the word “three” shall be substituted. 
Amendment 4. In the Explanation to section 8 of the principal Act,— 


of section 8. 


(6) in clauses (i) and (ii), for the word “six”, the word 
“three”, shall be substituted; and 


(ii) after clause (i), the following new clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(@) ensure the mandatory achievement of foundational 
literacy and numeracy benchmarks for classes I to HI in all 
schools under its jurisdiction: 


Provided that the appropriate Government, through 
its designated authorities, shall be responsible and held 
accountable for meeting these benchmarks and shall be 
required to submit annual reports detailing the progress 
towards achieving the foundational literacy and numeracy 
targets, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(k) develop and monitor state-level achievement 
benchmarks for foundational literacy and numeracy goals in 
classes I to III, in accordance with the National Education 
Policy, 2020; 


(I) ensure that all teachers in its jurisdiction receive 
appropriate training in inclusive education practices, 
particularly concerning children with learning disabilities, 
and ensure that periodic assessments and remedial measures 
are implemented for these children; 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


63 


5. 


6. 


(m) ensure the establishment of “Balvatikas” in every 
government school for the purpose of providing early 
childhood education to children between the ages of three to 
six years, with the aim of ensuring school readiness; 


(n) provide digital devices and ensure the 
implementation of digital literacy programs for children, with 
particular focus on underserved and marginalized areas, in 
order to promote equitable access to digital education; 


(9) mandate continuous professional development for 
all pre-primary and primary teachers, specifically in the 
pedagogy of early childhood education and inclusive 
education practices; 


(p) ensure early screening of all children for learning 
disabilities at the primary school level, and provide remedial 
support through mainstream educational systems, with 
regular follow-up assessments and progress tracking; and 


(4) ensure the implementation of awareness campaigns 
and programs aimed at educating parents on the importance 
of early childhood education through workshops, community 
outreach, and regular parent-teacher interactions. 


For section of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“4I. (0) With a view to prepare children above the age of 
three years for elementary education and ensure early childhood 
care and education for all children until they complete the age of 
six years, the appropriate Government shall make the necessary 
arrangements for providing free pre-school education in all 
government schools and other relevant institutions, in accordance 
with the norms prescribed under this Act. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that 
‘Balvatikas’ are established in every government school to provide 
early childhood education for children aged three to six years, 
aimed at ensuing their school readiness. 


(3) The provision of pre-school education as outlined in this 
section shall include adequate infrastructure, qualified early 
childhood educators, developmentally appropriate learning 
materials, and a play-based curriculum, in alignment with the 
standards specified by an academic authority to be specified by the 
appropriate Government, under this Act." 


After section of the principal Act, the following new sections shall be 
inserted, namely;— 


“A. (l) The Central Government shall, by notification in 
the official Gazette, establish the Central Council for Early 
Childhood Development, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Central Council shall coordinate with the Union 
Ministries of Women and Child Development, Education, Finance, 
Labour and Employment, and Commerce and Industry, and civil 
society representatives, to monitor and guide early childhood care 
and education practices across the country. 


(3) The Central Council shall oversee the following 
functions:— 

(a) formulation of standards and guidelines for teacher 

training and qualifications in early childhood education; 


Amendment of 
section I. 


Appropriate 

Government to 
provide for pre- 
school education. 


Insertion of new 
sections lA and 
B. 

Council for Early 
Childhood 
Development. 


64 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(b) development and continuous review of an early 
childhood education curriculum, with a focus on play-based 
learning and inclusive education practices; 


(c) ensuring appropriate infrastructure tailored to the 
developmental needs of children aged three to six years; 


(d) monitoring the implementation of early childhood 
education standards at national and state levels, with periodic 
assessments and feedback mechanisms. 


(4) A State Council shall be established at the state level by 
each State Government, by notification in the official Gazette, on 
the lines of the Central Council, which shall coordinate with the 
Central Council to ensure effective local implementation of early 
childhood education practices in alignment with the national 
standards. 


B. () The appropriate Government shall establish district- 


Learning level learning disability assessment bodies to ensure early 
Disability identification and support for children with learning disabilities. 
Assessment. 


(2) All schools shall conduct regular screenings for 
identifying learning disabilities, with remedial support integrated 
into the mainstream education system. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure that schools are 
adequately equipped to provide accommodation, including but not 
limited to special educators, inclusive assessments, and remedial 
education, as required for children with learning disabilities.” 


Insertion _ of 7. After section 2 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be 


new _ section रु 3 
ik inserted, namely: 


Regulation of “2A.() All private pre-schools and early childhood 

Private Pre- education centres shall register with the respective State Education 

Sebonls, Department and shall be subject to the curriculum, safety, and 
teacher qualification standards as prescribed by an appropriate 
academic authority to be specified by the appropriate Government 
under this Act, or as notified by the Central Government. 


(2) The State Government shall regulate all private pre- 
schools and early childhood education centres as laid down under 
this Act. 


Provided that such regulation shall require strict adherence to 
the prescribed early childhood education standards, including but 
not limited to: 


(a) teacher qualifications and ongoing professional 
development, 


(b) safety and health standards for children, 
(c) curriculum and learning outcomes. 


(3) Non-compliance with the provisions of this section, 
including failure to register or failure to adhere to early childhood 
education standards, shall attract penalties as provided under 
section 8 of this Act. 


Amendment 8. In section 6 of the principal Act, after sub-section (8), the following 
Bese CHO provisos shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent 
schools from conducting periodic assessments to monitor a child's 
academic progress: 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


65 


0. 


2. 


3. 


Provided further that the periodic assessments shall be used 
solely for identifying learning gaps and for providing remedial 
support and shall not be competitive or harmful to the well-being 
of young children. 


Provided also that periodic assessments shall not be used for 
holding back a child in any class.” 


In section 8 of the principal Act, for sub-section (8), the following shall 
be substituted, namely:— 


“ 6) No school, including private pre-schools or early 
childhood education centres, other than those established, owned, 
or controlled by the appropriate Government or local authority, 
shall be established or function without obtaining a certificate of 
recognition from the prescribed authority, by making an application 
in such form and manner as may be prescribed.” 


In section 9 of the principal Act— 


() in sub-section (/), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that for pre-primary classes in Balvatikas, private 
play schools and other early childhood education centres, the 
Pupil-Teacher ratio shall not exceed twenty.”; 


(ii) for the word ‘school’, in the marginal heading and wherever 
it occurs, the words ‘school, Balvatika, private play school or other 
early childhood education centre, shall be substituted.” 


In section 23 of the principal Act, after sub-section (), the following new 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(3) For pre-primary teachers, specific qualifications and 
training requirements shall be established, including: 


(a) completion of an accredited early childhood 
education program; 


(b) training in child development, inclusive education 
practices, and play-based learning methodologies; 


(c) ongoing professional development and in-service 
training to keep abreast of best practices in early childhood 
education.” 


In section 24 of the principal Act, after sub-section (), the following new 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(93,) Every teacher shall be mandated to receive training 
in inclusive education practices, with specialized training in 
recognizing and addressing learning disabilities. 


Provided that every school — shall provide appropriate 
infrastructure and special educators in this regard.” 


After section 29 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“29A. (7) The appropriate Government shall ensure 
universal access to digital devices and affordable internet for all 
students, particularly in underprivileged and rural areas, to bridge 
the digital divide and promote equitable access to technology- 
assisted learning. 


(2) Every school, including govenment and private 
institutions, shall integrate digital literacy programs for students 
and teachers, ensuring equitable access to technology-assisted 
learning across all schools. 


Amendment of 
section 8. 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


Amendment of 
section 23. 


Amendment of 
section 24. 


Insertion of new 
section 29A. 


Access to Digital 
Devices and 
Digital Literacy. 


66 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(3) Non-compliance with the provisions of this section 
shall attract penalties as provided under section 8 of this Act. 


Amendment 4. In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-section (/), the following 
of section 3I. proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the National Commission for Protection of 
Child Rights shall establish a formal grievance redressal 
mechanism for parents of children with disabilities who face 
educational discrimination or inadequate support in schools.” 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


67 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The current state of early childhood education (ECE) and primary 
education in India faces several significant challenges. A vast number of 
children, particularly those from  socio-economically disadvantaged 
backgrounds, do not have access to structured and quality pre-primary education. 
Research indicates that over 85 per cent of brain development occurs before the 
age of six, yet many children enter primary school without the necessary 
cognitive, social, and emotional skills, putting them at a disadvantage from the 
very beginning. This plays a role in the low learning outcomes in children in 
primary grades. Studies have revealed that over half of the students in Class 5 
are unable to read Class 2-level text, and a similar percentage do not achieve 
minimum proficiency levels by the end of primary school. Moreover, there is an 
evident gap in teacher training, with many educators not adequately equipped to 
handle the unique developmental needs of young children. Additionally, private 
and public preschools often operate without standardization, resulting in wide 
discrepancies and in the quality of education, infrastructure, and teacher 
qualifications. Many private pre-schools also operate through formal learning 
curriculum that is detrimental to the development of young learners. 


The proposed Bill aims to address these issues by introducing mandatory 
Early Childhood Education (ECE) programs in all government schools through 
the establishment of Balvatikas, or pre-primary classes, for children aged 3 to 6 
years. These classes will focus on play-based, experiential learning and will 
ensure that every child is equipped with the foundational cognitive and socio- 
emotional skills needed for successful transition into primary school education. 
To further support this, the Bill mandates specialized training for teachers 
engaged in early childhood and primary education, ensuring they are prepared 
to address the developmental needs of young learners through child-centered 
pedagogy and continuous professional development. 


In addition to the expanding access to ECE, the Bill emphasizes the 
critical importance of foundational literacy and numeracy skills. It proposes 
clear standards and benchmarks for literacy and numeracy skills by Grade 3, 
holding schools accountable for ensuring that students meet these goals. The Bill 
also includes provisions for regulating both private and public preschools, 
setting minimum standards for curriculum, safety, teacher qualifications, and 
infrastructure. This will ensure uniformity in the quality of early education 
across the country. 


Through these changes, the proposed Bill seeks to create a more equitable 
and effective education system that guarantees every child, regardless of 
background, has access to high-quality early education, enabling them to 
succeed throughout their educational journey and beyond. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above-said objectives. 


FAUZIA KHAN. 


68 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides certain additional duties of the appropriate 
Government such as ensuring appropriate training in inclusive education 
practices, particularly for children with learning disabilities to all teachers in 
their jurisdiction, establishment of ‘Balvatikas’ in every government school for 
providing early childhood education to children between the ages of three to six 
years, provision of digital devices and ensure implementation of digital literacy 
programs for children with particular focus on underserved and marginalized 
areas as well as awareness campaigns and programs on the importance of early 
childhood education for parents through workshops, community reach etc. 
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall make all 
necessary alrangements for providing free pre-school education in all 
government schools and other relevant institutions including adequate 
infrastructure, qualified early childhood educators, developmentally appropriate 
learning materials, and a play-based curriculum. Clause 6 of the Bill provides 
for the establishment of the Central Council for Early Childhood Development 
by the Central Government. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both recurring and non- 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 69 


XXII 


Bill No. XLIV of 2025 


A Bill to prohibit violence against healthcare workers and professionals 
and damage or loss to the property of medical establishments across 
the country by constituting an institutional mechanism and 
for matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: — 


CHAPTER I 

PRELIMINARY 
l. (8) This Act may be called the Central Protection of Healthcare Workers Short —_ title, 
and Medical Establishments from Violence Act, 2025. application and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall apply to all medical establishments as defined and registered 


70 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


under the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 
200 or under any State Act for the time being in force relating to 23 of 200. 
registration of medical establishments. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 2... (0) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ८ 
(a) “appropriate Government” means— 


(i) in relation to medical establishment located 
in a Union territory without a legislature, the Central 
Government; and 


(ii) in all other cases, the State Government, as 
the case may be, within whose jurisdiction such medical 
establishment, is situated. 


(b) “Board” means the State Healthcare Protection Board 
constituted in each State and Union territory under section 6; 


(c) “District Committee” means the District Healthcare 
Vigilance Committee constituted in each district under section 9; 


(d) “medical establishment” means any healthcare institution 
or facility that offers services, facilities, or care requiring diagnosis, 
treatment (including curative, palliative and preventive), or 
management of illness, injury, deformity, abnormality, or 
pregnancy in any recognized system of medicine under the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020 and may 4 of 200. 
include, but not limited to: 


(6) a_ hospital, maternity home, nursing home, 
dispensary, clinic, sanatorium, blood banks, dental clinics, all 
registered alternative medicine healthcare facilities, 
physiotherapy clinics, medical camps, first-aid posts, or any 
other premises offering healthcare services; 


(ii) institutions or facilities engaged in pathological, 
bacteriological, genetic, radiological, chemical, biological 
investigations, or other diagnostic services, with the aid of 
laboratory or other medical equipment, usually carried on, 
established and administered or maintained by any person or 
body of persons, whether incorporated or not; 


(iii) any establishment offering healthcare services and 
owned, controlled, or managed by: 


(a).the Central or State Government or a 
Department of such Government; 


(b). Public Sector Undertakings or 
Autonomous Bodies of the Central or State 
Government; 


(c). Public or private trusts; 


(d). Corporations or societies registered under 
Central, Provincial, or State Acts; 


(e). Local authorities; 
(f). Single doctors practicing independently; 


(iv) mobile medical units and ambulances that are fitted 
with medical equipment and used for providing healthcare 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7] 


services; 


(v) teaching institutes, primary health centers, 
pharmacies, radiology and imaging centers, casualty and 
trauma care centers, health and wellness centers, 
Management and consulting centers, e-medicine and 
telemedicine centers; and 


(vi) any clinical establishment as defined in the 
Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 
23 of 2020. 200. 


(e) “healthcare worker" or “healthcare personnel” or 
“healthcare service personnel” means any individual engaged in 
delivering, supporting or facilitating medical and healthcare 
services, and includes, — 


() medical practitioners registered in accordance with 

the provisions of the National Medical Commission Act, 

30 of 209. 20i9, and possessing a recognized medical qualification 
within the meaning of clause (r) of section 2 of that Act; 


(ii) practitioners of Indian systems of medicine or 
homeopathy registered under any law of appropriate 
Government, and recognized by the Ministry of AYUSH or 
any statutory body constituted for such purpose; 


(iii) dentists, dental professionals, dental hygienists, 
and dental mechanics registered under the National Dental 
2I of 2023 Commission Act, 2023; 


(iv) nurses, midwives, auxiliary nurse-midwives, and 
health visitors, registered under the National Nursing and 
26 of 2023. Midwifery Commission Act, 2023; 


(v) mental health professionals registered under the 
0 of 207. Mental Healthcare Act, 207; 


(vi) a pharmacist registered under the Pharmacy Act, 
8 of 948. 948; 


(vii) paramedical and allied health professionals and 
students including physiotherapists, radiologists, dieticians, 
occupational and speech therapists, pharmacists, and 
diagnostic services providers, recognized under any law of 
appropriate Government or by any authority constituted by 
the such Government; 


(vii) medical and nursing students undergoing 
education or training in any recognized systems of medicine 
or healthcare profession; 


(ix) community health workers such as polio workers, 
lady health workers, Accredited Social Health Activist 
(ASHA) workers or any such other individual deployed in 
public health outreach activities; 


(x) any person, including support staff, ambulance 
drivers, paramedics, social workers, bereavement 
counsellors, transplant coordinators, security personnel, or 
administrative and non-clinical staff, who by virtue of their 
employment in a medical establishment, directly or indirectly 
participates in healthcare delivery; 


(xi) any other person or class of persons notified by the 
Central Government in the Official Gazette for the purposes 


72 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


of this Act; 


(f) “healthcare services” means any service relating to the 
provision, facilitation, curative, rehabilitative, preventive, 
promotive, supportive, or administrative functions aimed at 
managing any disease, injury, disability or overall health, and 
includes efforts to provide, facilitate, or ensure access to necessary 
healthcare for individuals, such as locating, treating, or transporting 
those in need, as well as the management and operation of 
healthcare facilities; 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed under the rules made under 
this Act; 


(h) “property” means any movable or immovable asset, 
including medical equipment or machinery, owned by, in 
possession of, or under the control of any healthcare professional, 
medical personnel, or medical establishment; and 


(i) "violence" means any act that causes or may cause harm, 
injury, intimidation, or endangerment to the life of healthcare 
worker, whether occurring within a medical establishment or 
outside it, and shall include, but not limited to,— 


(i) physical harm through actions resulting in bodily 
injury, grievous hurt, or death to healthcare worker; 


(ii) psychological abuse including verbal abuse or 
harassment intended to insult, humiliate, or provoke 
healthcare worker in the performance of their duties; 


(iii) any interference that obstructs or hinders or prevents 
healthcare worker from carrying out their responsibilities, 
regardless of the location; 


(iv) loss or damage to any property, medical equipment, 
or documents in the custody of or associated with healthcare 
worker or medical establishments; and 


(v) harassment including any unwanted conduct that 
violates the dignity of healthcare workers, impacting their 
living and working conditions and affecting their ability to 
perform their duties effectively; or 


(vi) any other activity that results in mental anguish, 
physical injury, or death to the healthcare service providers or 
beneficiary of healthcare services. 


CHAPTER II 


OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 


Prohibition of 3. () No individual shall, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or 
violence by visible representations or otherwise, engage in any act of violence 
Pee against a healthcare worker, whether during the discharge of their 
workers and professional duties or otherwise, or cause any damage or loss to any 
damage to property, within or associated with, a medical establishment. 

cL 3 (2) Any act of violence against a healthcare worker or damage to the 
establishments. property of a medical establishment under sub-section (0), which is 


motivated, whether wholly or in part, by considerations of caste, gender, 
religion, language, or place of birth, is hereby prohibited. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Central 
Government, notify and implement such measures, as may be necessary 
or expedient to prevent and mitigate any act of violence against 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 73 


healthcare workers and damage to property of medical establishments, 
ensuring that such acts are addressed and remedied at all levels of 
governance, as expeditiously as possible. 


4.0) Whoever commits, abets or incites commission of any act of violence Penalties for 
or damage in contravention of the provisions of section 3, shall be Wiplence: 485 

> मकर ४ हा healthcare 
punished with imprisonment which shall not be less than six months but workers aad 
which may extend to five years, and with fine which shall not be less damage to 


than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend upto five lakh rupees; sit of 
medica. 


(2) Whoever, while committing violence or damage as referred to under establishments. 
sub-section (7) of section 3, causes grievous hurt, as defined under 
45 of 2023. section 6 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, to any healthcare 
worker, shall upon conviction be punished with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to ten 
years and with fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees but which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees. 


5. (0) Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of the Information and 

46 of 2023. Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, upon receipt of a written eae of 

complaint from the aggrieved healthcare worker the person in charge or : 

head of the medical establishment, as the case may be, in which the 

healthcare worker is working, shall, within such period as may be 

prescribed, notify the officer in charge of the police station having 

territorial jurisdiction, regarding the commission of an offence under this 

Act, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) In the event of any violence against healthcare workers while on 
duty, the head of the establishment shall be responsible for causing an 
institutional First Information Report to be filed, within a period not 
exceeding six hours from the time of occurrence of such incident. 


(3) Upon receipt of a complaint or information under sub-section (3), 
either from the medical establishment or an aggrieved healthcare worker, 
the police officer shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary 

46 of 2023. contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Samhita, 2023, register a 
First Information Report within one hour of receiving such complaint or 
information. 


6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Offence to be 
46 of 2023. Sanhita, 2023, an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable ee ang 
and non-bailable. ; 


7. (0) (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Investigation, 
46 of 2023. Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, any case registered under this Act Supeny som ane 
हे A हे trial of cases. 
shall be investigated by a police officer not below the rank of 


Inspector; 


(ii) The investigation of each such case shall be completed 
within a period of thirty days from the date of registration of the 
First Information Report; 


(iii) Each such investigation shall be supervised by a senior 
police officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of 
Police, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) () All inquiries and trials under this Act shall be conducted 
as expeditiously as possible and once examination of witnesses has 
commenced, the same shall proceed on a day-to-day basis until all 
witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless a court- 
ordered adjournment is necessary for reasons to be recorded in 
writing by the Court; 


(ii) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya 
46 of 2023. Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, efforts shall be made to ensure 
that the inquiry or trial is concluded within a period of one year 


74 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[Part-II 


Presumption as 8. 
to certain 
offences. 


Compensation 9, 
for acts of 
violence. 


Presumption of 0. 
culpable mental 
state. 


Prohibition of l. 
carrying 

weapons into a 

medical 

establishment. 


from the date of filing of charge-sheet: 


Provided that such period may be extended by such 
further period, for reasons to be recorded in writing, but not 
exceeding six months at a time: 


Provided further that where the trial is not concluded 
within the said period, the Judge shall record the reasons for 
delay in writing. 


(3) (i) For the purpose of ensuring speedy trial in all cases 
registered under this Act, the appropriate Government shall, 
with the concurrence of the High Court, establish by notification 
in the Official Gazette, one or more Special Courts in each 
district, to try offences under this Act; and 


(ii) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, designate for every such Special Court, a 
Special Public Prosecutor for the purpose of conducting cases 
under this Act in that Court. 


Where an individual is charged with commission of an offence under 
section 3, the Court shall presume that the individual has committed the 
offence, unless proven otherwise. 


In addition to the penalties provided under section 4, any individual 
found guilty of an offence under this Act shall be required to pay 
compensation, as follows, — 


(i) an amount equal to twice the fair market value of the 
property damaged or the loss incurred, as adjudicated by the 
competent court; 


(ii) asum of one lakh rupees for inflicting hurt on a healthcare 
worker and five lakh rupees for inflicting grievous hurt on a 
healthcare worker, or as determined by the competent court: 


Provided that if the convicted individual fails to remit the 
compensation provided under this section, the amount shall be 
recoverable as arrears of land revenue in accordance with the 
provisions of the Revenue Recovery Act, 890. 


In any prosecution for an offence under section 3, wherein the 
commission of the offence necessitates a culpable mental state on the part 
of the accused, the Court shall presume the existence of such culpable 
mental state, however, it shall be open to the accused to rebut this 
presumption by proving that he did not possess such mental state with 
respect to the act constituting the alleged offence. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) a fact is said to be proved only when the Court 
believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt and not merely 
when its existence is established by a preponderance of 
probability. 


(b) "culpable mental state" includes intention, motive, 
knowledge of a fact and the belief in, or reason to believe, a 
fact. 


(0) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, no person shall possess, carry, or display any 
arms, including licensed weapons, within the premises of any medical 
establishment: 


Provided that no provision of this section shall apply to arms 


I of 890. 


54 of 959. 


45 of 2023. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 75 


2. 


3. 


4. 


officially permitted for security purposes and carried by law enforcement 
agencies or security personnel on duty at the medical establishment. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, "arms" 
shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause (c) of section 2 
of the Arms Act, 959. 


(2) Whosoever found in violation of sub-section () shall be liable to 
punishment with imprisonment of either description for a term of not less 
than one month but which may extend to six months, or with fine, which 
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to three 
lakh rupees, or with both. 


Where, during any stage of the inquiry, investigation or trial under this 
Act, it is established to the satisfaction of the court that no violation of 
the provisions of this Act was committed by the accused and that the 
complaint or the charge made against the accused was false and 
malicious, the individual making such false or malicious charge shall be 
liable to be prosecuted and punished under the relevant provisions of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


CHAPTER III 
SAFETY STANDARDS AND RESPONSIBILIES 


(0) Every medical establishment shall ensure the creation and 
maintenance of a safe and secure working environment for all healthcare 
workers within its premises, in accordance with the guidelines issued by 
the Central Government under sub-section (2) and for this purpose, 
undertake the following measures, namely, — 


(6) All medical establishments including colleges and 
hospitals thereunder shall develop a policy for ensuring a safe 
working environment within their campus; 


(ii) Any incident of violence within the premises shall be 
promptly investigated by the management, and a First Information 
Report shall be lodged as per the provisions of section 5 of this Act; 


(iii) A detailed action taken report on any incident of violence 
shall be sent to the National Medical Commission within forty- 
eight hours of the occurrence of the incident; 


(iv) All medical establishments shall be declared as 'Safe 
Zones' where any act of violence or threats shall result in swift legal 
action; 


(v) All medical establishments shall develop and implement 
internal policies to address workplace violence, including protocols 
for responding to and reporting such incidents; and 


(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, issue guidelines on 
the safety standards and measures to be deployed in all medical 
establishments across the country. 


Every medical establishment shall implement such basic safety measures 
as may be necessary to ensure the physical security of healthcare workers, 
patients, and attendants, and to prevent the occurrence of violence within 
its premises, which shall include but not be limited to, - 


(60) implementing advanced security measures, including but 
not limited to improved lighting, monitored CCTV cameras, and 
trained security personnel covering high-traffic areas like 
emergency rooms, operation theatres, connecting pathways, along 
with other such areas identified by the medical establishment; 


(ii) adequate CCTV surveillance within and outside the 


Punishment 0० 


false charge. 


Safe working 


environment 
medical 
establishments. 


in 


Basic safety 


measures 
medical 
establishments. 


in 


76 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Responsibilities 5. 
of healthcare 

workers and 

medical 

establishments. 


premises; 


(iii) stationing Quick Response Teams, equipped with 
effective communication tools to respond to incidents of violence 
or threats in a timely manner; 


(iv) mandatory de-escalation and crisis management training 
to healthcare workers to manage patient families in high-stress 
situations along with training on the legal recourses available in case 
of violence; 


(v) provision of safe and secure transportation facilities to 
healthcare workers for traveling to and from hospitals and other 
relevant medical institutions, especially during night shifts; 


(vi) installing and maintaining CCTV cameras at all critical 
entry points to ensure the screening of individuals for weapons or 
prohibited items and secure storage and regular review of the footage 
in accordance with the security protocols issued by the Central 
Government, from time to time, as per sub-section (2) of section 3; 


(vii) addressing instances of violence, disproportionately 
affecting female and younger healthcare workers _ by prioritizing 
their safety in medical establishment infrastructure design, including 
secure duty and rest rooms and separate facilities for female 
healthcare workers; 


(viii) designating and deploying a trained security force which 
shall be responsible for managing the safety of sensitive areas, 
including emergency rooms, Intensive Care Units, and entry points 
and impart training to them in handling violent situations, de- 
escalation techniques, and healthcare-specific security challenges; 


(ix) ensuring establishment of emergency response protocols 
for handling incidents of violence or threats to safety; 


(x) implementing access control measures or systems such as 
identification checks and systems, visitor badges and screening, and 
security personnel at critical points to restrict entry of unauthorized 
persons, particularly in sensitive zones such as Intensive Care Units, 
emergency wards, and healthcare professionals’ resting rooms; 


(xi) deploying a visitor management system to regulate the 
flow of visitors and to ensure that only authorized personnel and 
family members are allowed in patient area; and 


(xii) ensuring the provision of adequate sanitation, nutrition 
and hygiene measures to all healthcare workers. 


(0) Before initiating any treatment or medical procedure, every doctor, 
medical professional, or medical establishment, as the case may be, shall 
provide an explanatory note to the patient, or their nearest kin or 
attendant, outlining: 


(i) the present medical condition of the patient; 

(ii) | expected procedures and treatments; 

(iii) possible outcomes of the treatment; 

(iv) — expected recovery time; 

(v) chances of failure of the prescribed procedures; and 

(vi) estimated expenses for medication, procedures, 
treatment, and services: 

Provided that a confirmation of understanding must be 


obtained either in writing or recorded verbally in such form and 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 77 


6. 


manner as may be prescribed in the presence of at least two 
witnesses. 


Provided further that this requirement shall not delay 
emergency or trauma care, and the explanatory note shall be given 
and written or verbal confirmation of understanding obtained as 
early as reasonably possible; 


(2) All healthcare service providers shall ensure that the treatment and 
procedures are explained in a clear and comprehensible manner to the 
patient or their designated attendant before and during treatment; 


(3) All medical establishments shall — 


(i) safeguard patient confidentiality, uphold the highest 
standards of ethical conduct, and provide emergency care without 
discrimination, except on medical grounds; 


(ii) furnish, upon request, a copy of the patient’s medical 
record or any part thereof to the patient or their designated 
attendant; 


(iii) ensure display of essential information for all 
stakeholders, including patients, visitors, and healthcare staff, at 
noticeable places within their premises; 


(iv) provide separate duty rooms for male and female 
healthcare workers and ensure basic amenities such as sanitation, 
resting spaces, and access to food and water during night shifts; 


(v) be equipped with CCTV surveillance at critical entry 
points to monitor any unwanted access by attendants of patients 
into sensitive areas, such as Intensive Care Units and doctors' 
resting rooms; 


(vi) provide mental health counselling services for their staff, 
especially those who have been victims of violence or face high- 
stress work environments and institute peer support groups to offer 
ongoing emotional and psychological support; 


(vii) establish a clear, visible emergency reporting 
mechanism that healthcare workers can use to alert security 
personnel in the event of an emergency; 


(viii) abide by the safety standards and guidelines issued 
under sections 3 and 4 of this Act. 


(4) Any healthcare worker or medical establishment found to be in 
violation of any of provisions of sub-section (3) or refuses treatment to a 
patient on malicious grounds, shall be punished by disciplinary action, 
suspension, or revocation of licenses for medical practice or sealing of 
the medical institution, as the case may be, as prescribed by the 
appropriate Government in accordance with the relevant laws, rules, and 
regulations in this regard. 


CHAPTER IV 


STATE HEALTHCARE PROTECTION BOARD AND DISTRICT HEALTHCARE 
VIGILANCE COMMITTEES 


() The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette constitute, a Board, to be known as the State 
Healthcare Protection Board in each State and Union territory to be 
known as the (name of the State/Union territory) Healthcare 
Protection Board for the purposes of overseeing and ensuring 
implementation of the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder within its territorial jurisdiction. 


Constitution of 
State Healthcare 
Protection Board. 


78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(2) The composition of the Board shall be as follows, - 


(i) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of 
Health and Family Welfare in the appropriate Government— 
Chairperson, ex-officio; 


(ii) the Secretary or Principal Secretary to the appropriate 
Government in the Ministry or Department of Health and Family 
Welfare—Vice-Chairperson, ex-officio; 


(iii) one officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary in the 
Ministry or Department of Health and Family Welfare in the 
appropriate Government, to be nominated by that Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed; 


(iv) the Director of Health Services or Director of Medical 
Education in the State, as decided by that Government - Member 
ex-officio; 


(v) a legal expert of repute to be nominated by the State 
Advocate General or the Attommey General of India, as the case may 
be, in such manner as may be prescribed Member; 


(vj) a senior police officer not below the rank of 
Superintendent of Police to be nominated by the appropriate 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed - Member ex- 
officio; 

(vii) one person to be nominated by the State Medical Council 
in such manner as may be prescribed - Member; 


(viii) three persons to be nominated by the appropriate 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed, representing 
healthcare professionals, which may include doctors, nurses, 
paramedics — Members; 


(ix) one public health expert or civil society representative 
working in the field of healthcare to be nominated by the 
appropriate Government; in such manner as may be prescribed — 
Member; and 


(x) two representatives of the patient-community, to be 
nominated by the appropriate Government, in such manner as may 
be prescribed — Member. 


(3) The qualifications and experience, term of office, salary and 
allowances of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members 
specified in clauses (f) to (6) of sub-section (4) of the Board shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Board shall regulate its own procedure with transaction to its 
business and for discharge of its powers and functions under this Act 
and for this purpose, may issue regulations in this regard. 


Functions of 7.. The Board shall be responsible for overseeing the implementation of the 

the Board. provisions of this Act within the States and Union territories, as the case 
may be, and for that purpose, shall perform all of any of the following 
functions,— 


(i) monitor adherence to the prescribed safety standards by 
medical establishments; 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 79 


(ii) ensure institutional compliance with the provisions of 
this Act and redressal of incidents of violence; 


(iii) coordinate with law enforcement and district authorities 
for implementation of the provisions of this Act; 


(iv) constitute and supervise functioning of the District 
Healthcare Vigilance Committees under section 9 and provide 
adequate funds for their efficient functioning; 


(५) oversee and analyze reports from the District Committees 
and forward the recommendations from District Committees for 
disciplinary and/or legal action against public officials for 
dereliction of duty under clause (ii) of section 20 to the appropriate 
Government for necessary action at their end; 


(vi) submit an annual report to the appropriate Government 
on the activities undertaken by it for the implementation of the Act 
and including therein incident data, and recommendations to 
mitigate occurrence of such incidents etc.; and 


(vii) perform such other functions as may be prescribed by 
the appropriate Government from time to time. 


8. (6) The appropriate Government, may appoint such number of 
officers and staff to the Board, as may be required, for the efficient 
discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(2) The method of appointment, the salaries and allowances payable 
to and other terms and conditions of service, of the officers and staff, 
so appointed under sub-section (), shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


9. (7) The Board shall, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute 
a District Healthcare Vigilance Committee in each district within the 
States and Union territories, to monitor the implementation of this 
Act and ensure compliance with the safety standards prescribed 
under sections 43 and 4 of this Act. 


(2) The composition of the District Committee shall be as follows, - 
06) the District Magistrate- Chairperson, ex-officio; 


(ii) the Chief Medical Officer of the district - Member 
Secretary ex-officio; 


(iii) one representative from the State Health 
Department to be nominated by the appropriate 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed - 
Member ex-officio; 


(iv) one representative of a recognized medical 
association to be nominated by the appropriate Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed — Member; 


(v) one representative from a civil society organization 
working in the field of public health to be nominated by the 
appropriate Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed -Member; and 


(vi) two healthcare professionals, one from a 
government and one from a private healthcare institution, to 
be nominated by the appropriate Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed — Members. 


(3) The term of office, the salary and allowances payable to and 
other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson, 
Member Secretary and Members of the District Committee shall 


Officers and staff 


of the Board. 


Constitution 
District 
Healthcare 
Vigilance 
Committee. 


of 


Functions of 
the District 
Committee. 


Officers and 
staff of the 
District 
Committee. 


Central 
Government 
Oversight and 
Monitoring. 


Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 


Grants and 
loans by the 
State or Union 
territory 
Government. 


80 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


20. 


2i. 


22. 


23. 


24, 


be such as may be prescribed. 


(4) The procedure to be followed by the District Committee with 
regard to transaction of its business shall be such as may be 
prescribed by regulations, issued by the Board. 


The District Committee shall perform all or any of the following 
functions, namely— 


(6) review and audit compliance with the prescribed 
healthcare safety standards and protocols in public and private 
medical establishments within the district; 


(ii) conduct regular investigations and inquiries into instances 
of alleged dereliction of duty or willful negligence by public 
officials in enforcing the provisions of this Act and submit reports 
thereof to the Board with recommendations for disciplinary or legal 
action against them; 


(iii) conduct awareness campaigns across all medical 
establishments and communities to promote understanding of the 
provisions of this Act, deter violent actions, and encourage 
compliance; 


(iv) maintain a district-level database to track incidents of 
violence against healthcare workers in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed; 


(v) submit biannual reports to the Board constituted under 
section 6, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


() The appropriate Government, may appoint such number of 
officers and staff to the District Committee, as may be required, for 
the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(2) The method of appointment, the salaries and allowances payable 
to and other terms and conditions of service, of the officers and staff, 
so appointed under sub-section (6), shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


(0) The Central Government shall ensure that the provisions of this Act, 
and the guidelines framed under sections 3 and 44, are properly 
implemented across all States and Union territories. 


(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, issue such 
guidelines, advisories, and model protocols as may be necessary for 
the effective implementation of this Act. 


(3) The Central Government shall have the power to require States and 
Union territories to submit compliance reports annually or at such 
intervals as may be prescribed, and may conduct periodic reviews of 
their performance under this Act. 


CHAPTER V 
ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT 


The Central Government may. after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law on this behalf, provide, from time to time, 
adequate funds to the Board of the Union territories without 
Legislature, for the implementation of the provisions and purposes 
of this Act. 


The State or Union territory Government may, after due appropriation 
made by State or Union territory Legislature, as the case may be, by law 
in this behalf, make to the State Board concerned, grants and loans of 


[Part-II 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 8] 


25. 


26. 


27. 


28. 


such sums of money as the State or Union territory Government may 
think fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(0) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate Government in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India or by any person so appointed by him in this 
behalf, annually or at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by 
the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(3) The accounts of the Board, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this 
behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually 
to the appropriate Government by the Board and the appropriate 
Government shall cause the annual accounts along with the audit report 
thereon to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each 
House of Parliament or, as the case may be, before the State Legislature 
or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or 
where such legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


(0) The Board shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be 
prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during 
the previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the appropriate 
Government. 


(2) A copy of the report received under sub-section (/) shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament or, 
as the case may be, before each House of the State Legislature or the 
Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where 
such legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(0) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the 
period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


(0) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Board, may from time to time, with the approval of the 
appropriate Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is 
necessary or expedient for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions 
of this Act. 


(3) Every rule or regulation made by the Central Government under this 
section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 


Accounts and 
audit. 


Annual Report. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Power of the 
appropriate 

Government to 
make rules and of 
the Board to 
make regulations. 


82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation. 


(4) Every rule made by the State Government or the Union territory 
Government, as the case may be and every regulation made by the Board, 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of the State Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, 
where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature consists of 
one House, before that House. 


Act to 29. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 


Supplement any other law in this regard, for the time being in force. 
other laws. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 83 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Violence against healthcare workers is a growing and systemic issue in 
India, encompassing physical assaults, verbal abuse, bullying and sexual 
harassment. According to the Indian Medical Association, healthcare workers 
are four times more likely to face injury or require time away from work due to 
violence compared to other sectors. Shockingly, over 75per-cent. of doctors have 
reported experiencing some form of violence, with 68.33per-cent. of incidents 
having been perpetrated by patients' attendants or escorts. 


The violence manifests in multiple forms, including verbal abuse, 
telephonic threats, physical assaults, murder and arson. These attacks have 
severe psychological consequences for healthcare workers, causing insomnia, 
anxiety, depression and fear, ultimately affecting their ability to perform their 
duties effectively. The repercussions are not limited to the healthcare workers 
alone but extend to the patients, as such incidents undermine the quality of 
healthcare services and fuel more violence in a vicious cycle. 


In response to the increasing incidents of violence, there have been 
multiple strikes and protests led by medical professionals across the country. The 
medical community has repeatedly called for stronger protection for healthcare 
workers, recognizing that violence against healthcare workers weakens the 
health system, affects patient care and needs urgent attention from all societal 
stakeholders. 


Although some States have enacted laws to address the issue, this legal 
framework remains fragmented. There is, therefore, an urgent need for a 
comprehensive national legislation that uniformly protects healthcare 
professionals across the country and ensures a zero-tolerance approach towards 
any form of violence against them. The object of this Bill is to establish a strong 
legal deterrent against all forms of violence against healthcare workers, ensuring 
a safe and conducive working environment in the healthcare sector. The Bill 
aims to provide uniform protection across States, filling the legislative gaps that 
currently exist and reinforcing the safety, security and dignity of healthcare 
workers in India. 


Hence, this Bill. 
FAUZIA KHAN. 


84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the constitution of State Healthcare 
Protection Boards by the appropriate Government in each State and Union 
territory for ensuring the implementation of the provisions of this Act its 
composition and for the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members 
thereof. Clause 8 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government may 
appoint such number of officers and staff to the Board as deemed necessary and 
for the salaries and allowances payable to them as well as other terms and 
conditions of their service. Clause 9 provides for the constitution of District 
Healthcare Vigilance Committees in each district, its composition and for the 
salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of 
the Chairperson and Members thereof. Clause 2 provides that the appropriate 
Government may appoint such number of officers and staff to the District 
Committee as deemed necessary and for the salaries and allowances payable to 
them as well as other terms and conditions of their service. Clause 23 provides 
for the provision of adequate funds by the Central Government to the Board of 
the Union territory without Legislature for the implementation of the Act. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both recurring and non- 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 85 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 27 empowers the Central Government to make such provisions 
through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to 
the provisions of the Bill. Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the appropriate 
Government to make rules and the Board, with the approval of the appropriate 
Government to make regulations for carrying out the purpose of this Bill. 


As the orders or rules or regulations relate to the matters of procedural and 
administrative details only, the delegation of the legislative power is of a normal 
character. 


86 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


XXIV 


Bill No. XXXIX of 2025 


A Bill to provide for enhancement of livelihood security to individuals in 
urban areas of the country by formulation of an Employment Guarantee 
Scheme aimed at providing guaranteed wage employment in 
every financial year to every adult in the urban areas 
covered thereunder who volunteers to do skilled or 
unskilled work and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
l. 0) This Act may be called National Urban Employment Guarantee Act, Short title and 
2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be 
appointed for different States or for different areas in a State and any 
reference in any such provision to the commencement of the Act shall be 
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision in such 
State or, as the case may be, in such area: 


Provided that this Act shall be applicable to the whole of India within 
a period of five years from the date of enactment of this Act. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 87 


Definitions. 2. Inthis Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 


(a) "adult" means a person who has completed eighteen years of 
age; 


(b) "applicant" means any adult who has applied for employment 
under the scheme; 


(c) "Central Council" means the Central Employment Guarantee 
Council constituted under section 2; 


(d) "District Programme Coordinator" means an_ officer 
designated as such by the State Government under sub section (/) of 
section 8 for implementation of the scheme in a district; 


(e) “household” means the members of a family related to each 
other by blood, marriage or adoption and normally residing together 
and sharing meals or holding a common ration card; 


(f) “implementing agency” includes any department of the 
Central Government or a State Government, any urban local authority 
or Government undertaking or non-governmental organisation 
authorised by the Central Government or the State Government to 
undertake the implementation of any work taken up under a Scheme; 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(h)"Programme In-charge" means the officer designated as such 
by the State Government under sub section () of section 7; 


() "Programme Officer" means the person appointed by the 
Programme In-charge at the Urban Local Body under sub-section (4) 
of section 9; 


()"project" means any work taken up under a Scheme for the 
purpose of providing employment to the applicants; 


(k)"Scheme" means the Employment Guarantee Scheme notified 
by the State Government under sub- section (/) of section 4; 


(I) "skilled work" means any work that requires specific level of 
training or skills as notified by the urban local body; 


(m)"State Council" means the State Employment Guarantee 
Council constituted under sub-section (4) of section 4; 


(n)"unskilled work" means any physical work which any adult 
person is capable of doing without any skill or special training; 


(o) "urban area" means any area in a State which is covered by 
any urban local body of that State; 


(p) "Urban Local Body" means the body that administers or 
governs a city or a town such as Municipal corporation, 
Municipalities, Cantonment Boards or notified Town Area 
Committees; 


(q) "wage rate" means the wage rate to be determined by the 
Central Council for the States in consultation with their Governments 
as provided under section 7; and 


(r) "ward" means territorial constituencies in the municipal area. 
CHAPTER II 
GUARANTEE OF EMPLOYMENT IN URBAN AREAS 


Guarantee of 3. (6) The State Government shall, in such urban areas in the State, as 
Puployinent may be notified by the Central Government it in the Official Gazette, 
provide to every adult, skilled and unskilled work for not less than 


88 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


ninety days in a financial year depending on the applicant's skill, 
qualifications, experience, aptitude etc. in accordance with the Scheme 
made under this Act. 


(2) Every adult who has done the work given to him under the Scheme 
shall be entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work. 


(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily 
wages shall be made on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a 
fortnight after the date on which such work was done. 


(4) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case 
may be, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, 
make provisions for securing work to every adult under a Scheme for 
any period beyond the period guaranteed under sub-section (), as 
may be expedient. 


CHAPTER III 


NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEME AND UNEMPLOYMENT 
ALLOWANCE 


(0) For the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of section 3, every 
State Government shall, within six months from the date of 
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
formulate an Employment Guarantee Scheme, for providing not less than 
ninety days of guaranteed employment in a financial year to every adult, in 
the urban areas covered under the Scheme as notified, who is willing to do 
unskilled or skilled work and applies for such work in the prescribed form 
and manner, subject to the conditions laid down by or under this Act and in 
the Scheme. 


(2) The State Government shall publish a summary of the Scheme made by 
it in at least two local newspapers, one of which shall be in a vernacular 
language circulating in the area or areas to which such Scheme shall apply. 


(3) The Scheme made under sub-section (4) shall provide for the minimum 
features specified in the First Schedule. 


(0) The State Government may, without prejudice to the conditions 
specified in the Second Schedule, specify in the Scheme the conditions for 
providing guaranteed employment under this Act. 


(2) Every adult employed under the Scheme made under this Act shall be 
entitled to such facilities not less than the minimum facilities specified in 
the Second Schedule. 


First preference in the employment opportunities under this Act shall be 
given to women, and persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Minorities. 


The Central Council, constituted under section 2, shall determine the 
wage rate for a State, after consultation with the Government of the 
concemed State: 


Provided that the wage rate may be determined using a scientific 
methodology, in such manner as may be prescribed, taking into account 
various input factors and may be revised every year to keep up with 
inflation: 


Provided further that different rates of wages may be specified for 
different areas: 


Provided also that the wage rate shall not be less than rupees six 
hundred and fifty per day. 


The Central Government shall take all necessary measures to act upon the 
recommendation received from the Central Council, as mandated under 


Employment 
Guarantee 
Scheme for 
urban areas. 


Conditions for 
providing 
guaranteed 
employment. 


Preference in 
employment 
opportunities. 


Wage rate. 


Social Security. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 89 


Payment of 9, 
unemployment 

allowance. 

Non-disbursement 0. 


of unemployment 
allowance in 
certain 
circumstances. 


Disentitlement to l. 


receive 
unemployment 
allowance in certain 
circumstances. 


clause (a) of sub-section () of section 43 within thirty days of its receipt 
and provide social security to all job holders working under the scheme 
guaranteed under this Act. 


(0) If an applicant for employment under the Scheme is not provided 
such employment within fifteen days of receipt of his application 
seeking employment or from the date on which the employment has 
been sought in the case of an advance application, whichever is later, 
his shall be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance in accordance 
with this section. 


(2) Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be 
prescribed by the State Government and subject to the provisions of 
this Act and the Scheme and the economic capacity of the State 
Government, the unemployment allowance payable under sub-section 
(0) shall be paid to the applicant at such rate as may be specified by 
the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, in 
consultation with the Central and State Councils: 


Provided that such allowance shall not be less than one-fourth of 
the wage rate for the first thirty days during the financial year and not 
less than one-half of the wage rate for the remaining period of the 
financial year. 


(3) The liability of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance 
to the applicant during any financial year shall cease as soon as:— 


(a) the applicant is directed by the Urban Local Body to report 
for work; or 


(b) the period for which employment is sought comes to an end 
and the applicant had not turned up for employment; or 


(c) the applicant has earned as much from the wages and 
unemployment allowance taken together which is equal to the wage 
for the length of employment he had sought during the financial year. 


(4) The unemployment allowance payable to the applicant shall be 
sanctioned by the Programme In-Charge and disbursed by the Programme 
Officer. 


(5) Every payment of unemployment allowance under sub-section (/) shall 
be made or offered not later than fifteen days from the date on which it 
became due for payment. 


(6) The State Government may prescribe the procedure for payment of 
unemployment allowance under this Act. 


(0) If the Programme Officer is not in the position to disburse the 
unemployment allowance in time or at all for any reason beyond his 
control, he shall report the matter to Programme In-Charge along with the 
reasons therefor in writing through a notice which shall be displayed on 
the notice board of the Urban Local Body. 


(2) Every case of non-payment or delayed payment of unemployment 
allowance shall be reported in the annual report submitted by the 
Programme In-Charge to the State Government along with the reasons for 
such non-payment or delayed payment. 


(3) The State Government shall take all measures to make the payment of 
unemployment allowance reported under sub-section (I) to the concerned 
applicant as expeditiously as possible. 


An applicant who— 
(a) does not accept the employment provided under a Scheme; 


(b) does not report for work, or communicate the reason thereof, within 


90 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


2. 


fifteen days of being notified by the implementing agency to report for the 
work; or 


(c) continuously remains absent from work, without obtaining a 
permission from the concerned implementing agency for a period of more 
than three weeks or remains absent for a total period of more than three 
weeks in any month, 


shall not be eligible to claim the unemployment allowance payable under 
this Act but shall be eligible to seek employment under any Scheme at any 
time. 


CHAPTER IV 
IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING AUTHORITIES 


(2) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette specify, there shall be constituted a 
Central Employment Guarantee Council to discharge the functions, 
and perform the duties, assigned to it by or under this Act. 


(2) The headquarters of the Central Council shall be at New Delhi. 


(3) The Central Council shall consist of the following members to be 
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed:— 


(a) a Chairperson; 


(b) five representatives of the Union Ministries including two 
from Niti Aayog not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India as may be determined by the Central 
Government — Members ex-officio; 


(c) one representative from each State Government as 
nominated by the concerned State Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed — Members; 


(d) fifteen non-official members representing Urban Local 
Bodies, organisations of workers and disadvantaged groups: 


Provided that not less than one-third of the non-official 
members appointed under this clause shall be women: 


Provided further that not less than one-third of the non- 
official members shall be belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes and Minorities; 


(९) a Member-Secretary not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India. 


(4) The salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and members of the Central Council shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(5) The Central Council shall meet once in every three months. 


(6) The Chairperson of the Central Council shall address the media and 
public after every meeting of the Central Council and disclose the matters 
discussed. 


(7) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers 
and staff to the Central Council, as may be necessary for the efficient 
discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(8) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, 
and other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff, so 
appointed under sub-section (7), shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Central 
Employment 
Guarantee 
Council. 


Functions and 


duties of the 


Central Council. 


State 
Employment 
Guarantee 
Council. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9] 


3. 


4. 


(0) The Central Council shall perform and discharge the following 
functions and duties: — 


(a) advise the Central Government on the ways to provide social 
security to the workers employed under the Scheme for the length of 
their employment within thirty days from the commencement of this 
Act; 


(b) develop a scientific methodology to determine the wage rate 
for skilled and unskilled works for all States for each financial year 
after consultation with the Governments of the States, which shall be 
reviewed every year; 


(c) establish a central evaluation and monitoring system and 
review it periodically; 


(d) monitor the implementation of this Act; 


(e) advise the Central Government on all matters concerning the 
implementation of this Act; 


(9 promote the widest possible dissemination of information 
about the Scheme made under this Act; 


(g) prepare annual reports to be laid before Parliament by the 
Central Government on the implementation of this Act; 


(h) advise the Central Government on ways to improve the skill 
of workers through training and certifications, and; 


(i) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the 
Central Government. 


(2) The Central Council shall have the power to undertake evaluation of 
the various Scheme made under this Act and for that purpose collect or 
cause to be collected statistics pertaining to the urban economy and the 
implementation of the Scheme and recommend changes, as may be 
deemed necessary, to the State Governments. 


(0) For the purposes of regular monitoring and reviewing the 
implementation of this Act at the State level, every State Government, 
shall by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a State Council 
to be known as the "(name of the State) Employment Guarantee 
Council". 


(2) The State Council shall consist of a Chairperson and such number 
of official members, as may be appointed by the State Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed and with not more than fifteen 
non-official members, to be nominated by the State Government, from 
Urban Local Bodies, organisations of workers and disadvantaged 
groups, in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that not less than one-third of the non-official members 
nominated under this sub-section shall be women: 


Provided further that not less than one third of the non-official 
members shall be belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled 
Tribes, the Other Backward Classes and Minorities. 


(3) The salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and members of the State Council shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the State Government. 


(4) The procedure with regard to transaction of business of the State 
Council including the frequency and place of its meetings, quorum at such 
meetings etc. shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government. 


(5) The State Government shall appoint such number of officers and 
staff to the State Council, as may be necessary for the efficient 


92 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


5. 


6. 


7. 


discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(6) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, 
and other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff, so 
appointed under sub-section (5), shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(/) The State Council shall perform and discharge the following functions 
and duties:— 


(a) establish an evaluation and monitoring system and review it 
periodically; 


(b) monitor the implementation of this Act; 


(c) advise the State Government on all matters concerning the 
implementation of this Act; 


(d) promote the widest possible dissemination of information 
about the Schemes made under this Act; 


(९) prepare annual reports to be laid before the State legislature 
by the State Government on the implementation of this Act; 


(f) advise the State Government on ways to improve the workers 
skills through training and certifications; 


(g) advise the State Government on wage rate for different kind 
of works, and; 


(h) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the 
State Government. 


(2) The State Council shall have the power to undertake evaluation of the 
various Scheme made under this Act and for that purpose collect or cause 
to be collected statistics pertaining to the urban economy and the 
implementation of the Scheme and Programmes in the State. 


(0) The Urban Local Bodies shall be the principal authorities for planning 
and implementation of the Scheme made under this Act. 


(2) The functions of the Urban Local Bodies shall be to:— 


(a) publish skilled and unskilled job requirements for the period 
of not less than ninety days on the notice board of the Urban Local 
Body and their respective website, if applicable; 


(b) help register and approve micro, small and medium 
enterprises to be part of the scheme; 


(c) get police verification of all the applicants who get employed 
under the scheme; 


(d) link unskilled workers with the e-shram portal; 


(e) carry out such other functions as may be assigned to it by the 
State Council, from time to time. 


(3) The Urban Local Bodies shall ensure that the works taken up under the 
Scheme shall meet the required technical standards and measurements. 


(0) The Municipal Commissioner or the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Urban Local Body or an officer of appropriate rank, as the State 
Government may decide, shall be designated as the Programme In-Charge. 


(2) The role of Programme In-Charge shall be as follows:— 
(a) appoint the programme officer(s); 


(b) finalise and approve ward wise projects to be taken up under a 
programme under the Scheme; 


Functions and 
duties of the 
State Council. 


Principal 
authorities for 
planning and 
implementation 
of schemes. 


Programme 
In-Charge. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 93 


(c) finalise and approve micro, small and medium enterprises that 
would be a part of the scheme; 


(d) finalise and approve schools that would be a part of the 
scheme; 


(e) supervise and monitor the projects taken up at the ward level 
and the area that comes under his/her jurisdiction; 


(f) carry out such other functions as may be assigned to him/her by 
the State Council, from time to time. 


(3) The Programme In-Charge shall prepare in the month of December 
every year, a budget for the next financial year containing the details of 
anticipated demand of the scheme and funds required for different works. 


(4) The State Government shall delegate such administrative and financial 
powers to the Programme In-Charge as may be required to enable him/her 
to carry out the functions assigned under this Act. 


District 8. 0) The Collector of the district or any other district level officer of 
ra sda appropriate rank, as the State Government may decide, shall be designated 
Coordinator. pik C हि ५ 4 
as the District Programme Coordinator for the implementation of the 
Scheme in the district. 


(2) The District Programme Coordinator shall be responsible for the 
implementation of the Scheme in the district in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder. 


(3) The role of District Programme Coordinator shall be to:— 


(a) accord necessary sanction and administrative clearances, 
wherever necessary, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) coordinate with the Programme In-Charge and Programme 
Officers functioning within his jurisdiction and the implementing 
agencies to ensure that the applicants are provided employment as per 
their entitlements under this Act; 


(c) review and monitor the performance of the Programme In- 
Charge and the Programme Officers; 


(d) conduct periodic inspection of the works in progress; 
(e) redress the grievances of the applicants; 


(9 present a status report on the functioning of all the Urban Local 
Bodies in the district under this Act to the State Council in every one 
hundred and eighty days. 


(g) ensure that regular social audits of all works within the 
jurisdiction of the Urban Local Body are carried out by the Programme 
In-Charge, in such form and manner as may be prescribed and that 
prompt action is taken on the objections raised in the social audit; 


(4) The State Government shall delegate such administrative and financial 
powers to the District Programme Coordinator as may be required to 
enable him to carry out the functions assigned under this Act. 


(5) The Programme Officer appointed under sub-section (7) of section 9 
and all other officers of the State Government and local authorities and 
bodies functioning within the district shall be responsible to assist the 
District Programme Coordinator in carrying out his functions under this 
Act. 


Programme 9. (6) The Programme In-Charge shall appoint a person, who is not 

oe below the rank of a Block Development Officer, with such 
qualifications and experience, as may be prescribed by the State 
Government, as Programme Officer at the Urban Local Body level. 


94 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


20. 


2i. 


22. 


23. 


(2) Not more than five Programme Officers can be appointed in an Urban 
Local Body. 


(3) The Programme Officer shall be responsible for matching the demand 
for employment with the employment opportunities arising in the area. 


(4) The Programme Officer shall help the micro, small and medium 
enterprises to register and get them due approval to be part of the Scheme. 


(5) The Programme Officer shall be responsible for ensuring that clean and 
hygienic sanitation facilities, drinking water and first-aid for all the 
applicants who get employment under the scheme are available at the 
place of work. 


(6) The Programme Officer shall prepare a plan for the ward under his 
jurisdiction by consolidating the project proposals received from the 
residents of that area, as per their feasibility. 


(7) The functions of the Programme Officer shall be to:— 
(a) implement the projects taken up; 


(b) allocate employment opportunities amongst the applicants and 
ask them to report for work; 


(c) sanction and ensure payment of unemployment allowance to 
the eligible applicants; 


(d) ensure prompt and fair payment of wages to all applicants who 
are employed under the Act and are working in that urban area; 


(e) deal promptly with all complaints that may arise in connection 
with the implementation of the scheme within the urban area; and 


(9 any other work as may be assigned to him by the Programme 
In-Charge or the District Programme Coordinator. 


(8) The Programme Officers shall function under the direction, control and 
superintendence of the Programme In-Charge. 


The State Government shall make available to the District Programme 
Coordinator, the Programme In-charge and the Programme Officers, 
necessary staff and technical support as may be deemed necessary for the 
effective implementation of the Scheme. 


The State Governments, shall make a dedicated portal where citizens can 
choose the Urban Local Body and recommend projects: 


Provided that citizens with no internet access may recommend 
projects to the Programme Officer or the Programme In-Charge through a 
letter. 


The State Government, shall, by rules, prescribe an appropriate grievance 
redressal mechanisms at the ward level and the district level for dealing 
with any complaint by any person in respect of implementation of the 
scheme and the procedure for disposal of such complaints. 


CHAPTER V 
FINANCE AND AUDIT 


(0) The Central Government and the State Governments shall have 
concurrent responsibility for providing funds for implementing the 
provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and 
recurring expenditure for the implementation of the provisions of the 
Act. 


Responsibilities 
of the State 
Governments. 


Recommendation 
of Projects. 


Grievance 
redressal 
mechanism. 


Sharing of 
financial 
responsibilities. 


Funding Pattern. 


Transparency 
and 
accountability. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 95 


24, 


25. 


(3) The Central Government shall provide to the State Governments, 
as grants-in-aid of revenues, such percentage of expenditure referred 
to in sub-section (2) as it may determine, from time to time, in 
consultation with the State Governments. 


(7) Subject to the rules as may be made by the Central Government in 
this behalf, in consultation with the State Governments, the Central 
Government shall meet the cost of the following, namely:— 


(a) the amount required for payment of wages for skilled and 
unskilled applicants employed under the scheme; 


(b) up to three-fourths of the material cost of the scheme; 


(c) such percentage of the total cost of the scheme as may be 
determined by the Central Government towards the administrative 
expenses, which may include the salary and allowances of the 
Programme Officers and supporting staff, and the administrative 
expenses of the Central Council. 


(d) such percentage of the total cost of the scheme as may be 
determined by the Central Government as grants towards Urban 
Local Bodies with more than twenty thousand applicants. 


(2) The State Government shall meet the cost of the following, namely:— 


(a) the cost of unemployment allowance payable under the 
Scheme; 


(b) one-fourth of the material cost of the Scheme including 
payment of wages to skilled and semi-skilled workers subject to the 
provisions of the Second Schedule; 


(c) the administrative expenses of the State Council. 


(0) The Programme In-Charge and all Programme Officers in the Urban 
Local Body shall be responsible for the proper utilisation and management 
of the funds placed at their disposal for the purpose of implementing the 
scheme. 


(2) The State Government, may prescribe the manner of maintaining 
proper books and accounts of employment of the applicants employed 
under the scheme and the expenditure incurred in connection with the 
implementation of the provisions of this Act and the rules and scheme 
made there under. 


(3) The State Government, may by rules, determine the arrangements to be 
made for the proper execution of the scheme and programmes under the 
Scheme and to ensure transparency and accountability at all levels in the 
implementation of the Scheme. 


(4) All payments of wages and unemployment allowances shall be made 
directly to the adult concerned either digitally or through cash as per the 
rules made by the State Government: 


Provided that applicants may be encouraged to choose digital 
payment methods and in case of cash transfers, at least two witnesses for 
each payment so made should be recorded in addition to the procedure 
prescribed by rules made by the State Government, as the case may be. 


(5) If any dispute or complaint arises concerning the implementation of the 
Scheme, the aggrieved person may file a complaint in this regard to the 
Programme Officer in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(6) The Programme Officer shall enter every complaint in a complaint 
register maintained by him in such form and manner as may be prescribed 
and shall dispose of the disputes and complaints within seven days of its 
receipt and in case it relates to a matter to be resolved by any other 


45 of 2023. 


96 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


3l. 


authority it shall be forwarded to such authority under intimation to the 
complainant: 


Provided that if the Programme Officer is unable to find a suitable 
resolution within the stipulated seven days, the matter shall be referred to 
the Programme In-charge: 


Provided further that if the Programme In-Charge is unable to find a 
suitable resolution within thirty days of receipt of the complaint, the matter 
shall be referred to the District Programme Coordinator. 


(0) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India, prescribe appropriate arrangements for audit 
of the accounts of the Scheme at all levels. 


(2) The accounts of the Scheme shall be maintained in such form and in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government. 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall on conviction be 
liable to a fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 


(0) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the powers 
exercisable by it (excluding the power to make rules) may, in such 
circumstances and subject to such conditions and limitations, be 
exercisable also by the State Government or such officer subordinate to the 
Central Government or the State Government as it may specify in such 
notification. 


(2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the powers 
exercisable by it (excluding the power to make rules and Schemes) may, in 
such circumstances and subject to such conditions and limitations, be 
exercisable also by such officer subordinate to it as it may specify in such 
notification. 


(0) The Central Government may give such directions as it may consider 
necessary to the State Government, for the effective implementation of the 
provisions of this Act. 


(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (/), the Central 
Government may, on receipt of any complaint regarding the issue or 
improper utilisation of funds granted under this Act in respect of any 
Scheme if prima facie satisfied that there is a case, cause an investigation 
into the complaint made, and can suggest changes to the State 
Government: 


Provided that the Central Government shall not stop the release of 
funds to a State Government in any case. 


(0) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient 
so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First or 
the Second Schedule and thereupon the First or the Second Schedule, as 
the case may be, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly. 


(2) A copy of every notification made under sub-section () shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 


No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
District Programme Coordinator, Programme In-Charge and Programme 
Officer or any other person who is, or who is deemed to be, a public 
servant within the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, in respect of anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or Scheme 
made there under. 


Audit of 
Accounts. 


Penalty for 
non-compliance. 


Power to 
delegate. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
give directions. 


Power to amend 
Schedules. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 97 


Power to make 32. (0) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
tules. make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Each State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
and subject to the conditions of previous publication, and consistent with 
this Act and the rules made by the Central Government, make rules to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. 


Laying of rules 33. (/) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be 

and schemes. laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall have thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 


(2) Every rule or Scheme made by the State Government under this Act 
shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of the 
State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


Power to 34. (4) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Gee ices Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
: such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear 

to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the 
expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


98 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


. 


0. 


il. 


THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 4(3)] 
MINIMUM FEATURES OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEME 


The focus of the Scheme shall be on the following works:- 
(i) provide micro, small and medium enterprises skilled labour; 


(ii) use skilled labour to improve learning outcomes or skill 
development of students in schools; 


(iii) help assisting works carried out by urban local bodies; 


(iv) help conduct different surveys by central and_ state 
governments; 


(v) water conservation and water harvesting works; 
(vi) drought proofing (including afforestation and tree plantation); 
(vii) land development; 


(viii) flood control and protection works including drainage in 
water logged areas; 


(ix) rural connectivity to provide all-weather access; and 


(x) any other work which may be notified by the Central 
Government in consultation with the State Government. 


Ensure the social rights of urban poor. 


Creation of durable assets and strengthening the livelihood resource base 
of the urban poor. 


Provide decent working conditions with livable wages which shall be 
reviewed every year to counter inflation. 


The State Council shall prepare a list of preferred works for different areas 
based on their ability to create durable assets. 


The Scheme shall be subject to appropriate arrangements as may be laid 
down by the State Government under the rules issued by it for proper 
maintenance of the public assets created under the Scheme. 


Under no circumstances shall the labourers be paid less than the wage rate 
as determined by the Central Council or as provided in the Act. 


The Scheme shall not permit engaging any contractor for implementation 
of the projects under it. 


Every Scheme shall contain adequate provisions for ensuring transparency 
and accountability at all level of implementation. 


Provisions for regular inspection, supervision and feedback from owners 
of micro, small and medium enterprises, school principals and residents of 
works taken up and done by the applicant employed under the Scheme 
shall be made to ensure proper quality of work as well as to ensure that the 
total wages paid for the completion of the work is commensurate with the 
quality, quantity and satisfaction of work done. 


The District Programme Coordinator, the Programme In-Charge and the 
Programme Officer shall prepare annually a report containing the facts and 
figures and achievements relating to the implementation of the Scheme 
within their jurisdiction and a copy of the same shall be made available to 
the public on demand and on payment of such fee as may be specified in 
the Scheme. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 99 


0. 


il. 


2. 


3. 


THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See sections 5 and 24(2)] 


CONDITIONS FOR GUARANTEED URBAN EMPLOYMENT UNDER A SCHEME 
AND MINIMUM ENTITLEMENTS OF LABOURERS 


The adult members of every household who:- 
(a) reside in any urban areas; and 
(b) are willing to do unskilled and skilled work, 


may submit their names, age and the address of the household to the Urban 
Local Body of which they reside for registration and issuance of a job 
card. 


First preference regarding the employment opportunities shall be given to 
women, Scheduled Castes, Schedule Tribes, Other Backward Classes and 
Minorities. 


Provided that priority shall be given to women in such a way that at 
least one-third of the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered 
and requested for work under this Act. 


It shall be the duty of the Programme Officer to register the applicant and 
get police verification done, after making such enquiry as it deems fit and 
issue a job card containing such details of adult members of the household 
affixing their photographs and Aadhar card number, as may be specified 
by the State Government in the Scheme. 


The registration made under paragraph 3 shall be for such period as may 
be laid in the Scheme, but in any case not less than five years, and may be 
renewed from time to time. 


Every adult member of a registered household whose name appears in the 
job card shall be entitled to apply for unskilled and skilled work under the 
Scheme. 


All registered adults shall be entitled to employment in accordance with 
the Scheme made under the provisions of this Act, for as many days as 
each applicant may request. 


The Programme Officer shall ensure that every applicant referred to in 
paragraph 6 shall be provided skilled or unskilled work in accordance with 
the provisions of the Scheme within fifteen days of receipt of an 
application or from the date he seeks work in case of advance application, 
whichever is later: 


Applications for work must be for at least fourteen days of continuous 
work. 


Applications for work may be submitted in writing either to the 
Programme Officer, as may be specified in the Scheme. 


The Programme Officer, as the case may be, shall be bound to accept valid 
applications and to issue a dated receipt to the applicant. Group 
applications may also be submitted. 


Applicants who are provided with work shall be so intimated in writing, by 
means of a letter sent to himat the address given in the job card and by a 
public notice displayed at the Urban Local Body. 


As far as possible, employment shall be provided within a radius of five 
kilometres of the place where the applicant resides at the time of applying. 


In cases the employment is provided outside such radius, it must be 
provided within the jurisdiction of the Urban Local Body, and the worker 


200 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


4. 


5. 


6. 


7. 


8. 


9. 


20. 


2]. 


22. 


23. 


24, 
25. 


26. 


shall be paid ten per cent of the wage rate as extra wages to meet 
additional transportation expense. 


In all cases where unemployment allowance is paid, or due to be paid, the 
Programme Officer shall inform the Programme in Charge and the District 
Programme Coordinator in writing the reasons as to why it was not 
possible for him to provide employment or cause to provide employment 
to the applicants. 


The District Programme Coordinator shall, in his half yearly report to the 
State Council, explain as to why employment could not be provided in 
cases where payment of unemployment allowance is involved. 


Provision shall be made in the Scheme for advance applications, that is, 
applications which may be submitted in advance of the date from which 
employment is sought. 


The Programme Officer in the Urban Local Body shall prepare and 
maintain or cause to be prepared and maintained such registers, vouchers 
and other documents in such form and in such manner as may be specified 
in the Scheme containing particulars of job cards and passbooks issued, 
name, age and address of the applicant. 


A list of adults, who are provided with the work shall be displayed on the 
notice board of the Urban Local Body and at such other places as the 
Programme in Charge may deem necessary and the list shall be open for 
inspection by the State Government, and any person interested. 


If the Programme Officer is satisfied at any time that an adult has 
registered with it by furnishing false information, it may direct the 
Programme In-Charge to direct his name to be struck off from the register 
and direct the applicant to return the job card: 


Provided that no such action under this paragraph shall be directed 
unless the concerned has been given an opportunity of being heard in the 
presence of two independent persons. 


If any personal injury is caused to any adult employed under the Scheme 
by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, he shall be 
entitled to, free of charge, such medical treatment as is admissible under 
the Scheme 


Where hospitalisation of the injured worker is necessary, the State 
Government shall arrange for such _ hospitalisation including 
accommodation, treatment, medicines and payment of daily allowance not 
less than half of the wage rate required to be paid had the injured been 
engaged in the work. 


If an adult employed under a Scheme dies or becomes permanently 
disabled by accident arising out of and in the course of employment, he 
shall be paid by the implementing agency an ex-gratia payment at the rate 
of one lakh rupees or such amount as may be notified by the Central 
Government, and the amount shall be paid to the legal heirs of the 
deceased or the disabled, as the case may be. 


In case the number of children below the age of six years accompanying 
the worker at any employment area are five or more, provisions shall be 
made to depute one worker to look after such children. 


The person deputed under paragraph 23 shall be paid wage rate. 


In case the payment of wages is not made within the period specified 
under the Scheme, the workers shall be entitled to receive payment of 
compensation as per the provisions that shall be created by the Central 
Council. 


The wages under a Scheme may be paid by the method decided by 
respective State Governments. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 20! 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


3. 


If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child accompanying any 
adult, who is employed under a Scheme, such adult shall be entitled to, 
free of charge, such medical treatment for the child as may be specified in 
the Scheme and in case of death or disablement, through an ex-gratia 
payment as may be determined by the State Government. 


In case of every employment under the Scheme, there shall be no 
discrimination solely on the ground of gender and the wage rate 
determined by Central Council, shall be complied with. 


The applicants who shall be employed under the Scheme can take two 
leaves per month other than the National holidays after informing the 
Programme Officer and their concerned supervisor. 


The Programme Officer should ensure that Workplace benefits tailored to 
job requirements, including rest areas, sanitation facilities, drinking water, 
first-aid stations, and child-care support, if applicable are provided. 


No worker shall work for more than eight hours and six days a week 
continuously. 


202 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Unemployment remains one of the most pressing and persistent challenges, 
affecting the livelihoods of millions and constraining the economic growth of the 
country. According to the International Labour Organisation, one in three young 
people is neither in education, employment, nor training, with women constituting 
ninety-five per cent. of this group. Further, the Economic Survey 2023-24 
highlighted that half of college graduates are not immediately employable, and only 
4.4 per cent. of the youth workforce possesses formal skills. 


This persistent problem has become highly sensitive and severe. A testimony to 
this, is the fact that over forty thousand graduates and postgraduates, along with 
more than one lakh individuals with education up to Class XII, applied for 
contractual sanitation worker positions in Haryana. Data from the National Crime 
Record Bureau indicates that a person commits suicide every three hours due to 
unemployment in the country. While seventy to eighty lakh youth enter the labour 
force every year, India is said to be experiencing a demographic dividend. However, 
this demographic dividend may soon turn into a demographic liability if enough jobs 
are not created. 


The Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) 2023-24 reveals a disheartening 
reality: the youth unemployment rate has stagnated at ten per cent. country wide 
since last year, but urban areas are facing an even graver crisis. Urban youth 
unemployment stands at 4.7 per cent. 


While there is a policy that seeks to provide hundred days of guaranteed 
employment in rural areas, there is no comprehensive national policy to address 
urban unemployment. The Union Government introduced an Employment Linked 
Incentive (ELI) scheme to deal with the problem in this budget session. However, 
the per company load of hiring four thousand interns every year and training them 
may not lead to desired results. Further, ELI as a scheme neglects the role of the 
States and the spirit of cooperative federalism. Thus, there is a need to create a 
comprehensive national policy addressing urban unemployment with States actively 
involved in the process. 


Considering the complexities of urban areas, the policy needs to take into 
consideration different factors like implementing agency, work permitted, worker 
registration and police verification, grievance redressal, eligibility criteria keeping in 
mind the fluid movement of people from rural to urban areas and vice versa, length 
of contract, wage rates, benefits, learning aspects, contract termination, working 
conditions, and most importantly providing the job seekers with a fair chance for a 
more long term sustained employment. 


Eleven states in India have implemented schemes that aim at generating urban 
employment, either through employment guarantee programs or community work 
initiatives. 

Various academicians and the 25"report of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Labour recommended that “There is an imperative need for putting in 
place an Employment Guarantee Programme for the urban workforce in line with 
MGNREGA.” Further, this would be in line with the Article 4] of the Constitution. 
Even though the article is a Directive Principle of State Policy, it urges the State to 
make effective provisions for the right to work, education, and public assistance 
within its economic capacity in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness, 
disablement, and in other unwanted circumstances. Introducing an urban 
unemployment guarantee program would support the Right to Livelihood, which the 
judiciary has interpreted as an essential aspect of the Right to Life. 


This Bill aims to offer flexibility to both skilled and unskilled workers. Different 
types of work will have different length of contracts. This will help both unskilled 
and skilled workers to maintain fluidity of movement as well as provide them with 
the option to learn a new skill while performing their jobs. Moreover, the workers 
will have the option to work with micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) 
and schools for a year to enhance their long term employment opportunity. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 203 


The Bill further seeks to empower women, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, 
Other Backward Classes and Minorities by prioritising their employment and 
representation in Central as well as State Councils. The bill features broad eligibility 
criteria to ensure accessibility for all and requires the Central Council to develop a 
scientific methodology, considering various input factors, in consultation with the 
states to determine wage rates. These rates will be reviewed annually to keep pace 
with inflation. 


Additionally, the Bill mandates the Central Council to propose methods for 
converging different government schemes to provide social security for workers 
registered under this scheme. It also requires the Union government to act on the 
recommendations made by the Central Council within thirty days. 


The Bill includes provisions for compensation if the sought employment is not 
provided and establishes checks and balances at the district level through district 
coordinator, along with rules set by the states. Additionally, it outlines specifications 
for working hours, holidays, working conditions, and terms for contract termination. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above-mentioned objectives. 


DEREK O’BRIEN. 


204 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the State Government shall, in such urban 
areas in the State, as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every 
adult skilled and unskilled work for not less than ninety days in a financial year in 
accordance with the Scheme. Clause 9 provides that if an applicant for employment 
under the Scheme is not provided employment within fifteen days of receipt of 
his/her application, he/she shall be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance. 
Clausel2 provides for the constitution of a Central Employment Guarantee Council 
with a Chairperson and Members and for the appointment of officers and staff thereto 
as deemed necessary by the Central Government as well as for the salaries and 
allowances payable to them and the terms and conditions of their service. Clause 4 
provides for the constitution of State Employment Guarantee Council with a 
Chairperson and Members and for the appointment of officers and staff thereto as 
deemed necessary by the Central Government as well as for the salaries and 
allowances payable to them and the terms and conditions of their service. Clause 9 
provides for the appointment of a Programme Officer at the Urban Body level. 
Clause 23 of Bill provides that the Central Government and the State Government 
shall make available funds for implementing the provisions thereof and that the 
Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and recurring expenditure 
and provide to the State Governments, as grants-in-aid of revenues, such percentage 
of expenditure as it may determine from time to time, in consultation with State 
Governments. Sub-section (/) of Clause 24 provides that the Central Government 
shall meet the amount required for payment of wages for skilled and unskilled 
applicants employed under the scheme, up to three-fourths of the material cost of the 
Scheme, administrative expenses of the Programme Officers and his supporting staff 
and of the Central Council and grants towards Urban Local Bodies with more than 
twenty thousand applicants. The expenditure in relation to States shall be borne by 
the State Government concerned. However, the expenditure in relation to Union 
Territories shall be borne by the Central Government. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both recurring and non-recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not possible to 
estimate the exact quantum of recurring and non-recurring expenditure likely to be 
involved at this stage. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 205 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and State Government 
to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 34 provides that the 
Central Government may, make such provisions, by order, as may be necessary for 
removing any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this Bill. 


As the matters in respect of which rules or orders may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 


206 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


XXV 


Bill No. XXI of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Education Act, 2009. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (0) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education (Amendment) Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force at once. 


2. Insection 2 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
35 of 2009. 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (g), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely— 


“(gg) ‘learning outcomes’ means assessment standards, indicating the 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 207 


expected level of learning that children should achieve for each class, as 
may be prescribed.” 


Amendment 3. Insection 8 of the principal Act, after clause (i), the following clause shall 
of section 8. be inserted, namely,- 


“(@) ensure yearly evaluation of learning outcomes of each class and subject 
as required.” 


Amendment 4. Insection 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), the words "other than 
obsecion I: a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate Government or 
the local authority" shall be omitted. 


208 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 was 
enacted with the good intention of providing free and compulsory education to the 
children of India. However, it suffers from some flaws that undermine its purpose. 
The exemption of schools established, owned or controlled by the appropriate 
Government or the local authority from the recognition criteria under section 8 of 
the Act, leaves many schools out of the requirements necessary for quality 
education. There is a need for amendment in the Act to ensure quality education in 
all the schools. 


2. Secondly, in evaluating the performance of schools, apart from the 
“inputs”, the addition of evaluation of learning outcomes can be a tool for 
significantly improving the quality of learning. The principal Act is completely 
silent on learning outcomes. The current Bill provides for the right to quality 
education while ensuring quality learning outcomes. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


DEREK O’BRIEN. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 209 


XXVI 


Bill No. LVI of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (8) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Amendment 2. Inarticle 07 of the Constitution:-— 
of article 07. 
(i) for clause (2), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 08 and 09, a 
Bill shall not be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of 
Parliament unless it has— 


(a) undergone a minimum period of thirty days of 
public pre-legislative consultation in all official 
languages, as may be prescribed by Parliament by law and 
the rules framed thereunder, if any; 


(b) been scrutinised by a Parliamentary 
Committee; and 


(c) been agreed to by both Houses, either without 
amendment or with such amendments only as are agreed 
to by both Houses.” 


(ii) after clause (2), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely: — 


“(2A) Parliament shall, by law, provide for post- 
legislative public consultation and review, including the 
participation of citizens and relevant Parliamentary 
Committees, to assess the effectiveness, implementation, and 
impact of laws passed by the Parliament: 


Provided that such review shall be conducted not later than six 
months of enactment of the Act and at periodic intervals thereafter, as 
may be prescribed, and its findings shall be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.” 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2Il 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Comprehensive parliamentary oversight is required for effective lawmaking. 
However, the increasing complexity and wide remit of the Parliament very often 
means that a thorough discussion of Bills is seldom possible on the floor of the 
House. For instance, during the 7" Lok Sabha, 35 per cent. of the Bills introduced 
in Lok Sabha and 34 per cent. of the Bills introduced in Rajya Sabha were passed 
with less than half an hour of discussion. 


Parliamentary committees provide a platform for in-depth scrutiny of Bills, 
ensuring greater accountability and transparency. The Committees also facilitate 
meaningful consultation with experts and stakeholders on the Bills. However, there 
has been a substantial decline in the referral of Bills to Parliamentary Committees. 
The 6" and 7" Lok Sabhas saw only 28 per cent. and 6 per cent. respectively of 
Bills, being referred to Committees as against 60 per cent. and 7] per cent. of Bills 
in the 4" and 5" Lok Sabha respectively. So far, out of the 20 Bills introduced in 
the 8 Lok Sabha, only 4 have been referred to a Parliamentary Committee. 


The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution has 
recommended referring all Bills to the Departmentally Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committees for better legislative oversight and quality. Upholding the 
sanctity of the legislative process in a representative democracy calls for a careful 
examination of all proposed legislation. Incorporating a provision in the 
Constitution itself to ensure mandatory scrutiny of all Bills by Parliamentary 
Committees prior to their passage by the Parliament will ensure more detailed and 
informed deliberation on a Bill and will also serve to ensure greater executive 
accountability to the Parliament. 


In 204, the Pre-Legislative Consultation Policy (PLCP) was introduced by 
the Ministry of Law and Justice with the objective of enhancing transparency, 
accountability, and public participation in the legislative process. The policy 
mandates that all Ministries and Departments place draft legislation in the public 
domain for at least 30 days, along with explanatory notes, to enable informed public 
feedback before submission for Cabinet and Parliamentary consideration. 


Paragraph of the PLCP allows Ministries and Departments significant 
discretion to bypass the policy’s requirements if they deem public consultation to 
be "not feasible" or "undesirable". This broad exemption creates a major loophole 
that undermines the very purpose of the policy. 


Comparative constitutional frameworks offer valuable lessons in— 
A) Pre-legislative Consultation 


In South Africa, the Constitution mandates that all proposed 
legislation undergo a process of meaningful public engagement prior to 
enactment. This requirement is not merely procedural but substantive, 
and failure to comply renders the law unconstitutional, as affirmed by 
the Constitutional Court. 


Similarly, in South Korea, public participation has been 
institutionalized through legal provisions that require all draft 
legislation to be published at least 20 days in advance of introduction in 
the legislature. This ensures sufficient time for public scrutiny, 
feedback, and deliberation. 


B) Post- Legislative Consultation 


Australia excels in post-legislative consultation due to its use of 
sunset clauses, which mandate reviews of laws to assess their 
effectiveness. The Office of Impact Analysis conducts transparent post- 
implementation reviews, incorporating stakeholder feedback and 
publishing outcomes. Public consultation is accessible through 
platforms, ensuring broad participation and clear documentation. 


2i2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Canada’s legislative framework also includes sunset clauses for 
certain laws, requiring periodic evaluation with public input. 
Parliamentary committees lead post-legislative scrutiny, engaging 
citizens and experts to assess impacts. Reports on law performance are 
shared publicly. 


The United Kingdom has a strong post-legislative scrutiny 
system, led by Committees that review laws three to five years post- 
enactment. 


Adopting a stronger, enforceable consultation framework would not only 
align India with global best practices but also reinvigorate public trust and 
democratic engagement in the legislative process. 


In a democratic republic, the legitimacy of lawmaking derives not only from 
elected representation but also from public participation, transparency, and 
accountability. While Article 07 of the Constitution governs the introduction and 
passage of Bills in Parliament, it does not explicitly require public consultation or 
post-legislative evaluation, both of which are critical in ensuring that laws serve 
the people effectively and remain adaptable to social realities. 


Recent experiences in legislation have highlighted the need for 
institutionalizing pre-legislative public consultation, so that stakeholders, civil 
society, and citizens have an opportunity to scrutinize and provide input on 
proposed laws. This ensures that the legislative process is not only procedurally 
valid but also democratically robust. 


Further, there is a growing recognition that post-legislative review 
mechanisms are essential to assess the impact, implementation, and unintended 
consequences of laws, allowing Parliament to make timely amendments or repeals 
where necessary. This will enhance the overall quality and responsiveness of 
legislation. 


Accordingly, this Amendment Bill seeks to: 


l. Make scrutiny of all Bills by Parliamentary Committees 
mandatory prior to their passing by Parliament; 


2. Mandate a minimum thirty-day public consultation period 
before any Bill can be considered validly passed by Parliament; and 


3. Introduce a framework for post-legislative evaluation through 
public and committee-based reviews. 


These measures will strengthen democratic govemance, increase 
transparency, and ensure that laws are not only made in the name of the people but 
also with their informed participation and ongoing oversight. 


Hence, this Bill. 


DEREK O’BRIEN. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


XXxVIT 


Bill No. XXVIII of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. 0) This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment) Short title and 
Act, 2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force at once. 


Insertion of 
new _ section 
43B. 


Liability of 
digital 
service 
providers for 
inaccurate or 
misleading 
technological 
guidance and 
compensation 
for faulty 
algorithm, 
misleading 
data, 
incorrect 
mapping etc. 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


In the Information Technology Act, 2000, after section 43A, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely: — 


"43B. (0) Any person or entity either operating a digital service 
platform or providing a digital service or both, including but not limited 
to mapping, navigation, or automated route guidance services or apps, 
shall ensure accuracy and reliability of the information so provided, in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Where any digital service provider, such as a navigation app, 
is found to be negligent in providing accurate and reliable information 
due to its faulty algorithm, misleading data, or incorrect mapping and the 
misleading or inaccurate navigation guidance results in bodily harm, 
injury, or death, of any user of such services, such service provider shall 
be liable to pay compensation up to twenty-five lakh rupees to the person 
so affected or to the legal heir and shall also in addition be liable to the 
criminal liability under the existing laws for the time being in force. 


Explanation:— For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) digital service provider includes any individual, 
private agency, private company, partnership firm, sole proprietor 
firm or any such other body or agency which has been granted 
permission by the appropriate Government to offer services 
through digital or electronic means in accordance with the policy 
governing such service sector; and 


(b) navigation app means an application that provides 
navigational directions in real time and includes any mapping app, 
Global Positioning System or navigation system. 


(3) The liability under sub-section (2) shall not be excluded 
solely on the basis of a general disclaimer accepted by the user, unless the 
provider demonstrates that— 


(a) the erroneous guidance resulted from force majeure 
conditions beyond reasonable technological control; or 


(b) the user was sufficiently warned of the risk and expressly 
disregarded safety advisories in reliance on such information.” 


2 of 2000. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Recently, two 29-year-old doctors lost their lives in Kerala, India, 
when their car plunged into the Periyar River while following a route 
recommended by Google Maps. This tragic event highlights the perilous 
outcomes of over-reliance on technology. In a similar incident, three 
individuals enroute to a wedding in Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh, also fell into a 
river while adhering to Google Maps' guidance. This serves as a reminder 
that the information provided by Google Maps is not always reliable and can 
sometimes lead users astray. Furthermore, a family from Bihar inadvertently 
found themselves in the forests of Karnataka after using Google Maps for 
directions to Goa. In the 20 case of Rosenberg vs. Harwood in the United 
States, a district court in Utah dismissed a woman's lawsuit after she was hit 
by a vehicle while trying to cross a busy road, which she navigated using 
Google Maps. The woman sued both Google and the driver, but the Court 
determined that there was no direct legal relationship between her and 
Google. In India, incidents resulting from inaccurate Google Maps data are 
becoming a significant concern. As technology has advanced, more people 
are relying on Google Maps on their smartphones for navigation. However, 
accidents can sometimes occur due to erroneous information or directions 
provided by the app. According to Section 43A of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000, all organizations must take reasonable measures to 
ensure the security and accuracy of their users' data. 


The use of navigation apps is growing rapidly each year; however, 
there is a significant gap in legal regulations to guarantee their accuracy. To 
improve traveller safety, it is crucial to revise the provisions of the IT Act. 
Therefore, this Bill seeks to fix liability on the part of the digital service 
provider, such as a navigation app, if it is found to be negligent in providing 
reliable and accurate information due to its faulty algorithm, misleading 
data, or incorrect mapping, resulting in bodily harm, injury, or death of the 
user concerned and to pay suitable compensation to the persons affected. 


Hence, this Bill. 


AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE. 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


XXVIII 


Bill No. XLII of 2025 


A Bill to regulate the collection, testing, processing, storage, distribution, 
issuance, and transfusion of human blood and blood components, so as to 
ensure health protection and prevention of transfusion-transmissible diseases 
and to establish national standards for safe blood collection, transfusion 
and management and imposing penalties for non-compliance 
and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows,— 
l. 06) This Act may be called the National Blood Transfusion Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2i7 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 


(b) “Authority” means the National Blood Transfusion Authority 
established under section 3; 


(c) “blood” means whole human blood collected from a donor and 
intended for transfusion; 


(d) “blood centre” means any facility engaged in collection, 
testing, processing, storage, or distribution of blood or blood 
components; 


(e) “blood component” means any therapeutic constituent of blood 
including red cells, white cells, platelets and plasma, separated by 
physical or mechanical means; 


(f) “hemovigilance” means surveillance of adverse effects 
associated with transfusion of blood and blood components; 


(g) “Member” means Member of the Authority established under 
section 3; 


(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 


() “transfusion medicine” means branch of medicine that 
encompasses all aspects of the transfusion of blood and blood 
components including aspects related to hemovigilance. 


Establishment of 3. (4) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
ae शा constitute an Authority to be known as National Blood Transfusion 
Transfusion Authority to exercise the powers conferred on and to perform the 
Authority. functions assigned to it, under this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall 
by the said name sue and be sued. 


(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi. 


(4) The Authority may, in consultation with the Central Government, 
establish its office(s) at such other places within the country, as it may 
deem necessary, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(5) The Authority shall regulate its own procedure with regard to transaction 
of its business and may, for this purpose, issue regulations. 


Composition of 4. 0) The Authority shall consist of the following, namely,— 
the Authority. 


(a) the Secretary or an Additional Secretary, Union Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, so nominated on his behalf — 
Chairperson, ex-officio; 


(b) the Director General of Health Services under the Union 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—President, ex-officio; 


(c) the Deputy Director General under the Union Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare—Director, ex-officio; 


28 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(d) the Additional Director General of Health Services under 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, to be nominated by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed — 
Secretary, ex-officio; 


(e) the National Mission Director, National Health Mission— 
Member, ex-officio; 


(f) the Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser, Union 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—Member, ex-officio; 


(g) the Drugs Controller General of India—Member, ex-officio; 


(h) an officer of the rank of the Joint Secretary, Union Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare, to be nominated by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed—Member ex- 
officio; 


(6) the Secretary, Indian Red Cross Society—Member, ex- 
officio; 


(@ the Director, National Institute of Biologicals—Member, ex- 
officio; 


(k) two Transfusion Medicine Experts from Government Blood 
Centres, to be appointed by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed—Members; 


(6) one Transfusion Medicine Expert from a private Blood 
Centre, to be appointed by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed —Member; 


(m) one Transfusion Medicine Expert from the Armed Forces 
Blood Centre, to be appointed by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed —Member; 


(n) one representative from the National Medical Commission 
to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed —Member; 


(०) two representatives from national-level Voluntary Blood 
Donor Organisations to be appointed by the Central Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed —Members; 


(p) one representative from a State Blood Transfusion Council, 
to be appointed by the State Government on rotation basis from 
all the States—Member; and 


(q) such other members, not exceeding three, as may be 
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed, having expertise in the field of blood transfusion or 
public health. 


The term of office of, the salary and allowances payable to, and other 


terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members, of the 
Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 


The Authority shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely: — 


(a) lay down policies and national standards for collection, 
testing, processing, storage, distribution and transfusion of blood and 
blood components; 


Functions of the 
Authority. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


(b) regulate and monitor the activities of all blood centres in the 
country and ensure compliance with safety norms and ethical standards 
and guidelines and for this purpose to conduct inspection of blood 
centres, from time to time; 


(c) prescribe the safety norms, ethical standards and guidelines in 
donor recruitment, blood collection and transfusion practices and the 
protocols for quality assurance and internal audits; 


(d) establish a national hemovigilance programme; 


(९) promote voluntary blood donation through coordinated 
national campaigns; 


(f) oversee research and training in transfusion medicine; 


(g) advise the appropriate Government in matters relating to 
blood transfusion services; 


(h) investigate into any adverse events related to blood transfusion 
as reported by the blood centres to determine the causes and recommend 
and implement corrective measures, in consultation with the 
appropriate Government under whose territorial jurisdiction the blood 
centre falls: 


Provided that the information regarding such adverse events 
shall be treated with confidentiality, ensuring the privacy of donors and 
recipients; 


(i) investigate into the complaints regarding non-compliance or 
violation of the provisions under this Act; and 


() perform such other functions, as may be assigned by the 
Central Government. 


Authority —_to 6. The Authority shall, while investigating any matter referred to it under 
ae ane 09 clauses (h) and (i) of section 5, have all the powers of a Civil Court in trying 
; a suit and, in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely,— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from 
any part of India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
court or office; 


(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses and 
documents; and 


(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 


Officers and 7. (0) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers and 
fete इक staff to the Authority, as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of 


its functions under this Act. 


(2) The method of recruitment, the salaries and allowances payable to, 
and other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff, so 
appointed for the purpose of the Authority shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


45 of 2023. 


23 of 940. 


220 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


0. 


iI. 


2. 


3. 


All members, officers and staff of the Authority shall be deemed, when acting 
or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be 
public servants within the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


The appropriate Government shall consult the Authority on all policies related 
to blood transfusion and related matters. 


No person shall establish or operate any blood centre, after the commencement 
of this Act, unless such centre is registered under the provisions of this Act. 


(0) Every person intending to establish or operate a blood centre shall make 
an application to the Authority in such form and manner and accompanied by 
such fee as may be prescribed: 


Provided that all blood centres established or operating under a 
valid licence granted under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 940, before the 
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be registered under the 
provisions of this Act for a period of one year from the date of commencement 
of this Act and shall apply for registration within one year from the date of 
commencement of this Act, failing which such blood centre shall cease to 
operate. 


(2) The Authority shall, on receipt of an application under sub-section (4), 
cause such enquiry to be made and if satisfied that the applicant fulfils the 
prescribed standards and norms, register the blood centre and issue a 
certificate of registration in such form and manner, as may be prescribed. 


(3) Every certificate of registration issued under sub-section (2) shall be valid 
for a period of five years from the date of issue and may, on an application 
made in that behalf in such form and manner and subject to such conditions as 
may be prescribed, be renewed for such period as may be prescribed. 


(0) The Authority may either suspend or cancel the registration of any blood 
centre, if it is satisfied on an enquiry being made and after giving a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, that— 


(a) the centre has violated any provision of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder; or 


(b) the centre is being operated without complying with the 
standards prescribed and, in a manner, prejudicial to the health and 
safety of donors or recipients: 


Provided that in case of severe or repeated violation of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, the registration 
shall be cancelled permanently, and such blood centre shall be 
prohibited from operating. 


(2) The procedure for suspension or cancellation, the period for which 
registration may be suspended and the manner of preferring an appeal against 
such suspension or cancellation shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Whoever establishes or operates a blood centre without obtaining 
registration, as provided under section 0, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both. 


Members, 
officers and staff 
of the Authority 
to be public 
servants. 


Appropriate 
Government to 
consult the 
Authority. 


Prohibition on 
operation 
without 
registration. 


Application for 
registration. 


Suspension and 
cancellation of 
registration. 


Prohibition of 
unregistered 
operations. 


Adulteration 
or unsafe 
practices. 


Penalty for 
non- 
compliance. 


Offences by 
Companies. 


Crediting 
sums 
realised by 
way of 
penalties to 
Consolidated 
Fund of 
India. 


Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


Annual report. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 22] 


4. 


5. 


6. 


7. 


8. 


9. 


20. 


Whoever knowingly collects, processes, or transfuses blood or blood 
components, which is contaminated, adulterated or unsafe, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term not less than two years but which 
may extend to five years, and with fine which shall not be less than five lakh 
rupees. 


Any blood centre or person who contravenes any provision of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder, shall be liable to a penalty, which shall not be less 
than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees. 


(0) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of 
and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company, as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (l), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this section— 


(a) "company" means a body corporate, and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 


(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm. 


All sums realised by way of penalties imposed under the provisions of this 
Act, shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the 
Authority, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(0) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(2) The accounts of the Authority, as audited and certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this 
behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually by 
the Authority to the Central Government, which shall cause the same to be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament 


(0) The Authority shall prepare every year, in such form and within such time 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report giving a 


222 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


2i. 


22. 


23. 


true and full account of its activities during the previous year and copies 
thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall cause to be laid before each House of 
Parliament, the annual report along with a memorandum of action taken or 
proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the Authority and the reasons 
for non-acceptance of the recommendations, if any, within a period of one 
year from the date of receipt of such report. 


(3) Where the report or any of its part is related to any of the issues connected 
with the State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the 
Governor of that State, who shall in turn, cause to be laid before the State 
legislature concerned, such report along with an explanatory memorandum 
concerned with the action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendations related to the State, if any, and reasons for not accepting any 
of the recommendations made therein, within a period of one year from the 
date of receipt of such report. 


(7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules, for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Authority may, with the approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters 
for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purposes of 
implementing the provisions of this Act. 


(3) Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made 
by the Authority under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that 
the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule 
or regulation. 


(0) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or 
expedient for removing such difficulty. 


(2) Every order or direction made under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any 
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the 
provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. 


Power to make 
rules and 


regulations. 


Power to remove 


difficulties. 


Act not 
derogation 
any other law. 


in 
of 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


223 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The availability of safe and adequate blood is an essential requirement of 
any modern health system. At present, regulation of blood transfusion services is 
governed by dispersed provisions under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 940 and 
Rules made thereunder. In view of the growing needs for quality control, 
standardisation, voluntary donation, and oversight, it is necessary to enact a 
dedicated legislation to monitor and regulate blood transfusion services. 


The Bill seeks to establish a National Blood Transfusion Authority with 
statutory powers to prescribe national standards for blood collection, processing, 
storage and transfusion; to ensure quality assurance through inspections and audits; 
to promote voluntary donation; and to provide for penalties for unsafe practices. It 
also mandates the registration of all blood centres and provides for coordinated 
responsibilities of the Central and State Governments. 


Hence, this Bill. 


AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE. 


224 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National 
Blood Transfusion Authority whereas Clause 4 provides for the 
composition of the Authority and the salaries and allowances payable to and 
other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of 
the Authority. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government may appoint 
such number of officers and staff to the Authority as may be deemed 
necessary for its efficient functioning and for their salaries and allowances 
and other terms and conditions of their service. Clause 8 of the Bill 
provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the 
Authority as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at 
this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be 
involved. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 225 


MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 2 empowers the Central Government to make rules and the National 
Blood Transfusion Authority to make regulations, with the approval of the Central 
Government, to carry out the provisions of this Bill. Clause 22 provides that the 
Central Government may, make such order or give such direction, as may be 
necessary, for removing any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this Bill. 


As the rules, regulations, orders and directions will relate to matters of 
procedural and administrative details only, the delegation of legislative power is of 
a normal character. 


226 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


XXIX 


Bill No. LXX of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the recognition of astrology as a scientific discipline, the 
registration and regulation of astrologers through a statutory 
Regulatory Authority, the promotion and development 
of astrology, and the prevention of fraudulent 
practices related thereto and for matters 
connected therewith or 


incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 


as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
l. (J) This Act may be called the Astrology (Regulation and Promotion) Act, Short title and 
commencement. 


2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Declaration of 
Astrology as a 
scientific 
discipline. 


Curriculum and 
standards for 
astrology. 


National 
Register of 
Licensed 
Astrologers. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 227 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “astrology” means the study of the movement and relative 
positions of celestial bodies in the zodiac belt as a means of 
understanding and interpreting their effects on human affairs and 
terrestrial events; 


(b) “astrologer” means a person practicing astrology as a 
profession having obtained the minimum educational and professional 
qualifications or experience as may be prescribed under this Act; 


(c) “Authority” means the Regulatory Authority for Astrology 
established under section 6; 


(d) “Code” means the Code of Professional Conduct and Ethics 
for Astrologers to be formulated and notified by the Authority under 
section 9; 


(e) “Fund” means the Astrology Regulation and Promotion Fund 
established under section 4; 


(f) “fraudulent practice” means any act intended to deceive, 
misrepresent, exploit, or obtain undue advantage in the name of 
astrology; 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 


(h) “Register” means the National Register of Licensed 
Astrologers prepared and maintained under section 5. 


CHAPTER II 


RECOGNITION AND REGULATION OF THE STUDY 
AND PRACTICE OF ASTROLOGY 


Astrology is hereby declared as a scientific discipline of study, research, and 
practice concerning the effects of celestial bodies on human life and 
terrestrial phenomena. 


The Central Government shall, develop a curriculum and framework 
for the study of astrology in educational institutions in the country, set 
uniform standards for the practice of, and facilitate and promote 
conduct of research in astrology in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(J) The Central Government shall, cause to be prepared and maintained, 
through the Authority established under section 7, a National Register of 
Licensed Astrologers containing the names, contact details, qualifications, 
place and mode of practice and such other details as may be specified, of 
persons qualified and recognized as astrologers, in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(2) The Register shall be a public document, under section 74 of the 
Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 and shall be published on the website 
of the Authority for easy access of the general public, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) Any person practicing or desirous of practicing astrology as a profession 
in the country, in whichever form and manner as may be prescribed, shall 
mandatorily apply for registration and license to practice astrology as a 
profession, to the Authority, in such form and manner and within such time 
from the date of commencement of the Act, as may be prescribed. 


(4) The applications so received shall be scrutinized by the Authority and if 
found in compliance with the conditions specified under this Act and the 
rules made thereunder, the applicant shall be issued a registration number 


47 of 2023. 


228 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


along with a certificate of registration and license to practice astrology as a 
profession, in such form and manner as may be prescribed and his name 
shall be entered in the Register: 


Provided that no such application shall be rejected without providing 
the applicant with clear reasons thereof in writing and a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard: 


Provided further that such registration and license shall be valid for 
such period as may be prescribed and after expiry of the registration/license 
period, the registration/license shall be eligible for renewal for an extended 
period equivalent to the initial period. 


(5) The license issued under this section shall be suspended or cancelled by 
the Authority, if the person concerned is found guilty of professional 
misconduct or malpractice in violation of the Code issued under this Act, 
depending on the gravity of the offence as established by the Authority 
during the investigation of the charges of offence against him: 


Provided that no such suspension or cancellation of license shall be 
done without giving the accused person a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard. 


(6) No person shall, after the date of commencement of this Act, practice 
astrology as a profession in the country, unless he has been issued a 
registration number along with the certificate of registration and license and 
his name has been entered in the Register. 


(7) Registration under this section will, however, not confer any benefits or 
entitlements other than those expressly provided under this Act. 


(7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish an authority to be known as the Regulatory 
Authority for Astrology to exercise the powers conferred upon and to 
perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act. 


(2) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at such place in the 
country as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official 
Gazette. 


(3) The Authority may, with the approval of the Central Government 
and in consultation with the State Governments concerned, establish its 
offices at such other places within the country, as it may deem 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(4) The Authority shall consist of the following, to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed:— 


(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence and 
integrity possessing not less than twenty years experience in the 
field of astrology, education, or related disciplines; 


(b) two Members representing recognized bodies of 
astrologers in the country; 


(c) one Member with requisite experience as may be 
prescribed in the field of education or social sciences; and 


(4) an officer of the Central Government not below the rank 
of Joint Secretary, as the ex-officio Member-Secretary. 


(5) The Chairperson and Members, other than the ex officio Member- 
Secretary, shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be eligible for 
re-appointment for one more term, subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed. 


(6) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such as 
may be prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


Establishment 
of the 
Regulatory 
Authority for 
Astrology. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 229 


Officers and 7. 
employees of 
the Authority. 


Functions and 8. 
powers of the 
Authority. 


Code of 9. 
Professional 

Conduct and 

Ethics for 

astrologers. 


Measures for 0. 
promotion and 

development of 

astrology. 


(7) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such 
procedure with regard to the transaction of its business as may be 
prescribed. 


(7) The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Government, appoint such number of officers and employees as it 
considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions. 


(2) The qualifications and method of appointment, the salaries and 
allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and employees of the Authority shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


The Authority shall have the following powers and functions, namely— 


(a) prescribing minimum educational and __ professional 
qualifications, guidelines and framework for the practice of astrology in 
the country; 


(b) receipt and scrutiny of applications for registration and grant 
of licence for the practice of astrology, issuing registration number and 
certificate of registration; 


(c) maintaining a National Register of Licensed Astrologers 
and publishing it on their website; 


(व) granting, renewing, suspending, or cancelling licences to 
practise astrology in the country; 


(e) formulating a Code of Professional Conduct and Ethics for 
astrologers and notifying it on their website as well as ensuring strict 
compliance thereto; 


(f) receiving and investigating complaints of professional 
misconduct or malpractice of registered and licensed astrologers or any 
other matter related to the study, practice and research in the field of 
astrology; 


(g) imposing penalties for fraudulent or unethical practices, false 
representation and other proven violations or contraventions of the 
provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder; 


(h) levy of fees or other charges as may be required under this 
Act; 


(i) advising the Central Government on matters relating to the 
regulation, promotion and development of astrology as a scientific and 
professional discipline and any other matter incidental thereto; and 


0) perform such other functions, as it may consider necessary, for 
implementation of the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder or as may be assigned by the Central Government, from 
time to time. 


All registered and licensed astrologers shall strictly adhere to the Code of 
Professional Conduct and Ethics for Astrologers formulated and notified by 
the Authority. 


CHAPTER II 
PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT OF ASTROLOGY 


The Central Government shall take appropriate measures for the 
promotion and development of astrology, including but not limited to— 


(a) establishment of research institutions for the study and 
advancement of astrology; 


230 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


il. 


2. 


3. 


4. 


5. 


(b) inclusion of astrology as a subject in higher educational 
institutions; 


(c) organization of national and international conferences, 
seminars, and workshops for the development of astrology; 


(d) encouraging collaboration with international institutions for 
research and exchange programs; and 


(e) organise public awareness campaigns to disseminate 
correct knowledge of astrology and its significance as a scientific 
and professional discipline and to warn sensitize the general public 
against fraudulent and unethical practices in the practice of 
astrology. 


CHAPTER IV 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 


(7) Any person who, by misrepresentation, false promise, or deceptive 
means, induces another person to believe in astrological predictions for the 
purpose of monetary gain or exploit any person emotionally, financially, or 
otherwise in the name of astrology, shall be deemed to have committed an 
offence under this Act. 


(2) Any registered and licensed astrologer found to be repeatedly indulging 
in fraudulent or unethical practices in astrology in violation of the Code 
shall be deemed to have committed an offence under this Act. 


(3) Any person or astrologer proven guilty of the offences under sub- 
sections (J) and (2) shall be liable to imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years; or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees; or 
with both. 


Any person who falsely represents himself as a registered and licensed 
astrologer or found practicing astrology without registration and license as 
required under the Act shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
two lakh rupees. 


No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except upon a 
complaint made by the Authority or any officer authorized in this behalf. 


CHAPTER V 
FINANCE AND GOVERNANCE 
(7) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be 


established for the purposes of this Act, a Fund to be called the 
Astrology Regulation and Promotion Fund. 


(2) The Fund shall be administered by the Authority under the supervision 
and control of the Central Government and there shall be credited thereto: — 


(a) all grants, loans, and advances made to it by the Central 
Government, from time to time, to carry out the purposes of the Act; 


(b) all fees and charges received by it under this Act and amounts 
accrued on account of monetary penalties imposed under the Act; and 


(c) any other sums received by the Authority, with the approval of 
the Central Government, in the course of discharge of its functions. 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the 
Authority, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


Fraudulent and 
unethical 
practices in 
astrology. 


False 
representation 
and practice 
without 
registration 
and license. 


Cognizance of 
offences. 


Funds of the 
Authority. 


Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 


Accounts and 
Audit. 


Annual Report. 


Power to make 
tules. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Act to override 
other laws. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23] 


6. 


7. 


8. 


9. 


20. 


2i. 


(J) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India. 


(2) The accounts of the Authority, as audited and certified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by 
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually by the Authority to the Central Government, which shall cause the 
same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of 
Parliament. 


The Authority shall prepare every year, in such form and within such time 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report giving a 
true and full account of its activities during the previous year and copies 
thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government, which shall cause it, 
as soon as may be after its receipt, to be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(J) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may 
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Authority or its 
members or its officers for actions taken in good faith in pursuance of this 
Act or of any rules, regulations or orders made thereunder. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in force. 


232 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Astrology has been practiced in India since ancient times and continues to 
hold significance in contemporary society. However, the absence of a regulatory 
framework has led to fraudulent practices by individuals who mislead the public 
for monetary gain. This Bill seeks to recognize astrology as a scientific discipline, 
establish mechanisms for the registration of astrologers, establish a Regulatory 
Authority for the regulation of astrologers and the practice of astrology as a 
profession in the country, promote research and education in astrology, and provide 
deterrents against fraudulent practices. The Bill also entrusts the Central 
Government with the responsibility of developing a curriculum for the study of 
Astrology, setting standards, and overseeing registration and enforcement for the 
practice of Astrology. 


Hence, this Bill. 
AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 233 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall develop a 
curriculum and framework for the study of astrology in educational institutions in 
the country, set uniform standards for its practice, and facilitate and promote 
conduct of research in astrology. Clause 6 provides for establishment of the 
Regulatory Authority for Astrology to exercise the powers conferred upon and to 
perform the functions assigned to it under this Act, its composition and the salaries 
and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members thereof as well as the 
other terms and conditions of their service. Clause 7 provides for the appointment 
of sufficient number of officers and employees to assist the Authority in the 
efficient discharge of its functions and for their salaries and allowances and other 
terms and conditions of their service. Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the functions 
and powers of the Authority. Clause 0 provides for the measures to be taken by 
the Central Government for the promotion and development of astrology in the 
country, including establishment of research institutions for the study and 
advancement of astrology, organization of national and international conferences, 
seminars, and workshops for the development of astrology and organizing public 
awareness campaigns to disseminate accurate knowledge of astrology and to warn 
against fraudulent practices. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of 
an Astrology Regulation and Promotion Fund whereas Clause |5 provides that the 
Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the Authority for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure, both of 
recurring and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, 
at this stage, it is not possible to estimate the exact amount of recurring and non- 
recurring expenditure likely to be involved. 


234 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause l9 provides that the Central 
Government may make such provisions, by order, as may be necessary for 
removing any difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill. 


As the rules or orders will relate to matters of procedure and administrative 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 235 


Bill No. XXV of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. 08) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025. Short title and 
commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force at once. 


2. In article 282 of the Constitution, the following provisos shall be inserted, Amendment of 
namely:— article 282. 


“Provided that the devolution of grants by the Union to the States by 
way of Centrally Sponsored Schemes pertaining to subjects enumerated in 
the Concurrent List or State List shall be routed through the budgets of the 


236 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


State Governments, and the States shall, independently of the Union, 
formulate the modalities for the implementation of the Schemes, including 
the branding and nomenclature criteria, with the overarching objective of 
tailoring initiatives to address local needs: 


Provided further that the Union shall strive to bear complete financial 
responsibility under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes, and in no 
circumstance shall any State be mandated to contribute in excess of twenty- 
five per cent. of the total funding pattern and such an obligation shall only 
be countenanced in exceptional and compelling circumstances, with the 
concept of shared cost constituting an exceptional deviation: 


Provided also that the formulation of the contours and general 
guidelines of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes referred to in the preceding 
provisos shall be culminated only subsequent to consultation and approval 
by not less than one-half of the States.” 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 237 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Article 282 of the Indian Constitution enables the Central as well as the State 
Governments to make grants for any ‘public purpose’, even beyond their 
respective legislative competences. The execution of Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes (CSSs) falls within the purview of article 282, whereby the States 
undertake implementation of the CSSs. While the Central Sector schemes are 
directly funded and executed by the Centre, CSSs are funded jointly by the Centre 
and the State. The budget estimates for 2023-24 reveal that more than 20 per cent. 
of the total fiscal transfers to the States are designated for CSSs, amounting to over 
Rupees 3.6 lakh crore. 


Numerous concerns afflict the framework governing CSSs in India. Unlike 
articles 270 (Taxes levied and distributed between the Union and the States) and 
275 (Grants from the Union to certain States), the transfers effected by the Union 
to the States under article 282 are not based on the recommendations of the 
Finance Commission, thereby increasing the discretionary authority of the Union 
Government. These schemes pertain to subjects enumerated in the State or 
Concurrent Lists in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. However, the Union 
Government unilaterally determines the scope, nature, and design of the CSSs. 
Most States are currently constrained to contribute 40 per cent. of the outlay in 
majority of the CSSs, thereby straining their overall fiscal resources. CSSs are at 
present based on a ‘one size fits all approach’ often neglecting State-specific needs 
and contexts. The recent push by the Central Government to enforce Centrally 
decided branding and naming guidelines of CSSs further exacerbates the 
prevailing imbalance in Centre-State relations. 


Successive Finance Commissions (FCs) have dealt with the issue of CSSs 
and highlighted the need for their restructuring. The Fourteenth Finance 
Commission recommended that the existing arrangements for transfers need to be 
reviewed with a view to minimise the discretion of the Central Government and 
to promote co-operative federalism. The Fifteenth Finance Commission expressed 
concern over the large number of CSSs and sub-schemes and the resultant lack of 
flexibility for the States. The Arvind Verma Committee (2005) recommended that 
all the CSSs should have terminal dates and targeted outcomes. The B.K. 
Chaturvedi Committee (20) recommended that the States should have the 
flexibility to tailor schemes as per their own ground realities. The Sub-Group of 
Chief Ministers (205) recommended rationalisation of schemes by grouping them 
into Core of Core, Core and Optional Categories. Despite all these measures, fiscal 
autonomy of the States are substantially eroded by the gradual increase in the 
States’ share in CSS, lack of flexibility for States in the implementation of CSSs, 
etc. 


In light of the above, there arises an imperative need to amend article 282 of 
the Constitution, affording greater autonomy to States for the implementation of 
CSSs in alignment with local needs and aspirations. To rectify the prevailing fiscal 
imbalance, the Central Government must also assume a heightened financial 
responsibility under Centrally Sponsored Schemes. Likewise, any formulation of 
guidelines in this regard necessitates consultation with the State Governments and 
their concurrence thereof. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the said objectives. 


JOHN BRITTAS. 


238 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making the Central Government 
responsible to bear the complete financial responsibility in Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes, and to ensure that States are insulated from contributing anything more 
than 25 per cent. of the total funding pattern, that too in exceptional and 
compelling circumstances. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify 
the recurring or non-recurring expenditure involved. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 239 


XXXI 


Bill No. XXXIV of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 972. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. () This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, Short title and 
2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force at once. 


Amendment of 
section 29. 


Amendment of 
section 33. 


Amendment of 
section 43. 


Amendment of 
section 62. 


Declaration of 
certain wild 
animal species as 
vermin. 


Insertion of new 
section 62A. 


Special provision 
for declaration of 
individual 
Schedule I 
animal as vermin 
in exceptional 
cases. 


Wildlife Conflict 
Mitigation Fund 
and special 
measures for 
States facing 
acute human- 
wildlife conflict. 


240 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


6. 


In section 29 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 972 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), for the words “National Board”, the word “Board” 
shall be substituted. 


In section 33 of the Principal Act, after the words “as per the guidelines 
issued by the Central Government”, the words “after ratification by the 
Legislatures of not less than one-half of the States” shall be inserted. 


In section 43 of the Principal Act, in the proviso to sub-section (2), for the 
words “Central Government”, the words “State Government” shall be 
substituted. 


For section 62 of the Principal Act, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“62. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, is 
satisfied that any wild animal species, not specified in Schedule I, has 
become a threat to human life or property, or is causing substantial 
damage to crops, livestock, or other means of livelihood, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare such wild animal species 
as vermin for such specified area and for such period as may be 
specified in the notification; 


Provided that during the period for which such notification is in 
force, the provisions of this Act shall not apply to the specified wild 
animal species within the area so specified: 


Provided further that the Central or the State Government, as 
the case may be, issuing such notification shall periodically review 
the situation and may, by a subsequent notification in the Official 
Gazette, withdraw the declaration if it is satisfied that the 
circumstances warranting such declaration no longer exists.” 


After section 62 of the Principal Act, the following new sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“62AA. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and in 
addition to the powers conferred upon the Chief Wild Life Warden 
under clause (a) of sub-section (8) of section , where the State 
Government is satisfied that an individual wild animal belonging to 
any of the species specified in Schedule I is, due to repeated and 
verifiable intrusion into human habitation, posing a persistent and 
grave threat to human life, or has caused loss of life or serious injury 
to any person, it may, by order in writing, declare such individual wild 
animal as vermin for the purposes of this Act and may also authorize 
any person to capture or destroy such animal in such manner as may 
be prescribed; 


Provided that such order shall apply only to the specific 
individual wild animal identified through physical markings, 
tracking, or other reliable means, and shall not extend to the species 
as a whole. 


62AB. () The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be called the Wildlife Conflict Mitigation 
Fund for the purpose of supporting proactive and reactive measures to 
reduce human-wildlife conflict and there shall be credited thereto such 
sums of money, as the Central Government may consider necessary, 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf. 


(2) The Fund shall be under the control of the Central Government and 
managed by the Central Government in consultation with the State 
Governments, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


53 of 972. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 24] 


(3) Where a State Government, based on the data and recorded fatalities or 
property damage, is satisfied that it is facing acute human-wildlife conflict 
scenarios, it may submit a detailed proposal to the Central Government 
seeking special financial assistance to effectively tackle and manage such 
scenarios. 


(4) Upon due consideration and verification of the detailed proposal 
received from the State Government under sub-section (3), the Central 
Government shall allocate appropriate funds from the Wildlife Conflict 
Mitigation Fund to the concerned State Government, for the following 
purposes, but not limited to — 


(a) implementation of scientific and eco-sensitive fencing and 
boundary protection measures; 


(b) payment of compensation to affected persons or families ; 
(c) translocation, rescue, and rehabilitation operations ; 


(d) community-based conflict mitigation and __ sensitisation 
programmes; and 


(e) such other measures as may be prescribed for reducing human- 
wildlife conflict.” 


242 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 972 [Act No. 53 of 972], was enacted as a 
seminal legislative instrument to safeguard wild animals, birds, and plants, and to 
promote ecological and environmental security across the nation. Over the decades, 
it has played a pivotal role in the preservation of India’s biodiversity. However, the 
evolving dynamics of human habitation, expanding forest cover, etc. have given 
rise to significant challenges. In particular, States with dense forests and adjoining 
human settlements, such as Kerala, are facing a mounting crisis owing to the 
frequent and often fatal encounters between humans and wildlife, which necessitate 
a calibrated legislative response that upholds both ecological protection and human 
safety. 


Official data paints a sobering picture. In the past five years alone, elephants 
have caused 2,869 human deaths nationwide, while tigers were responsible for 378 
fatalities. These figures exclude those resulting from attacks by other species such 
as wild boars. In Kerala, 555 human lives were lost to wildlife encounters between 
20i9-20 and 2023-24. Additionally, the State recorded 4,527 cases of human 
injuries arising from such conflicts between 2020 and 2024. The staggering toll on 
human life and livelihoods underscores the urgent necessity for a responsive and 
decentralised legal framework that empowers State authorities to act swiftly and 
effectively. 


The crisis is exacerbated by a parallel trend - the steady expansion of forest 
cover across the country. According to the India State of Forest Report (ISFR), 
India’s forest cover has grown from 6,92,027 sq. km. in 20I to 7,5,343 sq. km. 
in 2023, registering an increase of 23,36 sq. km. over a decade. Kerala alone 
witnessed an increase from 9,278 sq. km. in 205 to 2,253 sq. km. in 202. This 
growth has also intensified the interface between wild habitats and human 
habitations, particularly in geographies like Kerala where human settlements 
closely adjoin forested tracts, making this boundary increasingly volatile and 
dangerous. 


Many amendments have been incorporated into the parent Act by the Wild 
Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2022. Clause l of the Amendment Act altered 
section 29 to eliminate the requirement for State Governments to consult their State 
Boards for Wildlife before authorising interventions within sanctuaries, replacing 
it with mandatory consultation with the National Board for Wildlife. Clause 27 of 
the Amendment Act, meanwhile, conferred exclusive powers upon the Central 
Government to regulate the transfer of captive elephants, despite the fact that such 
transfers require local contextual understanding. 


These amendments apparently constrain the States’ ability to exercise 
administrative discretion in matters that are inherently local, ecological, and 
situational—thus severely impairing their capacity to respond to human-animal 
conflict in real time. 


Under the existing framework, only the Central Government has the authority 
to declare animals as vermin under section 62, regardless of the severity of the 
threat posed in a particular State. This Bill proposes to empower the Central and 
State Governments to declare wild animal species, other than those listed in 
Schedule I, as vermin for specified periods and areas. It also seeks to introduce a 
new provision to enable the identification and destruction of individual Schedule I 
animals that pose a persistent and grave threat to human life. These measures are 
proposed with robust safeguards and accountability mechanisms to ensure they are 
exercised judiciously and only in exceptional circumstances. 


Further, this Bill calls for the institutionalisation of financial assistance from 
the Central Government to support States facing acute human-wildlife conflict. 
This includes provisions for a dedicated Wildlife Conflict Mitigation Fund to 
finance scientific fencing, translocation and community awareness programmes, 
and compensation schemes. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 243 


This Bill, therefore, aims to: 


¢« Uphold the primacy of cooperative federalism in wildlife 
governance by’ enhancing the decision-making authority of State 
Governments and State Boards; 


« Empower States to respond swiftly to escalating human-wildlife 
conflict; 


« Ensure equitable treatment of all States under the law by 
providing clear and uniform provisions for declaring vermin; 


¢ Decentralise wildlife conflict resolution by empowering States to 
declare non-Schedule I species as vermin in specified contexts; 


¢ Introduce a speedy legal mechanism for States to act against 
individual Schedule I animals that endanger human lives; 


¢ Provide institutional and financial support through Central 
assistance for mitigation and management efforts for States experiencing 
acute human-animal conflict situations; 


¢ To vest State Governments with the authority to regulate the 
transfer of captive elephants; and 


¢ Restore the balance between ecological protection and the 
imperatives of human safety and livelihood protection. 


This Bill, thus, endeavours to harmonise the goals of wildlife conservation 
with the constitutional principles of federal governance and the pressing need for 
human safety. It is not an antithesis to conservation, but rather, it affirms that 
conservation is most meaningful when it ensures the protection of both wildlife and 
human lives and livelihoods. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives. 


JOHN BRITTAS. 


244 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a dedicated Wildlife Conflict 
Mitigation Fund, to support scientific and eco-sensitive fencing and boundary 
protection measures; compensation to affected persons or families; translocation, 
rescue, and rehabilitation operations; community-based conflict mitigation and 
sensitisation programmes; and such other measures as may be prescribed for 
reducing human-wildlife conflict, to which the Central Government shall credit 
such sums of money, as it may consider necessary, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the actual 
recurring or non-recurring expenditure likely to be involved. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 245 


XXXII 


Bill No. XX XVIII of 2025 


A Bill to amend the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. 0) This Act may be called the Digital Personal Data Protection Short title and 
(Amendment) Act, 2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force at once. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


246 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[Part-II 


2६ 


In the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (hereinafter referred to 
as the principal Act), in section 2, — 


(i) after clause (०), the following new clause shall be inserted, 


namely,— 


“(oa): ‘harm’ includes, but is not limited to: 
(i) bodily or mental injury; 
(ii) loss, distortion or theft of identity; 
(iii) loss of reputation or humiliation; 
(iv) loss of employment; 
(v) discriminatory treatment; 
(vi) financial loss, or damage or loss of property; 
(vii) subjection to blackmail or extortion; 


(viii) denial or withdrawal of a service, benefit or goods 
resulting from an evaluative decision about the Data 
Principal; 


(ix) observation or surveillance not reasonably 


expected by the Data Principal; 


(x) movement or any other action arising out of fear of 


being observed or surveilled; (xi) psychological manipulation 
which impairs the autonomy of the individual; 


(xii) any restriction placed or suffered directly or 


indirectly on speech; and 
(xiii) unauthorized profiling.” 


(ii) after clause (x), the following new clauses shall be inserted, 


namely,— 
“(xa) “profiling” means any form of processing of 


personal data that analyses or predicts aspects concerning 
the behaviour, attributes or interests of a Data Principal; 


(xb) “reasonable security safeguards” includes, but is 
not limited to, — 


(6) implementation of such security 


practices and standards and having a comprehensive, 
documented information security programme and 
policies containing managerial, technical, operational 
and physical security control measures that are 
commensurate with the information assets being 
protected with the nature of business: 


Provided that in the event of an information 


security breach, the Data Fiduciary or the Data 


Processor, as the case may be, shall be required to 


demonstrate that they have implemented security 


control measures as per their documented information 
security programme and information security policies; 


(ii) adherence to the international Standard 
ISASOAEC 2700i on ‘Information Technology - 


Security Techniques — Information Security 


Management Systems — Requirements’: 


Provided that any industry association or an 
entity formed by such an association, whose members 
are self-regulating by following other than IS/ISO/IEC 


22 of 2023. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


247 


codes of best practices for data protection, as per sub- 
clause (i), shall get its codes of best practices duly 
approved and notified by the Board for effective 
implementation: 


Provided further that the body corporate or 
a person on its behalf, who have implemented either 
IS/ISO/IEC 2700 standard or the codes of best 
practices for data protection, as approved and notified 
by the Board, shall be deemed to have complied with 
reasonable security practices and procedures provided 
that such standard or the codes of best practices have 
been certified or audited on a regular basis by entities 
through an independent auditor, duly approved by the 
Board, at least once a year or as and when the body 
corporate or a person on its behalf undertake 
significant upgradation of its process and computer 
resource, whichever is earlier; and 


(iii) such other additional safeguards as may be 
prescribed under sub-section (5A) of section 8.” 


In section 3 of the principal Act, in clause (b), after the words "connection 
with”, the words "or profiling of," shall be inserted. 


In section 6 of the principal Act, after sub-section (0), the following new 
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(l) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, no Data Fiduciary shall share the personal data of a Data 
Principal with any other Data Fiduciary or Data Processor 
unless - 


(a) specific, prior, informed and explicit 
consent is obtained for such data sharing, and 


(b) the purpose of such sharing is disclosed 
at the time of seeking such consent. 


Provided that where personal data is 
proposed to be transferred to a foreign country, the 
Data Principal shall be informed of such eventuality 
in advance. 


(2) The consent under sub-section (7) shall be 
obtained independently of any general consent for processing 
any other personal data obtained previously. 


(23) Any sharing of data in contravention of sub- 
sections (I) and (2) shall be deemed to be personal data 
breach and shall attract the same penalty, as provided for non- 
compliance of the obligation under sub-section (5) of section 8 
and also the liability to compensate the Data Principal, as 
provided under section 6A. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “sharing” 
includes any transfer, transmission, dissemination, disclosure, or making 
available of personal data by one Data Fiduciary to another or to a Data 
Processor, whether electronically or otherwise.” 


After section 6 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“6A. (/) A Data Principal shall have the right to seek 
compensation for any harm suffered due to contravention of the 
provisions of this Act by a Data Fiduciary or a Data Processor. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Amendment of 
section 6. 


Insertion of 
new section 
6A. 

Right to 
Compensation. 


Amendment of 
section 7. 


Amendment of 
section 8. 


Insertion of 
new section 
8A. 


Right to be 
Forgotten. 


248 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(2) The Board shall have the power to adjudicate and 
award compensation, commensurate with the harm caused.” 


6. In section 7 of the principal Act, — 
(i) after clause (e), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely;— 


“Provided that the compliance of foreign judgment or 
order shall be subject to compliance, through courts of 
competent jurisdiction in India, with sections 3,4 and 44A 
read with sub-sections (5) and (6) of section 2 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 908.”; 


(ii) after clause (i), the following new clauses shall be inserted, 
namely: 


“G) any exemption granted under this section shall be 
reasonable, not excessive or arbitrary, and shall be subject to 
judicial review; and 


(k) notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no 
data shall be processed for profiling, behavioural monitoring or 
targeted advertising without the explicit and informed consent of the 
Data Principal.” 


7. In section 8 of the principal Act, — 


(i) in sub-section (4), after the words "A Data Fiduciary”, 
the words “or a Data Processor engaged, appointed, used or 
otherwise involved by a Data Fiduciary on its behalf", shall be 
inserted; . 


(ii) after sub-section (5), the following new sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely,— 


"(5A) Save as provided in clause (xb) of section 2, 
the Central Government shall, within three months from 
the date on which the provisions of this Act come into 
force, prescribe by rules, additional reasonable security 
safeguards to be followed by a Data Fiduciary and Data 
Processor: 


Provided that the rules so framed shall be 
congruent with clause (xb) of section 2 and the rules 
framed by the Central Government under clause (ob) of 
sub-section (2) of section 87 read with section 43A of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000."; 


(iii) in sub-section (6), after the words "the Data 
Fiduciary”, the words "or the Data Processor, as the case may be," 
shall be inserted. 


8. After section 8 of the principal act, the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“8A. () Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a 
Data Principal shall have the right to request the erasure, deletion, 
or restriction on continued retention or disclosure of her personal 
data held by the Central Government, State Government, or any of 
their instrumentalities, where — 


(a) the data is no longer necessary for the purpose 
for which it was collected or processed by the authority; 


(b) the Data Principal has withdrawn consent, and 
there is no legal ground for retention; or 


5 of 908. 


2] of 2000. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(c) retention of such data is not necessary for 
compliance with a legal obligation or for a task carried out in 
public interest. 


(2) Every such request made under sub-section () shall be duly 
considered by the concerned public authority, and if found valid, the 
authority shall — 


(a) erase or anonymize the relevant data; and 


(b) confirm such erasure or anonymization in 
writing to the Data Principal within thirty days of receipt 
of the request. 


(3) Any refusal to act on a request received under sub-section (4) 
shall be intimated to the Data Principal within thirty days of the receipt 
of such request and shall be accompanied by written reasons, and the 
Data Principal shall have the right to appeal against such refusal before 
the Board.” 


9. In section 9 of the Principal Act, sub-sections (4) and (5) shall be omitted. 


0. Insection I! of the Principal Act, after sub-section (), the following new 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely;— 


“(IA) The Data Principal shall have the right to make a 
demand to the Data Fiduciary, to whom she has previously 
given consent and where the processing has been carried out 
through automated means, to transfer her personal data to 
another Data Fiduciary of her choice". 


il. Insection 7 of the Principal Act, - 


(0) sub-section (3), including the Explanation thereto, 
shall be omitted; 


(ii) for sub-section (5), the following shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“(5) Any exemption or relaxation under this 
section shall be reasonable, not excessive or arbitrary, 
and shall be subject to judicial review.”; 


(iii) after sub-section (5), the following new sub- 
section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(6) The provisions contained in 
section 6 of the Act pertaining to the conferring of 
consent by a Data Principal for the processing of 
personal data shall apply mutatis mutandis to the 
processing of personal data under this section unless 
expressly excluded by law or rules.” 


2. ‘In section 9 of the principal Act,— 
(6) for sub-section (2), the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“(2) The Chairperson and Members of the Board shall be 
appointed by a Selection Committee comprising: 


(a) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge 
of the Supreme Court nominated by him — 
Chairperson ex-officio; 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


Amendment of 
section I. 


Amendment of 
section I7. 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


250 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(b) the Leader of the Opposition in the 
House of the People - Member ex-officio; 


(c) the Minister in-charge of the Union 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology — 
Member ex-officio; 


(d) the Attomey General of India - Member 
ex-officio; and 


(e) an independent expert with vast 
experience in the field of Data Protection, Information 
Technology, Data Management, Data Science, Data 
Security or Cyber and internet Laws, to be nominated 
by the Chairman of the Council of the States in such 
manner as may be prescribed- Member: 


Provided that the Selection Committee may co-opt one 
Director each from any of the Indian Institutes of Technology and 
Indian Institutes of Management as subject experts without 
having the right to vote in the proceedings thereof. 


Explanation.— For the purpose of removal of doubts, it is 
hereby declared that where the Leader of the Opposition in the House of 
the People has not been recognised as such, the leader of the single largest 
party in opposition to the Government in the House of the People shall 
deemed to be the Leader of the Opposition.” 


(ii) after sub-section (2), the following new sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely,— 


“(2A) The Board shall be an independent statutory 
authority and shall not be subject to the directions of the 
Central Government in the discharge of its functions.” 


Amendment of 3. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), the words "except 
26000 2% with the previous approval of the Central Government", shall be deleted. 
Amendment of 4.  Insection 23 of the principal Act, for sub-section (), the following shall 
section 23. 


be substituted, namely:— 


“(6) The Board shall regulate and observe its own 
procedure in regard to the holding or and transaction of business 
at its meetings, including by digital means, and authenticate its 
orders, directions and instruments, in accordance with the 
regulations, that may be issued by the Board in this regard, from 
time to time.” 


Amendment of 5. In section 24 of the principal Act, the words, "with previous approval of 
Section 24. the Central Government,", shall be deleted. 
Amendment of 6. Insection 32 of the principal Act, ;— 
section 32. 
(i) for sub-section (4), the following shall be substituted, 
namely: 
“(4) A voluntary undertaking shall not absolve a 
Data Fiduciary or a Data Processor, as the case may be, from 
liability to pay compensation under section 6A, nor bar 
adjudication under section 33.” 
(ii) sub-section (5) shall be omitted. 
Amendment of 7. Insection 33 of the principal Act, after sub-section (), the following new 
section 33. 


sub-section shall be inserted, namely: 


Amendment of 
section 40. 


Amendment of 
section 44. 


5 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


“6869, In the eventuality of imposing penalty under sub- 
section (0), the Board shall also determine and award compensation 
to the affected Data Principal having regard to the gravity of the 
harm, nature of the breach, and extent of infringement of rights.” 


8. In section 40 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (t) shall be 
omitted. 


9.  Insection 44 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (2), clauses (a) and (c), shall be omitted. 


(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 


252 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the digital age, personal data has emerged as a critical asset with 
wide-ranging implications for individual rights and privacy. The Digital 
Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 was enacted with the stated objective of 
safeguarding personal data and regulating its processing. However, a closer 
scrutiny of the Act reveals significant shortcomings that may undermine the 
very rights it purports to protect. 


Grave concerns have been raised regarding the structure and 
independence of the Data Protection Board, the principal adjudicatory 
authority under the Act. The current provision empowers the Central 
Government to appoint the Chairperson and Members of the Board without 
laying down any criteria or requiring a transparent selection process. Earlier, 
the Joint Parliamentary Committee had recommended an independent 
regulatory framework. 


In addition to the issues of independence and transparency in the 
constitution of the Data Protection Board, section 22(3) of the Act permits the 
Central Government to waive the mandatory one-year cooling-off period for 
the Chairperson or any Member of the Board before they accept any re- 
employment. This discretionary power, if left unchecked, risks compromising 
the integrity and impartiality of the Board. It creates a fertile ground for 
conflicts of interest and post-retirement inducements that could distort 
regulatory outcomes and weaken public trust in the adjudicatory body. The 
cooling-off period must be treated as an absolute bar, without exceptions, to 
ensure that Members and the Chairperson of the Board remain free from undue 
influence during and after their term of office. 


The introduction of the concept of ‘voluntary undertaking’ under 
section 32 allows entities in violation of the law to submit undertakings and 
thereby avoid formal inquiry and penalties. This provision creates a potential 
escape route for powerful Data Fiduciaries and erodes the deterrent effect of 
the law. Compounding this, the Act is silent on compensatory relief to Data 
Principals who have suffered harm. There is a need to incorporate the global 
best practices, such as the European Union's General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR), in the Act to recognize the right to claim compensation 
by the Data Principal - thus offering redressal for privacy violations or data 
breaches. 


Further, the Act introduces the notion of “reasonable security 
safeguards” as a compliance obligation for data fiduciaries but does not define 
or prescribe minimum standards for such safeguards. This ambiguity fosters 
compliance in form rather than in substance. The Act simultaneously repeals 
Section 43A and clause (ob) of sub-section (2) of Section 87 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 - provisions that had enabled affected individuals to 
seek compensation for negligence in data protection. 


Likewise, the extensive exemption powers under Section 7 vest the 
Central Government with authority to exempt public and private entities, 
including start-ups, from complying with the provisions of the Act. The Act 
also does not guarantee rights such as the "right to be forgotten" in relation to 
data held by the State. 


The legislation also affects the Right to Information Act, 2005 by 
effectively overriding Section 8()(j) of the RTI Act through section 44(3), and 
there is a likelihood of the provision being misused to withhold information 
merely on the ground that it constitutes personal data, even in cases where its 
disclosure will serve larger public interest or where such information could not 
ordinarily be denied to Parliament or a State Legislature. 


Other deficiencies in the Act include the exclusion of provisions 
requiring Data Fiduciaries to obtain specific consent before sharing data with 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 253 


third parties or foreign entities; exclusion of Data Processors from the ambit of 
responsibility under the Act; and the lack of provisions for the right to data 
portability, despite these being recommended by earlier drafts or Parliamentary 
Committees. 


Crucially, children’s data, despite being nominally protected under 
Section 9, is subject to broad governmental exemptions. Such exemptions 
allow for behavioural monitoring, profiling, and targeted advertising directed 
at children without robust parental consent mechanisms, which might 
undermine child safety and contradicts the protective intent of the law. 


Moreover, there are apprehensions that the Act fails to rein in state 
surveillance effectively. Clauses such as Sections 7(b) and 7(c) allow the 
processing of personal data for vaguely defined state functions and national 
security, without explicit consent. Section 7(e) permits the enforcement of 
foreign civil and contractual judgments without the oversight of Indian 
courts—sidestepping safeguards under the Code of Civil Procedure, 908. 


The concept of “harm” to Data Principals, a foundational element in 
previous iterations of the Data Protection Bill, has been conspicuously omitted 
in the Act. As a result, there is no established basis for individuals to claim 
compensation or for regulators to evaluate the impact of privacy violations. 


In light of these substantial gaps, this Amendment Bill seeks to:— 


l. Define "harm" and "profiling" and recognize the right to 
claim compensation for damages resulting from breaches; 


2. Establish minimum standards for reasonable security 
safeguards and reinstate repealed protective provisions from the 
Information Technology Act, 2000; 


3. Mandate specific, informed, and unbundled consent for data 
sharing, including cross-border transfers; 


4. Ensure the independence of the Data Protection Board; 


5. Introduce the right to data portability, and require 
accountability from data processors as well as fiduciaries; 


6. Eliminate arbitrary exemptions, particularly those allowing 
the State to operate outside the framework of the Act; 


7. Ensure judicial review and transparency in all exemptions 
and governmental decisions under the Act; 


8. Protect children's data more rigorously by disallowing 
exemptions for profiling, monitoring, or advertising without consent; 


9. Reinstate the original provisions of the Right to Information 
Act, 2005, ensuring India’s transparency framework and the 
foundational principles of democratic accountability; and 


0. Provide for such other matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


The objective of this proposed legislation is not only to fill legislative 
gaps but also to reorient the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 toward 
its stated goal of protecting the fundamental right to privacy as enshrined under 
Article 2] of the Constitution of India. The Supreme Court, in Justice K.S 
Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India and Ors., has recognized that “the right 
to privacy is protected as an intrinsic part of the right to life and personal liberty 
under Article 2 and as a part of the freedoms guaranteed by Part III of the 
Constitution”. It is the solemn duty of the legislature to give effect to this 
principle in both letter and spirit. 


254 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


This Bill, therefore, seeks to reclaim the balance between innovation 
and individual rights, governance and accountability, regulation and freedom— 
while laying the foundation for a data protection regime that truly honours 
constitutional values and public trust. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives. 


JOHN BRITTAS. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 255 


XXXII 


Bill No. XLVI of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the protection, revival and sustainable development 
of water bodies in the country in consultation with the State 
Governments and for the constitution of a Board for 
recommending and taking measures for the said 
purpose and for matters connected 
therewith and incidental 
thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Water Bodies (Protection, Revival and Short title and 
Sustainable Development) Act, 2025. eomiue reciente 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Comprehensive 
plan for 
protection, 
revival and 
sustainable 
development of 
water bodies. 


Constitution of 
the National 
Water Bodies 
Board. 


256 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[Part-II 


2. 


(J) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 


(a) "appointed day" means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for 
the purpose of section 4; 


(b) "Board" means the National Water Bodies Board 
constituted under section 4; 


(c) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Board; 
(dq) "Member" means a member of the Board; 


(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 


(f) "regulations" means regulations made by the Board under 
this Act; 


(g) “State Government” in relation to a Union territory having 
a Legislature, means the Administrator thereof functioning under 
article 239AA or any other provision of the Constitution, as the case 
may be; and includes the Government of such Union territory for the 
purposes of this Act; and 


(h) “water body” includes natural and manmade water 
resources, lakes, ponds, tanks and wetlands but does not include sea, 
river and stream. 


(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in 
the Environment (Protection) Act, 986, or in the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 974, or in the rules made thereunder, shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the said Acts, as the 
context may require. 


(J) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State 
Governments, within six months from the date of the commencement of 
this Act, prepare a Comprehensive Plan for the protection, revival and 
sustainable development of water bodies in the country. 


(2) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments 
may, by notification in the official Gazette, amend the Comprehensive 
Plan from time to time, as may be necessary. 


(3) For the purposes of sub-section (7), every State Government shall 
within one month from the date of the commencement of this Act, 
furnish to the Central Government, such detailed data of water bodies 
within its territorial jurisdiction, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) Every State Government shall, within four months from the date of 
the commencement of this Act, prepare a list of all water bodies situated 
within the State and notify such list in the official Gazette, in such form 
as may be prescribed. 


(7) With effect from the appointed day, the Central Government 
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, for the 
purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the National Water 
Bodies Board. 


(2)The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to contract and shall, by the said name, sued and 
be sued. 


(3) The head office of the Board shall be at Patna in the State of 
Bihar or at such other places as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify and the Board may, with 


29 of 986. 
6 of 974. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 257 


the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices or 
agencies at other places in the country. 


(4) The Board shall consist of the following persons, namely,— 


(i) Secretary to the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti, —Chairperson ex-officio; 


(ii) Secretary to the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Urban Affairs, —Member ex-officio; 


(iii) Secretary to the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Rural Development — Member ex-officio; 


(iv) Secretary to the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change - 
Member ex-officio; 


(9 Ten Member ex-officio, to be nominated by the 
Central Government, to represent the Governments of the 
States, by rotation in the alphabetical order of the names of 
such States, for such period of time as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the nomination shall be made from 
officials of the State Government not below the rank of 
Secretary to the State Government and dealing with the 
subject of water resources; 


(vi) not more than three Members, to be appointed by 
the Central Government, from amongst persons having 
experience in conservation of water bodies and water 
management, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(vii) not more than four Members, to be appointed by 
the Central Government, from amongst persons having 
experience in the fields of irrigation, water harvesting, 
environment protection and sanitation, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(5) The qualifications and experience, term of office, salaries and/or 
allowances of and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and Members of the Board shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


(6) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of 
the Board, exercise and discharge such powers and duties, as may be 
prescribed or delegated by the Board. 


(7) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalidated merely by 
reason of,— 


(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the 
Board; 


(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a 
member of the Board; 


(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting 
the merits of the case. 


(8) The Board shall regulate its own procedure with regard to transaction 
of its business and the procedure of the Committees thereof. 


(72) The Board may appoint such number of officers and employees 
as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions 
under this Act. 


(2) The manner of appointment, qualifications and experience, terms 
and conditions of service including salary and allowances of the 


Officers and 
employees of 
the Board. 


258 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be specified 
in the regulations made by the Board. 


(3)The Board may engage the services of personnel, both from within 
and outside the country as consultants, and visiting academicians on 
such terms and conditions and remunerations as may be specified in 
the regulations made by the Board and shall facilitate their 
operations within the country. 


Committees of 6. (J) Subject to the rules made in this behalf, the Board may constitute 
eB oar, such Committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its 
duties and performance of its functions under this Act. 


(2) The Board shall have the power to co-opt as members of any 
Committee appointed under sub-section (/), such number of persons who 
are not members of the Board as it may think fit, and the person so co- 
opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the Committee, and 
take part in the proceedings of the Committee. 


Powers and 7. (J) The Board shall serve as a body for the protection, revival and 


eh 06 sustainable development of water bodies in the country. 


(2) The powers and functions of the Board, shall, include the following, 
namely — 


(i) serve as a monitoring agency for the protection, 
revival and sustainable development of water bodies; 


(ii) prepare national coordinated programmes to 
promote the spirit of conservation of water bodies; 


(iii) assist का setting up infrastructure and 
environment for enhancing the storage capacity of water 
bodies; 


(iv) ensure restoration of water reservoirs; 


(v) assist in creating infrastructure for de-siltation of 
water bodies; 


(vi) suggest prevention and removal of encroachment 
on water bodies; 


(vii) ensure cleanliness and hygiene in water bodies; 
(viii) prevent pollution in water bodies; 


(ix) oversee the utilization of water from water 
bodies; 

(x) help in preparing infrastructure for rain water 
harvesting; 


(xi) determine citizen and community rights over 
water bodies; 


(xii) create public awareness and education on water 
bodies; 
(xiii) make recommendations for amendment(s) in 


the Comprehensive Plan prepared under section 3; and 


(xiv) such other functions as may be assigned to it by 
the Central Government, from time to time. 


(3) The Board shall submit its recommendations and observations, state- 
wise, to the Central Government in such form and manneras may be 
prescribed. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 259 


8. 


0. 


iI. 


2. 


3. 


4. 


(7) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State 
Government, consider the recommendations and observations of the 
Board and prepare a concrete action plan in a State-wise format for 
implementation of the same by the State Governments. 


(2) The Central Government shall forward the action plan referred to in 
sub-section () to the respective State Government. 


(3) Every State Government shall constitute a Task Force consisting of 
such number of officers and other persons, as may be deemed necessary, 
and vest it with such powers, as may be prescribed, for the purpose of 
implementation of the action plan so received from the Central 
Government under sub-section (2) for protection, revival and sustainable 
development of water bodies. 


(4) Every State Government shall ensure that the action plan forwarded 
by the Central Government is implemented in letter and spirit, and shall 
submit a quarterly compliance report in this regard to the Central 
Government, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law, in this behalf, make to the Board grants of such 
sums of money as that Government may consider necessary, to 
enable it to perform its functions under the Act. 


The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial 
year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its 
activities during the previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to 
the Central Government. 


(7) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(2)The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India or by any other person so appointed by him in 
this behalf, annually and any expenditure incurred in connection with 
such audit shall be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General. 


(3)The Board shall furnish to the Central Government, before such date 
as may be prescribed, the audited copy of its accounts together with the 
auditor's report. 


The Central Government shall cause the annual report and accounts of 
the Board along with the auditor's report thereon to be laid, as soon as 
may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament. 


(J) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Board 
shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound 
by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may 
give in writing to it from time to time: 


Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an 
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this 
sub-section. 


(2) The decision of the central Government, whether a question is one of 
the policy or not, shall be final. 


No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or the Board or any Committee constituted by it or the 
Chairperson or any Member of the Board or such Committee, or any 
officer or employee of the Central Government or the Board or any other 
person authorised by the Central Government or the Board for anything 


Proposals _—_ by 
Central 
Government to 


the State 
Governments 
for 


implementation. 


Grants by 
Central 
Government. 


Annual Report. 


Accounts and 
Audit. 


Annual _ report 
and auditor's 
report to be laid 
before 
Parliament. 
Power of the 
Central 
Government to 
issue directions. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


260 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the 
tules or regulations made thereunder. 


Powers of the 5. The Central Government may, in consultation with the State 
een ३६ Government, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules to carry 
make rules. out the provisions of this Act. 

Power of the 6. The Board may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, by 
eh notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this 
: Act and the rules generally to carry out the provisions of this Act. 

Rules and 7.__ Every rule made by the central Government and every regulation made 


regulations to 


: by the Board under this Act shall be laid, as soon as after it is made 
be laid before 


before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 


Parliament. 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
tule or regulation. 

Overriding 8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 

oe Of ae inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in 

: force on the subject and save aforesaid the provisions of the Act shall be 

in addition to and not in derogation of any other law in this regard, for the 
time being in force. 

Power to 9. (J) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 

Bee itis the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 


make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 26l 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Water bodies, including lakes, ponds, wetlands, and reservoirs, play a 
vital role in India’s ecological balance, biodiversity, agriculture, and drinking 
water supply. However, rapid urbanization, industrialization, and unsustainable 
practices have severely impacted their health. Protection, revival and 
maintenance of these water bodies are now critical for ensuring water security, 
environmental sustainability, and climate resilience. 


According to the National Wetland Atlas and reports from the Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB), over 30 percent. of natural water bodies have 
disappeared in the past few decades. Satellite data and field surveys reveal 
significant shrinkage and encroachment of lakes and wetlands across cities like 
Bengaluru, Hyderabad, and Delhi. Untreated sewage, industrial effluents, and 
solid waste dumping are major pollutants. More than 60 percent of monitored 
water bodies in urban areas are polluted and unfit for direct human use. 


Lakes and ponds are being filled for real estate and infrastructure projects. 
Wetlands, especially in urban and peri-urban areas, are often encroached upon, 
disrupting their ecological functions. Water bodies are filling with silt and 
sediments due to upstream deforestation and poor land management. Erratic 
rainfall and prolonged droughts, influenced by climate change, have affected the 
seasonal inflow and recharge of water bodies. Many small water bodies dry up 
during summer, reducing groundwater recharge and increasing water scarcity. 


The National Green Tribunal (NGT) has passed several orders to protect 
water bodies from pollution and encroachment. Courts have directed 
municipalities and development authorities to demarcate and restore lakes and 
ponds. But the situation on the ground is pathetic. There are multiple agencies 
with overlapping responsibilities which hinder effective planning and execution. 
Lack of updated data on waterbody size, quality, and status hampers planning. 


Water bodies in the country are under severe stress, but their revival is 
both possible and essential. Protecting water bodies is not just an environmental 
concern but a necessity for ensuring water security, public health, and 
sustainable development in the country. 


Despite the growing awareness and multiple efforts by various 
stakeholders, the absence of a unified central legislation specifically focused on 
the protection, revival, and sustainable management of water bodies has been a 
major gap in India’s water governance. Water bodies are currently governed by 
a patchwork of State laws, environmental regulations, and urban planning codes. 
Agencies responsible for water, environment, land, and urban development often 
operate in silos, leading to poor coordination and jurisdictional conflicts. There 
is no single accountable authority at the national level to ensure the protection 
and restoration of all types of water bodies. Many wetlands and lakes are inter- 
state or inter-jurisdictional in nature. 


Existing environmental laws such as the Environment Protection Act, 986 
or the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 974 do not adequately 
provide focused attention on water bodies like ponds, lakes, and wetlands. 
Encroachments and pollution often go unpunished due to regulatory loopholes 
and weak enforcement. Water bodies play a critical role in climate adaptation by 
recharging groundwater, preventing floods, and supporting biodiversity. 


Countries like Australia, the USA, and the EU have integrated water laws 
that protect inland water bodies through centralized frameworks combined with 
local implementation. 


262 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


A central law would provide a uniform regulatory framework and ensure 
coordinated action. The current state of India’s water bodies urgently demands a 
comprehensive central legislation that moves beyond piecemeal and reactive 
measures. 


Hence, this Bill. 
A.D. SINGH. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 263 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National Water 
Bodies Board for the protection, revival and sustainable development of water 
bodies, its composition, the salaries and allowances payable to and other terms 
and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members thereof. Clause 5 
provides for the officers and employees of the Board and for their salaries and 
allowances and other terms and conditions of their service as well as for the 
engagement of consultants and visiting academicians, as required and for the 
payment of remuneration to them. Clause 9 provides that the Central 
Government after due appropriation shall provide adequate funds to the Board to 
carry out the purposes of the Bill. 


The Bill, therefore if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of l00 crore rupees is 
likely to be required as recurring expenditure. Non-recurring expenditure to the 
tune of 5 crore rupees is also likely be involved. 


264 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause |5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill, whereas Clause 6 empowers the National 
Water bodies Board, with the prior approval of the Central Government to make 
regulations. Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
such provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in 
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. 


As the matters in respect of which rules and regulations or orders may be 
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail, the delegation of 
legislative power is, of a normal character. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 265 


XXXIV 


Bill No. XXIV of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
l. 86) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Child Marriage (Amendment) 


Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 


notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


266 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Amendment of 2. In section 2 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, for clause (a), 6 of 2007. 
Section, the following shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(a) “child” means a person who has not completed eighteen years 
p p g y 
of age;” 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 267 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act (PCMA), 2006 was enacted with the 
objective of preventing child marriages and protecting the rights of children, 
particularly girls, from early and forced marriages. The current Act defines a child as a 
male under 2] years of age and a female under 8 years of age. Section 3 of the PEMA 
allows any party who got married as a child to seek annulment of the marriage as long 
as the petition is filed within two years of attaining majority. While there is a different 
age limit for marriage in PCMA, under the Majority Act, 875, majority is attained on 
completing 8 years of age. A literal reading of the provisions of PCMA suggest that 
both male and female parties can seek annulment of marriage before they attain 20 
years of age. The issues arises whether the male party can annul the marriage at 23 
years or 20 years due to the gender-based difference in the minimum age of marriage. 


Judicial pronouncements have revealed a divergence of views. The Punjab and 
Haryana High Court and the Karnataka High Court, in separate rulings, held that 
marriages between consenting individuals above the age of !8—even when one party is 
below 2i—are valid. In 20li, the Madras High Court in T. Sivakumar Vs. The 
Inspector of Police held that a literal interpretation will create an unfair disadvantage for 
males married at 20 years, who despite being married below the legal age, would not be 
able to annul the marriage and thus interpreted the age limit for annulment of marriage 
at 23 years. The Allahabad High Court in Sanjay Chaudhary has countered this by 
reasoning that male parties entering the marriage after attaining 8 years cannot claim 
ignorance of law. It opined that having same age limit, i.e. within 20 years of age, to 
file a nullity petition is aligned with the principle of gender equality. But the Allahabad 
High Court felt bound by the Supreme Court observations in Independent Thought Vs. 
UOI (207) which mentioned that men could file annulment petition till the age of 23 
years. As a result, the Allahabad High Court annulled the marriage and the aggrieved 
wife has filed an appeal in the Supreme Court. 


In the Independent Thought case, the issue before the Supreme Court was not the 
age limit for filing nullity petition under PCMA. Its observations that a male child can 
get the marriage annulled before attaining the age of 23 years results in substantive 
unfair disadvantage giving males more time than females to exit child marriage, leaving 
wives unprotected and disproportionately affected which undermines the central 
objective of PCMA to protect and advance the status of women. 


This differential treatment in defining legal age of marriage is inconsistent with the 
constitutional mandate of equality and equal protection under Article 4. The age of 
eighteen years is recognized in Indian law as the age of majority under the Majority 
Act, 875, conferring full civil and legal capacity, including the right to vote 
(Representation of the People Act, 95), to enter into contracts (Indian Contract Act, 
872), to be tried as an adult (Juvenile Justice Act, 205), and to be recruited into the 
armed forces. There is no rational justification for maintaining a higher minimum 
marriage age for boys when the law otherwise recognizes them as full adults at 
eighteen. 


This amendment seeks to bring uniformity in the legal minimum age of marriage 
for all genders at eighteen years, consistent with evolving societal norms, international 
human rights obligations and constitutional principles of equality. The amendment also 
seeks to remove ambiguity and ensure uniform enforcement of child marriage laws 
across jurisdictions. 


Hence, this Bill. 


A.D. SINGH. 


268 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


XXXV 


Bill No. XX XIII of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
l. (4) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new article 
2B. 


Right to 
Privacy and 
Digital Rights 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


269 


2. 


After article 2A of the Constitution, the following new article shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“2B. (4) Every citizen shall have the right to privacy, which 
shall include the right to personal autonomy, bodily integrity, dignity, 
and protection of personal data. 


(2) Every citizen shall have the right to control the collection, storage, use, 
processing and dissemination of their personal data, both online and offline, 
subject to reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interest of: 


(a) national security, 

(b) public order, 

(c) prevention of crime, 

(d) protection of the rights and freedoms of others, and 
(e) sovereignty and integrity of India. 


(3) The State shall ensure that no citizen shall be subjected to surveillance, 
interception of communication, or profiling by automated systems, except 
in accordance with the procedure established by law. 


(4) Every citizen shall have the right to:— 
(a) secure communication; 


(b) be informed when automated systems are used to make 
decisions affecting their rights; and 


(c) seek explanation for such decisions. 


(5) Parliament may, by law, provide for the enforcement and protection of 
the rights guaranteed under this article and promote digital literacy and data 
ethics.” 


270 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


In the 2* century, the digital revolution has transformed how individuals 
communicate, access information, and conduct their personal and professional lives. 
With this transformation, the concept of privacy has expanded beyond physical 
spaces into the digital realm. 


Firstly, technology evolves at a rapid pace, often outstripping existing legal 
frameworks. Traditional rights to privacy, as understood in classical constitutional 
law, primarily protect physical privacy—such as protection against unlawful 
searches and seizures. However, digital privacy concerns include the collection, 
storage, and processing of massive amounts of personal data by both Governments 
and private entities. Without explicit constitutional safeguards, individuals remain 
vulnerable to invasive surveillance, unauthorized data sharing, and breaches of 
confidentiality in the digital space. 


Secondly, the digital environment poses new forms of threats that the 
Constitution framers did not foresee. Cybercrimes like identity theft, phishing, 
hacking, and unauthorized use of personal information can cause serious harm to 
individuals. Governments and corporations often collect and analyze personal data 
for various purposes—ranging from national security to targeted advertising— 
sometimes without adequate transparency or consent. A dedicated constitutional 
provision ensures clear limits on such practices and provides citizens with 
enforceable rights and remedies. 


Thirdly, privacy is a fundamental aspect of personal autonomy and dignity. 
In the digital age, control over personal data and online identity is crucial for 
protecting freedom of thought, expression, and association. Without protection, 
individuals may face censorship, discrimination, or repression based on their digital 
footprint. Recognizing digital rights constitutionally empowers citizens to safeguard 
their freedom in cyberspace, just as they do in physical spaces. 


Furthermore, a separate constitutional provision provides legal clarity and 
consistency. It helps establish clear obligations for Governments and private actors, 
mandates transparency, and defines redress mechanisms for violations. This clarity 
is vital for judicial interpretation, policymaking, and technological innovation that 
respects human rights. 


Lastly, with increasing global emphasis on data protection—through 
frameworks like the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in Europe and 
similar laws worldwide—incorporating digital rights constitutionally aligns a nation 
with international human rights standards. This fosters trust in digital ecosystems, 
promotes responsible governance, and protects citizens in a connected world. 


Though the Supreme Court of India in Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) vs. 
Union of India (207) recognized the right to privacy as a fundamental right under 
Article 2 of the Constitution, the absence of an explicit textual provision in the 
Constitution has led to interpretational inconsistencies and weak enforcement. With 
the rapid expansion of digital technologies, there is a compelling need to recognize 
Digital Rights, including informational privacy, protection from surveillance, 
algorithmic transparency, and control over personal data. 


In conclusion, a separate constitutional provision on the Right to Privacy and 
Digital Rights is necessary to comprehensively protect individuals in the digital era. 
It ensures that fundamental rights evolve alongside technology, addressing new 
challenges while safeguarding personal freedoms and dignity in an increasingly 
digital society. 

This amendment seeks to: 


(i) insert anew Article 2iB explicitly recognizing the Right to Privacy 
and Digital Rights; 


(ii) enable Parliament to legislate comprehensive frameworks to 
protect these rights. 


Hence, this Bill. 
A.D. SINGH 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27) 


XXXVI 


Bill No. XLIII of 2025 


A Bill to establish a legal framework for the recognition of content, attribution of 
authorship and protection of intellectual property right in Al-generated works, 
addressing the interests of creators, developers, users, and the public, with a focus 
on ensuring access, transparency, fairness, and the ethical use 
of AI technologies and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title and 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Machine Created Intellectual Asset Act, 
2025. commence- 
ment. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


272 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Interpretation. 2. (J) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 


(a) “AI Authority” means the National Artificial Intelligence 
Data Governance Authority established under section 20; 


(b) “Artificial Intelligence or AI” means a system or interrelated 
technology based on an algorithm or computer program integrated 
with hardware components built to perform tasks requiring human-like 
intelligence to make decisions or generate outputs without explicit 
human guidance; 


(c) “AI Model” means a component of an information system 
that employs artificial intelligence technology, utilizing computational, 
statistical, or machine-learning techniques to process inputs and 
generate outputs, forming an integral part of automated decision- 
making or content generation; 


(d)“AI generated works or content” or “machine created 
intellectual asset” means any output, material, or content, whether in 
the form of text, image, audio, video, code, design, data structure, or 
any other similar format, generated, whether wholly or substantially, 
by an Artificial Intelligence system, either autonomously or with 
limited human intervention, and which does not qualify as a work of 
human authorship under existing copyright or intellectual property 


law; 
Explanation. — For the purposes of this clause, “AlI-generated 
works or content” shall not apply to performances, inventions, or other 
subject matters regulated under the Copyright Act, !957 or the Patents 4 of 957. 
Act, 970, or any other special law relating to intellectual property 39 of 970. 


rights, except to the extent expressly provided herein. 


(e) “creator” means, in relation to any literary, dramatic, musical, 
artistic, or other work that is Al-generated, a joint person, including 
the natural person(s) and/or legal entity responsible for the 
conceptualization, input, guidance, or supervision of the AI system in 
the creation of such work; 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this clause, “joint person” 
means two or more persons, whether natural, legal, or electronic, who 
collectively contribute to the creation, development, or authorship of a 
work or project, and who share rights, responsibilities, and ownership 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 


(f) “electronic person” means an AI system, algorithm, or 
autonomous entity recognised under this Actor other laws for the time 
being in force in this behalf; as having specific legal rights, duties, or 
liabilities, with limited legal personality for intellectual property, 
contracts, or accountability, subject to regulatory and ethical oversight; 


(g) “person” means any natural person, company, association, or 
body of persons, whether incorporated or not, and includes an 
electronic person, being an artificial intelligence system or 
autonomous entity that has been granted legal recognition, rights, or 
obligations under this Act or any other applicable law. 


(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 


(i) “Tribunal” means the Special Tribunal established under 
section 26. 


(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in 
the Information Technology Act, 2000 and rules made thereunder, shall 2! of 2000. 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 273 


3. 


For the purposes of this Act, “origin tag” means a structured set of 
embedded or associated data used to verify the origin, authenticity, and 
transformation history of Al-generated content, including, — 


(i) source models, datasets, and algorithms; 
(ii) involved entities in generation and distribution; 
(iii) timestamps and geo-tags of creation and edits; 
(iv) referenced or cited external content; and 
(v) modification and custody logs ensuring end-to-end traceability. 


For the purposes of this Act, “public interest’’ means activities such as 
research, education, critical analysis, journalism, non-commercial 
innovation, digital accessibility, and archival or preservation efforts that 
serve the broader public good and also encompasses the use of open data, 
access to public domain materials, and other lawful uses that may qualify 
as fair dealing or permitted use under Section 48 of this Act. 


Provided that such use,— 


(a) does not result in substantial commercial exploitation of AI- 
generated or Al-assisted outputs; 


(b) includes appropriate attribution where applicable; 


(c) ensures that any AI system involved in such use operates in 
accordance with ethical and transparency standards; and 


(d) avoids generating or distributing harmful, deceptive, or 
manipulated content that may infringe upon rights or mislead the 
public. 


For the purposes of this Act, “whistleblower” means any person, including 
but not limited to an employee, officer, contractor, expert, consultant, or 
member of the public, who voluntarily, makes a bona fide disclosure in the 
public interest and without personal gain or mala fide intent, to the Special 
Tribunal, the Central Government, the National AI Data Governance 
Authority, or any other authority constituted under this Act, of any 
information, complaint or evidence regarding,— 


(a) the commission of an offence under this Act; 


(b) misuse, abuse or violation of any provisions of this Act or any 
rules or regulations made thereunder; 


(c) any attempt to suppress, conceal, or falsify material data 
related to artificial intelligence systems, intellectual property, or 
related governance mechanisms; 


(dq) any instance of bias, discrimination, manipulation or 
unethical conduct in the training, deployment or use of AI models; or 


(e) any instance of retaliatory action or victimisation in 
consequence of such disclosure. 


(J) For the purposes of this Act, “AI Sandbox” means a controlled, 
regulated, and monitored virtual or physical environment established for 
the experimental development, testing, validation, and limited deployment 
of Artificial Intelligence systems, where developers, researchers, or 
organizations are permitted to operate AI technologies under regulatory 
oversight and relaxed legal conditions, subject to defined safeguards, 
ethical standards, and data protection requirements. 


(2) An AI Sandbox shall function under the supervision of such competent 
authority designated under this Act, such as the National AI Data 
Governance Authority established under section 20, and shall enable, — 


(a) real-world or simulated testing of AI models prior to 
commercial deployment; 


Meaning of 
origin tag. 


Meaning of 
public interest. 


Meaning of 
whistleblower. 


Meaning of AI 
Sandbox. 


Meaning of free 
AI model. 


Meaning of paid 
or proprietary Al 
model. 


Legal 

recognition of 
Al-generated 
electronic 
records. 


Use of digital 
signature by AI 
technologies. 


274 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


8. 


0. 


(b) evaluation of intellectual property implications, potential 
risks, and compliance gaps; 


(c) collection of feedback from stakeholders, regulators, and 
affected parties; 


(d) temporary exemptions or calibrated application of regulatory 
obligations to promote innovation, provided such exemptions do not 
compromise public safety, rights, or lawful interests. 


Illustration 


A university research lab develops an AI tool that generates 
educational videos using copyrighted textbooks. Instead of releasing it 
publicly, the lab applies to test the tool within an AI Sandbox. The 
regulatory authority allows limited use under supervision, requiring 
watermarking of Al-generated videos, keeping detailed records, and 
ensuring that outputs are not used for commercial purposes during the trial 
phase. 


For the purposes of this Act, “free AI model” means any AI system, tool, or 
model that — 


(a) is made accessible to the public without any direct monetary 
payment or licensing fee; 


(b) is available as open-source, open-access, or under a Creative 
Commons or similar license; and 


(c) permits users to input prompts or data and generate content 
without entering into a paid arrangement with the provider. 


For the purposes of this Act, “paid or proprietary AI model” means any 
Artificial Intelligence system, tool, or model that— 


(a) is accessible through a monetary transaction, subscription 
fee, enterprise licensing agreement, or other form of commercial 
arrangement; 


(b) is offered as a proprietary or closed-source solution by its 
developer, provider, or vendor; and 


(c) provides access, support, or customization subject to 
contractual terms or service-level agreements. 


CHAPTER II 
ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE 


Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, where any electronic record is generated, processed, or 
communicated by an AI system in accordance with such technical and 
ethical standards, as may be prescribed, such record shall be deemed to be 
legally valid and enforceable. 


Provided that the conditions prescribed under this Act, including 
authentication of digital signature, attribution of authorship, of the AI 
system, have been duly complied with. 


(J) Every AI system or technology operating within the jurisdiction of this 
Act and defined parameters as may be prescribed, and performing 
electronic functions or generating electronic records, shall mandatorily be 
assigned a verified digital signature, in such manner as may be prescribed, 
to ensure secure, identifiable, and accountable activity. 


(2) The digital signature referred to in sub-section (/) shall, — 


(a) be issued by a licensed Certifying Authority under the 
Information Technology Act, 2000; 


2] of 2000. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 275 
(b) be uniquely associated with the authorising person or entity; 
(c) contains such metadata credentials traceable to the 
identification of the AI system or technology and its operational 
parameters; and 
(d) ensure the integrity, authenticity, and non-repudiation of any 
electronic record, communication, or action initiated by such AI 
system. 
(3) Any electronic record or action authenticated by an AI system bearing 
such digital signature shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
Information Technology Act, 2000, be deemed to be valid and attributable 
to the person or entity responsible for deploying or operating such AI 
system, provided that— 
(a) the AI system has acted within the scope of its authorisation; 
and 
(b) the digital signature remains valid and uncompromised at the 
time of execution. 
(4) It shall be the duty of the Certifying authority to — 
(a) ensure that the AI system operates within defined parameters 
and is regularly monitored for compliance; and 
(b) revoke or suspend the digital signature in the event of 
compromise, malfunction, or unauthorised use of the AI system. 
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect the liability of the Certifying 
authority for any act or omission of the AI system performed under such 
digital signature. 

il. Where any law requires that a document be signed or bears the signature of 
any person, such requirement shall be deemed to be satisfied in respect of 
electronic records generated by AI systems if — 

(i) the electronic record is authenticated by a digital signature assigned 
to the AI system as per the provisions of this Act; and 

(ii) the digital signature remains valid and unrevoked at the time of 
authentication. 

2. (४) The Central Government shall, promote the use and adoption of 


interoperable formats, open standards, and publicly accessible Application 
Programming Interfaces (APIs) in AI systems deployed by or on behalf of 
any public authority, particularly those used for governance and public 
purposes. 


(2)Where any proprietary or closed-source AI system is procured, 
deployed, used, or integrated by a public authority for governance and 
public purposes, the public authority must comply with regulatory audit 
mechanisms and enable third-party oversight, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


Explanation. — For the purpose of this section, — 


(a) “interoperable format” means a data format or standard 
that allows exchange and processing of information across 
different systems without proprietary restriction; 


(b) “open standard” means specifications or protocols that are 
publicly available, allowing for free use, modification, and 
distribution without licensing restrictions; and 


(c) “public authority” means anybody, organization or 
establishment, , owned, controlled or substantially financed by or 
under the jurisdiction of the Central Government that engages in 


Recognition of 
Al-signed 
communi- 
cations. 


Inter- 
operability and 
open 
standards. 


Data integrity 
and auditability. 


Attribution 
authorship 
Al-generated 
content. 


of 
of 


276 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


3. 


4. 


works done for governance and public purposes and includes any 
non-Government organization, directly or indirectly funded by the 
Central Government; 


(2) All electronic records generated or processed by AI systems deployed 
for governmental or public use or service delivery, shall be subject to audit 
for — 


(i) verifying data accuracy and provenance; 
(ii) ensuring lawful use of data; and 
(iii) detecting and mitigating systemic bias and discrimination. 


(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, designate or authorise one or more authorities to conduct 
technical, ethical and legal audits of such AI systems and its electronic 
records. 


(3) The manner, periodicity, scope, and consequences of such audits shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER II 
LEGAL STATUS AND AUTHORSHIP OF AI-GENERATED CONTENT 


(J) The authorship of Al-generated content shall, unless otherwise 
prescribed by contract or regulation, be determined as follows — 


(i) in the case of paid AI models, authorship shall be attributed to 
the natural or legal person who— 


(a) initiated, directed, or caused the generation of such 
content through the AI System; and 


(b) bears responsibility for the operation, including the input 
data, and output parameters of the AI System. 


(ti) in the case of publicly available, open-source, or free AI 
models, authorship shall be jointly attributed to — 


(a) the person or entity that developed, maintained, or made 
the AI model publicly accessible; and 


(b) the person who initiated, directed, or caused the 
generation of such content through the AI System. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this clause, where authorship is 
jointly attributed, such attribution shall be treated as joint authorship within 
the meaning of section 2(z) of the Copyright Act, 957, and all rights, 
liabilities, and conditions applicable to joint authors shall, mutatis 
mutandis, apply. 


(2) In the absence of a determinable human author under sub-section (/), 
the content shall be attributed to the person or entity that owns or has 
operational control over the AI System at the time of generation. 


(3) The person or persons to whom authorship is attributed under this 
section shall, for all legal and regulatory purposes, be deemed to possess 
the corresponding rights and obligations under — 


(a) this Act; 
(b) the Copyright Act, 957; and 
(c) any other applicable law for the time being in force, including 


laws relating to civil liability, criminal liability, and consumer 
protection. 


(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of any licensing 
agreement, usage terms, or terms of service governing the use of the AI 
System. 


4 of 957. 


4 of 957. 


4 of 957. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 277 


5. 


6. 


7. 


8. 


9. 


(J) Unless proven otherwise, the person or entity whose digital credentials, 
authentication code, or organisational control is verifiably associated with 
the AI System that generated the content, shall be presumed to be the 
author or rights-holder of such content within the meaning of section |4 of 
this Act. 


(2) This presumption under sub-section (/) may be rebutted by credible 
documentary, forensic, or other admissible technical evidence establishing 
different authorship or unlawful use of the AI System. 


(J) The natural or legal person to whom authorship of an Al-generated 
work is attributed under the provisions of this Act shall have exclusive 
rights to, — 


(a) use, reproduce, adapt, and distribute the content; 


(b) assign, transfer, or license any or all of the rights referred to 
in clause (a), rights under the applicable laws; and 


(c) initiate legal action against infringement or misuse of such 
content, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The rights conferred under sub-section (/) shall be exercisable for such 
period and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, and shall be 
without prejudice to any public interest exceptions and regulatory 
guidelines, as may be prescribed. 


(7) The natural or legal person to whom authorship of an AI generated 
work is attributed under this Act shall be entitled to moral rights in respect 
of such work, including right to integrity and right to attribution. 


(2) The rights conferred under sub-section (/) shall not be waived, except 
by express written contract in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(J) Where an AI system generates new content that is derived, in whole or 
in substantial part, from pre-existing human-authored works protected 
under the Copyright Act, 957, such output shall be deemed as derivative 
work, and any use thereof shall be subject to the rights and licencing terms 
of the original right holder. 


(2) The person or entity authorising the use of such AI system shall ensure 
compliance with applicable copyright and moral rights of the original 
creator. 


(7) Any person or entity seeking exclusive rights in respect of an AI- 
generated content may apply for registration of such content to the AI 
Authority established under section 20 of this Act, in such form and 
manner, accompanied by such fee and within such time, as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) Every such application shall be accompanied by a disclosure statement 
containing the following particulars, namely, — 


(a) the identity of the AI system used for generating the content; 


(b) the extent of human involvement, if any, in the generation of 
the content; 


(c) details of the person or entity having ownership or control of 
the AI system at the time of generation; and 


(६) such other information or supporting documentation as may 
be prescribed. 


(3) The AI Authority may, after making such inquiry as it deems fit and 
being satisfied about the eligibility of the applicant, grant or reject the 
certificate of registration and may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and 
after giving the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being heard, cancel or 
suspend such registration. 


Presumption 
of authorship 
in AI contexts. 


Rights 
conferred upon 
authorised 
persons. 


Moral rights in 
Al-generated 
works. 


Derivative AI- 
generated 
content. 


Registration 
and disclosure 
of Al-created 
works. 


Establishment of 
the National AI 
Data Governance 
Authority. 


Composition of 
the AI Authority. 


278 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


20. 


2i. 


(4) The AI Authority shall establish and maintain a public register of 
such registered AI-generated works, as per the provisions of section 23 
of this Act. 


CHAPTER IV 
NATIONAL AI DATA GOVERNANCE AUTHORITY 


(7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, establish an authority to be known as the National AI Data 
Governance Authority for the purposes of regulating, supervising, and 
facilitating the lawful collection, processing, and use of data for 
artificial intelligence systems. 


(2) The headquarters of the AI Authority shall be at New Delhi. 
(J) The AI Authority shall consist of the following members — 


(a) the Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of 
India, who shall be the ex-officio Chairman of the AI Authority; 


(b) a Vice-Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central 
Government, from amongst persons with proven expertise in 
artificial intelligence, data science, or digital governance, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 


(c) three Members of Parliament (two from the House of the 
People and one from the Council of States), to be nominated by the 
Presiding Officers of the respective Houses in such manner as may 
be prescribed — Members; 


(d) not more than twenty-one members to be appointed by 
the Central Government, in such manner as may be prescribed, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, from amongst individuals or 
representatives capable of representing the following domains — 


(i) AI research institutions and technical universities; 
(ii) data protection and digital rights organizations; 
(iii) start-ups and AI-driven enterprises; 

(iv) public policy think tanks or regulatory bodies; 


(9 legal experts with a focus on technology law, 
intellectual property, or cyber law; 


(vi) industry bodies in digital infrastructure, cloud 
computing, or semiconductor manufacturing; 


(vii) civil society organizations and consumer rights 
advocacy groups; 


(viii) representatives from key sectors adopting AI, 
including agriculture, healthcare, education, and finance; and 


(ix) any other area of interest or expertise which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, ought to be represented: 


Provided that at least three members shall be experts in 
law, possessing demonstrable expertise in legal and 
regulatory frameworks relating to artificial intelligence, data 
protection, and emerging technologies. 


(2) The number of persons to be appointed from each of the categories 
specified in clause (d) of sub-section (7), the salary and allowances 
payable to, the terms and conditions of their appointment, their term 
of office, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their 
functions, and the manner of filling vacancies among members of the 
AI Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made under 
this Act. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 279 


22. 


23. 


24, 


25. 


(3) No act or proceeding of the AI Authority shall be invalid merely by 
reason of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the AI 
Authority. 


(4) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the AI Authority shall 
not disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, a member of 
either House of Parliament or any other public office. 


(7) The Central Government may, in consultation with the AI 
Authority, appoint such number of officers and employees as it 
considers necessary, for the efficient discharge of the functions of the 
AI Authority under this Act. 


(2) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, and 
the other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and employees 
of the AI Authority appointed under sub section (7) shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 


The AI Authority shall, subject to any rules that may be made under this 
Act, have power to regulate its own procedure, including the fixing of 
places and times of its sittings. 


(3) The AI Authority shall establish and maintain a central Repository of 
Al-Generated Content, for the purposes of, — 


(a) promoting transparency, accountability, and traceability of AI- 
generated works; 


(b) enabling rights management, registration, and licensing of 
machine created intellectual assets; and 


(c) supporting research, monitoring, and policy formulation on the 
use and impact of AI systems in content creation. 


(2) The Repository shall be a secure, searchable, and interoperable digital 
platform accessible to the public, subject to reasonable restrictions, and 
shall include metadata, such as — 


(a) the identity of the attributed author or controlling entity; 
(b) the date and nature of creation; 

(c) the AI model or system used; 

(d) the type and scope of content generated; and 

(e) any applicable copyright, license, or public domain status. 


(7) It shall be the duty of the AI Authority to oversee, coordinate, and 
regulate the governance of data used in the development, training, testing, 
deployment, and auditing of artificial intelligence systems in India. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the AI Authority 
shall perform all or any of the following functions: — 


(a) formulate and issue binding standards on data quality, data 
classification, consent, anonymisation, pseudonymisation, and data 
minimisation for AI systems; 


(b) monitor and ensure compliance with data-related provisions 
of this Act and other applicable laws concerning Al-generated content 
and copyright; 


(c) develop frameworks for responsible data sharing and data 
trusts, particularly for datasets used to train generative AI models; 


(व) certify high-risk or sensitive datasets used in training AI 
systems that have implications for copyright, intellectual property, or 
public interest; 


Officers and 
employees of 
the Al 
Authority. 


Powers of the 
AI Authority. 


Repository of 
Al-generated 
content. 


Duties of the 
AI Authority. 


280 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(e) conduct or commission audits of datasets and training 
pipelines to ensure conformity with legal, ethical, and quality 
standards; 


(f) maintain a central registry of datasets used by AI models that 
generate or manipulate content protected under the Copyright Act, 
I4 of 957. 957 and/or rules made thereunder; 


(g) promote data transparency and explainability, including 
mandating disclosure of dataset provenance, generative trace metadata, 
and content lineage, where required; 


(h) advise the Central Government on policies related to AI data 
governance, especially as it intersects with creativity, innovation, and 
the protection of rights; 


(i) facilitate cooperation with other national and international 
data protection, copyright, and AI governance bodies; 


(j) provide technical and legal assistance to creators, developers, 
and copyright holders in identifying unauthorized use of their data in 
AI systems; 


(k) develop model contracts, licenses, and consent frameworks 
for the ethical acquisition and use of data in AI training; 


(l) undertake public awareness and capacity-building initiatives 
to foster responsible data practices and legal literacy among 
stakeholders; and 


(m) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it under 
this Act or any rules made thereunder. 
(3) The AI Authority may make regulations, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, as deemed necessary, for — 


(a) mandatory or voluntary submission of Al-generated content 
for registration; 


(b) confidentiality of sensitive or proprietary content; 
(c) consequences of misrepresentation or falsification of AI- 


generated content, or non-compliance with Repository requirements; 
and 


(d) any other matter, as may be deemed necessary. 
CHAPTER V 
SPECIAL TRIBUNALS 


Establishment of 26. (0) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official 

Bran Gazette, establish one or more Special Tribunals (for the expeditious 
adjudication of disputes and offences arising under this Act and for the 
awarding of penalties. 


(2) Any person or entity aggrieved by any direction or order or decision of 
the AI Authority may prefer an appeal to the Tribunal in whose jurisdiction 
the matter falls, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (2), the Tribunal may after 
giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such 
orders, including interim orders, as it thinks fit. 


(4) The decision of the Tribunal under the Act shall be binding and 
enforceable as a decree of a civil court. 


ee of the 27. (7) The Central Government may, by notification, specify the ordinary 
गण. place or places of sitting of the Tribunal and the territorial jurisdiction 
pertaining to each such place. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 26] 


(2) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Chairperson, 
frame rules to regulate the practice and procedure of the Special Tribunal, 
including, but not limited to — 


(a) the categories of persons entitled to appear before the 
Tribunal; 

(b) the procedure for hearing of original applications and appeals, 
including circuit sittings outside the ordinary place of sitting; 


(c) the minimum number of Members required to constitute a 
Bench for hearing applications or appeals, subject to the condition that 
the number of Expert Members shall be equal to the number of 
Judicial Members on any such Bench; and 


(d) the procedure for transfer of proceedings from one Bench to 
another, or from one place of sitting to another. 


28. (7) The Tribunal shall consist of— 


29. 


(a) a full-time Chairperson, who shall be a person qualified to 
be appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court or a Chief Justice 
of a High Court; 


(b) not less than ten, but not exceeding twenty, full-time 
Judicial Members, as may be notified by the Central Government 
from time to time, who shall be persons qualified to be appointed 
as Judges of a High Court and possess demonstrable knowledge or 
experience in the fields of technology law, intellectual property, or 
data governance; and 


(c) not less than ten, but not exceeding twenty, full-time 
Expert Members, as may be notified by the Central Government 
from time to time, who shall be persons of ability, integrity, and 
standing, having special knowledge and professional experience of 
not less than fifteen years in the fields of artificial intelligence, 
machine learning, computer science, data science, or intellectual 
property. 


(2) The Chairperson of the Tribunal may, if deemed necessary in any 
particular matter, invite one or more individuals possessing specialised 
knowledge or expertise relevant to the subject matter of the dispute to 
assist the Tribunal in an advisory capacity. 


(3) The salary and/or allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other Members of the 
Tribunal including experts invited under sub-section (2) shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 


(7) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson of 
the Tribunal unless they— 


(a) are, or have been, a Judge of the Supreme Court; or 
(b) are, or have been, the Chief Justice of a High Court. 


(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial Member 
unless they — 


(a) have held a judicial office in the territory of India for at least 
fifteen years; or 


(b) have been a member of the Indian Legal Service and have held 
a post of Additional Secretary or equivalent for at least three years; or 


(c) have been an advocate for not less than fifteen years with 
substantial experience in the field of intellectual property, technology 
law, or constitutional law. 


Composition 
of the 
Tribunal. 
Qualifications 
छा. appoint- 
ment as 
Chairperson, 
Judicial 
Member = and 
Expert 
Member. 


Selection 
Committee. 


Tenure, 
Resignation and 
Removal of the 
Chairperson and 
Members of the 
Tribunal. 


Powers of the 
Tribunal. 


282 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


30. 


3. 


32. 


(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as an Expert Member 
unless they — 


(a) possess a doctoral degree or Master’s degree in computer 
science, artificial intelligence, data science, intellectual property, or 
related fields from a recognised university or institution; and 


(b) have professional experience of not less than fifteen years in 
matters relating to artificial intelligence, emerging technologies, data 
governance, machine learning, or intellectual property rights. 


(3) The Chairperson and other Members of the Tribunal shall be appointed 
by the President, on the recommendation of a Selection Committee 
constituted by the Central Government. 


(2) The Selection Committee shall consist of, — 


(a) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court 
nominated by the Chief Justice of India — Chairperson ex-officio; 


(b) the Cabinet Secretary to the Government of India — Member 
ex-officio; 


(c) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Law and Justice — Member ex-officio; 


(d) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology — Member ex-officio; and 


(e) an eminent academic or technologist to be nominated by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed — Member. 


(3) The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office for a term of five 
years from the date of entering upon their office, and shall be eligible for 
reappointment for a further term of three years, subject to an upper age 
limit of seventy years in the case of the Chairperson and sixty-five years in 
the case of other Members. 


(2) The Chairperson or any Member may resign their office by giving 
notice in writing to the President of India and shall vacate office on the 
expiry of three months from the date of such notice or earlier, if permitted 
by the President. 


(3) The Central Government may remove from office the Chairperson or 
any Member on grounds of proven misbehaviour or incapacity, after an 
inquiry conducted in accordance with the principles of natural justice by a 
sitting Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India. 


(J) The Tribunal shall have the power to adjudicate upon all disputes and 
matters arising out of or in connection with the following, — 


(a) infringement, assignment, licensing, and use of copyright, 
patents, trademarks, and other forms of intellectual property in relation 
to artificial intelligence and digital technologies; 


(b) disputes regarding ownership, originality, fair use, or 
infringement arising from Al-generated works or datasets; 


(c) challenges to decisions of the AI and intellectual assets 
constituted under this Act; 


(d) appeals against orders or directions issued by the AI Authority 
or any other regulatory body under this Act; 


(e) interpretation and enforcement of data usage and consent- 
related provisions for AI training or development purposes; 


(f) claims of liability or damages arising out of unauthorised use 
of copyrighted content by or through AI Systems; 


5 of 908. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 283 


(g) disputes regarding authorship, attribution, or royalties 
pertaining to Al-generated or Al-assisted works; and 


(h) any other matter as may be assigned by the Central 
Government. 


(2) The Tribunal shall, for the purposes of exercising the powers conferred 
on it and discharging the functions assigned to it under this Act, have the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, 
namely — 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents; 


(e) reviewing its decisions; 
(f) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex-parte; 


(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for 
default or any order passed by it ex-parte; and 


(h) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
33. The Tribunal shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely — 


(a) to adjudicate cases brought before it under this Act or any 
other law in force, as may be notified by the Central Government; 


(b) to ensure effective enforcement of rights and duties under this 
Act through issuance of orders, directions, and penalties; 


(c) to promote settlement of disputes through mediation or 
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, where possible; 


(d) to provide guidance through reasoned decisions which may 
serve as precedents in the domain of AJ and intellectual property; and 


(e) to undertake, in appropriate cases, suo motu review of any 
decision if such decision appears to cause manifest injustice or is 
contrary to the provisions of this Act. 


34. (7) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and 
staff, as it may deem fit, to assist the Tribunal in the efficient discharge 
of its functions. 


(2)The method of recruitment/appointment, the salary and allowances 
payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the officers 
and staff shall be such as may be prescribed. 


35. Any person aggrieved by any judgment, decree, or final order of the 
Tribunal may, within ninety days from the date of such judgment, decree, 
or order, prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court, on the ground that it 
involves a substantial question of law relating to the interpretation or 
application of this Act. 


Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within 
the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period as may be 
prescribed. 


36. The Supreme Court may make rules consistent with the provisions of this 
Act, for governing the procedure to be followed in respect of appeals made 
to it under section 36. 


Functions of 
the Tribunal. 


Officers and 
staff of the 
Tribunal. 


Appeal to the 
Supreme 
Court. 


Procedure for 
Appeals. 


284 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Penalty for 37. 


unauthorized use 
of protected 
machine 
generated 
intellectual asset. 


Penalty for 38. 
violation of data 

governance 

standards. 

Penalty for non- 39. 
disclosure or 

mis- 

representation. 

Penalty for re- 40. 
identification of 

anonymised 

data. 

Penalty for 4l. 


unauthorised or 
fraudulent use 
of digital 
signature by AI 
systems. 


CHAPTER VI 
REMEDY AND PENALTY 


Whoever, knowingly, or having reason to believe, infringes or abets the 
infringement of any copyright or proprietary right in a machine generated 
intellectual asset protected under this Act shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which 
may extend to three years; or with fine of not less than fifty thousand 
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees; or with both. 


Provided that where the infringement is not committed for commercial 
gain or profit, the AI Authority or the Court, as the case may be, may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, impose a sentence lesser than the 
sentence prescribed under this section. 


Whoever fails to comply with any rule, guideline, standard, or directions 
issued by the AI Authority or processes, stores, or transfers data in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder, shall 
be liable to a penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees, in the case of a 
natural person; and five crore rupees, in the case of a company, or body 
corporate or electronic person. 


Whoever, while applying for registration of AI generated content or enjoys 
the rights conferred by or is covered in any manner under the provisions of 
this Act, is found to be knowingly suppressing material facts from the 
authorities or the Government or provides false, inaccurate, or misleading 
information, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or 
with both. 


Whoever, without lawful authority, intentionally re-identifies or attempts to 
re-identify anonymised data used in AI systems shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine not 
exceeding fifty lakh rupees, or with both. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, — 


(a) “anonymised data” means any data which has been 
processed to remove or obscure personally identifiable 
information of the data subject from the data set to maintain data 
privacy in compliance with the data protection laws for the time 
being in force; and 


(b) “re-identification” means any process, method, or 
technique of matching anonymous data with another dataset 
containing identifying information or auxiliary data to discover 
the identity of the data subject. 


(3) Whoever knowingly and without lawful authority — 


(a) assigns or issues a digital signature in respect of an AI 
system; or 


(b) misuses, tampers with, or facilitates the misuse of a digital 
signature issued to an AI system; or 


(c) causes an AI system to authenticate or transmit electronic 
records using a falsified or compromised digital signature; 


shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five 
years, or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both. 


(2) Where the offence under sub-section (/) is committed with the intent to 
cause wrongful loss or gain, or to commit fraud or impersonation or 
misrepresentation, the offender shall be punished with imprisonment for a 
term not less than three years, but which may extend to seven years, and 
with fine not less than ten lakh rupees. 


2 of 2000. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 285 


42. 


43. 


44, 


(3) Any person authorised under this Act who, having knowledge or 
reasonable belief of the compromise, misuse, or unauthorised assignment 
of a digital signature associated with an AI system, fails to revoke, suspend, 
or report such digital signature in the manner prescribed shall be liable to a 
penalty not exceeding ten lakh rupees, and may be subject to such 
disciplinary or regulatory action as may be prescribed. 


(4) Nothing in this section shall preclude the simultaneous initiation of 
proceedings or imposition of penalties under the Information Technology 
Act, 2000, or under any other applicable lawfor the time being in force, in 
respect of the same act or omission. 


(J) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of 
and responsible to the company for the conduct of its business shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the 
contravention or offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
contravention or offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where a 
contravention or an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the contravention or offence was committed 
with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the 
part of, any director, manager, secretary, or any other officer of the 
company, such person shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, — 


(a) "company" means anybody corporate and includes a co- 
operative society registered or deemed to be registered under any 
law for the time being in force, a firm or other association of 
individuals; and 


(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 


(4) No person who makes a complaint, discloses information, or assists the 
AI Authority in good faith with respect to a contravention of or an offence 
under this Act shall be subjected to any civil, criminal, or administrative 
liability or any form of reprisal, coercion, or discrimination by reason of 
such disclosure. 


(2) Whoever causes harm to a whistleblower in contravention of sub- 
section (J) shall be liable to punishment with imprisonment which may 
extend to one year or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees or 
with both. 


(3) The AI Authority may issue directions for ensuring the anonymity, 
safety, and non-retaliation of whistleblowers. 


(J) Without prejudice to any other action that may be taken under this Act, 
any person aggrieved by an act of violation of the provisions of this Act 
may initiate civil proceeding before a competent court for any one or more 
of the following reliefs, namely, — 


(a) compensation for loss or damage suffered; or 


(b) an injunction or restraining order against continued or 
imminent violation; 


Offences by 
companies. 


Protection to 
whistleblowers 


Civil 
remedies. 


Interim measures 
and relief. 


Crediting sums 
realised by way 
of penalties to 
Consolidated 
Fund of India. 


General 
immunity in case 
of action taken 
in good faith. 


286 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


45. 


46. 


47. 


(c) direction for the removal or rectification of unlawful AI 
systems or data processing activities that has caused or contributed to 
the violation; or 


(d) any other relief that the court may deem just and proper 
taking into account the circumstances of the case. 


(2) In any proceeding under sub-section (J), while awarding compensation, 
the court shall take into consideration the nature and extent of the violation, 
the degree of harm, and the whether the act or omission was wilful. 


(3) The provisions of this section shall apply without prejudice to the right 
of the aggrieved person to seek any other remedy under this Act or under 
any other applicable law for the time being in force. 


(J) The Tribunal or the AI Authority or any designated officer authorised 
by it, may, in the interests of justice or to prevent imminent harm, issue 
interim orders including but not limited to, — 


(a) suspension of any AI system or data activity; or 
(b) direction to cease and desist from specified actions; or 
(c) seizure or preservation of digital evidence. 


(2) Interim orders issued under sub-section (/) shall remain in force for a 
period not exceeding thirty days unless extended by a competent court or 
the AI Authority upon sufficient cause being shown. 


(3) The procedure for seeking interim relief, as well as the conditions 
governing the grant of such relief, shall be such as may be prescribed. 


All sums realised by way of penalties imposed under the provisions of this 
Act, shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. 


CHAPTER VII 
IMMUNITY AND EXEMPTION FROM LIABILITY 


(J) No civil or criminal liability shall be imposed on any person or entity, 
who, in good faith and in compliance with the applicable laws and 
prescribed standards, engages in the lawful development, deployment, 
analysis, or disclosure of AI systems solely for the purposes of ethical 
research, transparency, public interest, open innovation, or regulatory AI 
Sandbox testing. Provided that such activity is undertaken with due 
diligence, adheres to the principles of proportionality and minimal harm 
and does not contravene the provisions of this Act or any law for the time 
being in force. 


(2) The immunity under sub-section (/) shall not apply in cases where — 


(i) the activity is undertaken maliciously, for material gain, or to 
defame, deceive, or cause harm; or 


(ii) there is wilful violation of data protection laws or security 
protocols; or 


(iii) the developer knowingly fails to address major or critical 
flaw in open-source AI models, once alerted; or 


(iv) the AI Sandbox participants exceed the scope, terms, or time 
limitations of regulatory approval. 


Illustration 


A developer releases an open-source AI tool capable of generating 
synthetic speech. The tool includes a watermarking system, ethical use 
policy, and technical guardrails to prevent misuse. The developer is 
immune from liability if the tool is misused by a third party to imitate the 
voice of a celebrity or a public figure. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 287 


48. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the following acts shall 
not constitute an infringement of any machine created intellectual assets or 
proprietary right recognised under this Act in respect of any Al-generated 
work, model, dataset, or digital artefact, — 


(a) fair dealing with any Al-generated work, not being an 
algorithmic system itself, for the purposes of — 


(i) private or personal use, including academic research and 
innovation; or 


(ii) criticism or review, whether of that work or any other 
related work; or 


(iii) reporting of current events or developments in science 
and technology. 


(b) the use of Al-generated data or content for training, testing, or 
improving AI models, where such use is — 


(i) non-commercial, academic, or public interest-oriented; 


(ii) accompanied by appropriate acknowledgement of 
source and authorship, where applicable; and 


(iii) does not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests 
of the rights holder. 


Provided that prior permission from the data holder shall be 
required for the use of data in the training, testing, or improvement of 
AI models, subject to the approval of the AI Authority: 


Provided further that it shall be the duty of the AI Authority to 
assess and ensure that such use does not perpetuate or introduce bias 
within the system. 


(c) transient or incidental storage or caching of Al-generated 
works during the process of electronic transmission or communication 
to the public, where such storage — 


(i) is automatic and technical in nature; and 
(ii) is temporary in nature; and 


(iii) does not involve modification or unauthorized use of 
the protected work. 


(६) use of Al-generated datasets or metadata for the purposes of 
verifying accuracy, traceability, or compliance with law, by regulatory 
or judicial authorities. 


(e) reproduction or communication of any Al-generated work in 
any accessible format by — 


(i) a person with disability for private, educational, or 
research use; or 


(ii) a non-profit organisation serving the needs of persons 
with disabilities, provided such reproduction is done on a cost- 
recovery basis and does not enter ordinary commercial channels. 


(f) the observation, study, or reverse engineering of any AI 
system or output for the purpose of interoperability, transparency, or 
ensuring safety and accountability in AI deployment, provided that 
such activity does not result in substantial reproduction of proprietary 
code or datasets. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, “fair dealing” shall 
be interpreted in accordance with the evolving technological standards and 
public interest considerations. 


Certain uses 
not to 
constitute 
infringement 
of machine 
created 
intellectual 
assets. 


288 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Exemption from 49, 


liability of AI 
intermediary in 
certain cases. 


(J) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any law for the time 
being in force, but subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), and (4), 
an AI Intermediary shall not be held liable for any third-party information, 
Al-generated content, datasets, prompts, models, outputs, or 
communication links made available, transmitted, or hosted by it, subject to 
compliance with the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The exemption under sub-section (J) shall apply only where — 
(a) the role of the AI Intermediary is confined to, — 


(i) facilitating access to AI systems or computing 
infrastructure; 


(ii) hosting or enabling access to AI models or datasets 
developed by third parties; or 


(iii) transmitting or storing user-generated prompts, queries, 
or outputs on a passive or temporary basis; 


(b) the AI Intermediary does not, — 


(i) initiate the generation of the Al-generated content in 
question; 


(ii) exercise control over the selection of the receiver of the 
output; or 


(iii) modify the content, prompt, dataset, or model except 
for technical or performance optimization; 


(c) the AI Intermediary exercises due diligence in content 
moderation, traceability, safety measures, and observes such technical 
protocols or ethical standards as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government or the AI authority established under this Act. 


(3) The exemption conferred by sub-section (7) shall not apply where — 
(a) the AI Intermediary has — 
(i) knowingly abetted, or conspired in; or 


(ii) facilitated the commission of any unlawful act through 
the AI system; or 


(iii) gained monetary benefit directly from specific acts of 
infringement, defamation, or other actionable wrongs; 


(b) upon receiving actual knowledge or a written notice from the 
Central Government, the AI Authority, or a competent court or 
Tribunal regarding any unlawful activity, the AI Intermediary fails to 
expeditiously disable access to or remove such content, dataset, tool or 
output while ensuring preservation of digital evidence for legal and 
regulatory scrutiny. 


Obligations of 50. Every AI intermediary seeking exemption under section 49 shall — 


Al 
intermediaries. 


(i) establish and publicly disclose a comprehensive content 
governance policy, including permitted and prohibited uses of the 
platform, and redressal mechanisms for users and third parties, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed; 


(ii) implement technical safeguards for detection and red-flagging 
of outputs constituting hate speech, child sexual abuse material, non- 
consensual deepfakes, copyright infringement or any unlawful act; 


(iii) logging and preserving metadata consistent with “origin tag” 
standards as specified under this Act; 


45 of 2023. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 289 


5. 


52. 


53. 


54. 


55. 


(iv) maintain and submit periodic transparency reports, in such 
form and manner and at such duration, as may be prescribed, detailing 
therein, — 


(a) content removal actions; 
(b) Government and regulatory requests; and 
(c) reported abuse cases and response times; 


(v) cooperate in good faith with investigations initiated by law 
enforcement or regulatory authorities; and 


(vi) ensure interoperability with the AI authority registry systems 
and standardised AI auditing protocols. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, the expression “third 
party information” means information dealt with by an AI intermediary in 
his capacity as such. 


CHAPTER VII 
ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT 


The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the AI 
Authority, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(J) The AI Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may 
be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India. 


(2) The accounts of the AI Authority as audited and certified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India or any other person appointed by 
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be 
forwarded annually by the Authority to the Central Government, which 
shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before 
each House of Parliament. 


(2) The AI Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such 
time, for each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving 
a full account of its activities during the previous financial year, and 
forward a copy thereof to the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 


CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 


The Chairperson, Members and officers and staff of the AI Authority and 
Special Tribunals shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in 
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants 
within the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Government or any officer of the Government or any member or any 
officer or employees of the AI Authority or the Special Tribunals in respect 
of anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith in pursuance 
of this Act or the rules made thereunder. 


Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 


Accounts and 
Audit. 


Annual 
Report. 


Members, 
officers and 
staff of the AI 
Authority and 
Special 
Tribunals to be 
public 
servants. 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 


Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules and 
of the Al 
Authority to 
make 
regulations. 


Savings. 


290 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


56. 


57. 


(J) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely, — 


(a) the manner and procedure for registration, audit, and 
accountability of AI systems under sub-section (3) of section 2, 
section |3, section 9 and sub-section (3) of section 25; 


(b) the standards for testing, certification, and explainability of 
AI systems before deployment; 


(c) the process for applying for and granting digital signatures 
to AI systems under section 0; 


(d) the form and manner of attribution of authorship and 
ownership of Al-generated content under section 4; 


(e) the procedure for identifying, designating, and regulating 
high-risk AI systems; 


(f) the format and content of notices and disclosures required 
under this Act under sub-section (2) of section 9; 


(g) the requirements and process for registration of AI 
developers, providers, and deployers under section 9; 


(h) the safeguards for the protection of data used in AI training 
and deployment; and 


(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed under 
this Act. 


(3) The AI Authority, may from time to time, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, 
for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 


(4) Every rule or regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule or regulation. 


(3) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to — 


(a) affect the operation of any other law for the time being in 
force in India, including laws relating to intellectual property, 
information technology, data protection, consumer protection, or 
public safety, unless such law is inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act; 


(b) limit or interfere with any right or remedy available to any 
person under any other law or contract for the time being in force; 


(c) affect any act done, liability incurred, or right accrued under 
any other law prior to the commencement of this Act, provided such 
act, liability, or right is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29] 


58. 


59. 


(2) In the event of any inconsistency or conflict between the provisions of 
this Act and any other law for the time being in force, the provisions of this 
Act shall, unless otherwise expressly provided in such other law, prevail to 
the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. 


(3) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as invalidating any 
notification, circular, direction, guideline, or order issued by the Central 
Government or any competent authority under any existing law, which is 
consistent with the objectives and purposes of this Act. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force 


(/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
appropriate Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as 
may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removal of the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of the period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


292 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The exponential advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies 
has given rise to novel forms of intellectual and creative output that challenge the 
traditional foundations of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR). Existing legal 
frameworks, which are predominantly anthropocentric, were never designed to 
accommodate the non-human authorship, automated creation, or autonomous 
decision-making that characterises Al-generated works and inventions. 


This Bill seeks to address these unprecedented developments by creating a 
sui generis legal framework that diverges from conventional doctrines of 
authorship, originality, and inventorship. It acknowledges that assets created by AI 
systems, be it in the form of text, images, inventions, data models, or any form of 
creative or functional expression—constitute a new class of intellectual property, 
which cannot be adequately governed under the existing Copyright Act, 957, the 
Patents Act, 970, or other analogous laws. 


Recognising the transformative economic, cultural, and technological 
significance of Al-generated content, this legislation aims to provide legal status, 
ownership rights, and regulatory mechanisms for Al-generated intellectual output. 
It proposes a distinct classification of rights that balances innovation, 
accountability, and public interest while fostering trust in AI technologies and 
protecting stakeholders' rights, including developers, users, and society at large. 


This Bill seeks to pioneer a sui generis model of intellectual property 
governance that reimagines the contours of ownership, authorship, liability, and 
enforcement in the age of machine-generated creation, thereby, ensuring that 
Indian law remains responsive, adaptive, and forward-looking in the face of 
technological evolution. 


Hence this Bill. 
SUJEET KUMAR. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 293 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 20 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Artificial 
Intelligence Data Governance Authority whereas Clause 2] provides for the 
composition of the Authority and for the salaries and allowances payable to as 
well as other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members 
thereof. Clause 22 provides that the Central Government shall appoint such 
number of officers and employees to the Authority as may be required for its 
efficient functioning and for the salaries and allowances payable to and other 
terms and conditions of their service. Clause 26 provides for the establishment of 
a Special Tribunal and Clause 28 provides for its composition and the salaries and 
allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and Members thereof. Clause 34 provides that the Central 
Government shall provide the Tribunal with such number of officers and staff as 
required to assist it in the performance of its duties and for the salary and 
allowances payable to them as well as the terms and conditions of their service. 
Clause 5l provides that the Central Government shall make available adequate 
funds to the National Artificial Intelligence Data Governance Authority, as may 
be deemed necessary for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India and the 
Consolidated Fund of the respective States. However, it is difficult to estimate the 
exact quantum of expenditure likely to be involved at this stage. 


294 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 56 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules and 
the AI Authority, with the previous approval of the Central Government to make 
regulations, for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 59 of the Bill 
empowers the appropriate Government to make such provisions through an order, 
as may be considered necessary or expedient, to remove any difficulty that may 
arise in giving effect to any of the provisions of the Bill. 


As the rules or regulations or orders will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 295 


XXXVII 


Bill No. XLV of 2025 


A Bill to establish a comprehensive legal framework for the 
classification, protection and management of sensitive information 
relating to national security; to regulate the authorised access, handling 
and disclosure of such information; to penalise 
unauthorised access and disclosure, including 
acts of espionage; to safeguard constitutional 
rights and ensure transparency; and to repeal 
the Official Secrets Act, 923, along with 
matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


WHEREAS it is expedient to provide a comprehensive and contemporary 
legislative framework for the classification and protection of sensitive 
information pertaining to the sovereignty, integrity, defence and strategic 
interests of India; 


AND WHEREAS it is necessary to criminalise espionage and unlawful disclosures 
while safeguarding the right to information, whistleblower protection and 
democratic oversight. 


Short title, 
application and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Classification 
Protocol. 


296 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 


India as follows:— 


l. 


2. 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


(0) This Act may be called the Classified Information and Espionage 
Control Act, 2025. 


(2) The provisions of this Act shall apply to,— 


(a) every citizen of India, whether within or outside the territory 
of India; 


(b) any person on board a ship or aircrafts registered in India, 
wherever they may be; and 


(c) any person, irrespective of citizenship, whether within or 
beyond the territorial boundaries of India, who unlawfully obtains 
or discloses classified information concerning the national interest 
of India and thereby commits an offence under this Act. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may 
be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 


(a) “Board” for the purpose of this Act is Independent Review 
Board on National Security and Disclosures, established under 
section ]; 


(b) “classified information” means any information, document, 
material or communication declared by the Central or State 
Government to be sensitive to national security, defence or strategic 
interests, and marked confidential, secret or top secret, the 
unauthorised disclosure of which is likely to prejudice national 
security or international relations; 


Explanation.— For the purpose of this clause, “unauthorized 
disclosure” means dissemination of classified information by a 
person who is not authorised or who acts in violation of this Act. 


(c) “espionage” means any act of accessing, obtaining, 
recording, copying, disclosing, transmitting or retaining classified 
information with the intent to harm the sovereignty, integrity or 
security of India; 


(d) “information” means any oral, written, electronic or any 
other form of communication or data, whether tangible or intangible, 
and whether stored, transmitted or received by any means; 


(e) “public interest disclosure” means disclosure made in good 
faith to an authorised constitutional authority for exposing corruption, 
illegality or abuse of power; and 


(f) “prescribed” means prescribed under the rules made under 
this Act. 


CHAPTER II 
CLASSIFICATION AND HANDLING OF INFORMATION 


(0) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, 
establish a system for classification of information based on sensitivity, 
and such system shall include levels of category such as “Confidential”, 
“Secret” and “Top Secret” or such other levels as may be notified from 
time to time. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 297 


(2) The classification referred to in sub-section (), shall be based on the 
sensitivity, potential harm to national security, and duration for which 
secrecy is warranted in the interest of the state. 


(3) No classification shall be made or maintained with the intent to 
conceal corruption, abuse of authority, or violations of human rights. 


(70) All information classified under section 3, shall be subject to periodic 
review by the Board, constituted under section 2, at an interval not 
exceeding five years from the date of such classification or of the last 
review, as the case may be. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (व), the Board 
referred to in sub-section (0), on its own motion or on the 
recommendation of any such authority or person as may be prescribed, 
may declassify any information at any time prior to the expiry of the 
period specified therein, if it is satisfied that disclosure of such 
information no longer prejudices national security. 


(0) No person shall be granted access to any information classified under 
the provisions of this Act, except where such person is holding a valid 
security clearance, issued by such authority and after following due 
clearances as may be prescribed. 


(2) Information shall be shared strictly on a need-to-know basis, and any 
unauthorised access or attempt to obtain such information without lawful 
authority shall be a punishable offence under this Act. 


CHAPTER III 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 


(0) Aperson shall be deemed to have committed the offence of espionage, 
if such person with wilful intent or purpose prejudicial to the sovereignty, 
integrity, security, or strategic interests of the State,— 


(a) approaches, inspects, photographs, records, surveys, 
geolocates, flies drones over, or enters any prohibited place, sensitive 
digital network, secured defence installation, or protected perimeter, 
without lawful authority; or 


(b) makes, copies, transmits, digitises, hacks, decrypts, models, or 
otherwise generates any sketch, plan, schematic, model, map, 
topographic data, digital representation, or other record, in any form, 
physical or digital, which is calculated to be, or is likely to be, or is 
intended to be, directly or indirectly useful to a foreign power, non- 
state actor, or enemy entity; or 


(c) obtains, collects, mines, leaks, records, sells, trades, or 
communicates, whether directly or indirectly, through artificial 
intelligence systems, spyware, hacking, data scrapers, bots, or digital 
surveillance tools; any secret official password, classified document, 
data set, protocol, communication, intelligence, model, program, 
code, algorithm, or information, which,— 


(i) is likely to be, or is intended to be, directly or indirectly 
useful to an enemy or a foreign power; or 


(ii) relates to a matter the disclosure of which is likely to 
affect the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the 
State, defence preparedness, critical infrastructure, or friendly 
relations with foreign States. 


(2) Any person found guilty of the offence of espionage under sub-section 
(0) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not less than ten years, 
which may extend to life imprisonment, or with fine upto one crore rupees 
or with both. 


Declassification 
and Review. 


Security 
clearance and 
need-to-know 
access. 


Espionage. 


298 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Presumption of 7. Ina prosecution under section 6, it shall not be necessary to prove that 
ea the accused committed a specific act with prejudicial intent, and the Court 
, may presume such intent if:— 


(a) the accused was found in possession of any classified 
material without lawful authority; 


(b) the act occurred in or involved a prohibited area or critical 
information infrastructure; 


(c) the nature of the information and the circumstances suggest 
use or potential use by foreign powers, hostile entities, or unlawful 
groups; or 


(d) the accused’s past conduct, known affiliations, or use of 
clandestine or anonymised digital tools indicate malicious intent. 


Explanation .— For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) "enemy" includes any country, organisation, individual, or 
non-state actor engaged in hostile actions or intelligence operations 
against India; and 


(b) "prohibited place" includes any area, building, data centre, 
server room, airspace, territorial zone, military base, or digital 
network declared restricted or classified as such by the Central 
Government. 


Explanation 2.— Mere unauthorised possession, access, or 
communication of classified content—whether physical, digital, or 
algorithmic—without lawful justification or authority shall constitute 
a violation under this section. 


Possession of 8. () Whoever, without lawful authority, is found in possession of any 
Classified classified information, document, model, article, data, record or material, 
material A > शि 5. है 
without whether in physical, electronic, or any other form, which is marked or 
authority. deemed to be classified under the provisions of this Act or the rules made 

thereunder, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 

extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or 


with both. 


(2) It shall not be a defence under this section that the accused was not 
aware of the classified nature of the information, unless it is proved that 
such possession was accidental, without intent, and without any failure to 
exercise due diligence. 


(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any person who makes a bona 
fide disclosure in public interest to a designated authority in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act. 


Attempts, 9. Any person who attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or abets any 
507 0073 “ahd offence under this Act shall be deemed to have committed the offence and 
abetment. हु है हि हर . 

punished with the same penalties for the said offence under this Act. 


Offences by 0. 06) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 

पक every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge 
of and responsible to the company for the conduct of its business shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the 
contravention or offence was committed without his knowledge or that 
he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
contravention or offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (0), where a 
contravention or an offence under this Act has been committed by a 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 299 


il. 


2. 


company and it is proved that thecontravention or offence was 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any 
neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary, or any other 
officer of the company, such person shall also be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) "company" means anybody corporate and includes a co- 
operative society registered or deemed to be registered under any law 
for the time being in force, a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 


(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
CHAPTER IV 
PUBLIC INTEREST AND OVERSIGHT 


(0) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person shall be 
liable to prosecution or any form of penal action under this Act for making 
a disclosure, in good faith and in the larger public interest, of any 
classified information to a designated authority. 


(2) A disclosure under sub-section (4) shall be entitled to protection under 
this section only if,— 


(a) it is supported by reasonable grounds and _ verifiable 
evidence; 


(b) it is made in writing or through such secure and verifiable 
means as may be prescribed; 


(c) it is made only to a designated authority, as notified by the 
Central Government in the official Gazette, including but not limited 
to the Supreme Court, High Courts, Lokpal, or the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India; and 


(d) it is not disclosed to any unauthorised person, media outlet, 
foreign entity, or digital platform prior to the completion of formal 
review by the designated authority or the Board. 


(3) The Board constituted under section 2 shall, upon receipt of a 
reference from a designated authority, examine whether such disclosure 
qualifies for protection under this section and shall communicate its 
decision within a period of ninety days from the date of such reference. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “good faith” shall 
mean an honest belief held with due care and reasonable diligence; and 
“public interest” shall include the exposure of corruption, abuse of power, 
gross mismanagement, or serious threats to public health, safety, or 
democratic accountability. 


(0) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, establish a body to be known as the Independent Review 
Board on National Security and Disclosures for the purposes of this 
Act. 


(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, to be appointed 
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed, 
namely— 


(a) a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief 
Justice of a High Court, who shall be the Chairperson; 


(b) one senior officer, who retired from not below the rank 
of Secretary to the Government of India, with experience in 
defence, intelligence, or national security — Member; 


Public interest 
disclosure and 
whistleblower 
protection. 


Establishment 
of the 
Independent 
Review Board 
on National 
Security and 
Disclosures. 


Laying of 
reports. 


Grants by the 
Central 
Government. 


300 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


3२ 


4. 


(c) one expert in cybersecurity, information warfare, or 
digital data protection — Member; and 


(d) one person of eminence in the field of constitutional law, 
civil liberties, or public accountability — Member. 


(3) The term of office, salaries and/or allowances payable to, and 
other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and 
Members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Board shall have the following powers and functions, namely— 


(a) to receive and review references from designated authorities 
regarding disclosures made under section of this Act; 


(b) to determine whether such disclosures qualify for protection 
as public interest disclosures under section ; 


(c) to recommend classification or declassification of 
information in accordance with national security and democratic 
transparency; 


(d) to issue guidance to public authorities on classification, 
retention, and dissemination of sensitive material; 


(e) to investigate into complaints regarding violation of the 
provisions of this Act and hear appeals from individuals aggrieved by 
decisions of competent authorities under this Act; 


(f) to prepare and submit annual reports on its activities and 
findings to the Central Government; and 


(g) any other function related to the subject, as may be assigned 
to it by the Central Government. 


(5) The Board shall regulate its own procedure and while investigating 
any matter under clause (e) of sub-section (3) have all the powers of a 
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 908, while trying a suit in 
respect of the following matters, namely— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; and 


(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents. 


(6) The decisions of the Board shall be binding on all public authorities 
and shall not be called in question in any court except by way of a petition 
under article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court having 
jurisdiction. 


(7) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers 
and staff to the Board, as it deems necessary, to assist it in the efficient 
discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(8) The method of appointment, salaries and allowances payable to, 
and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson, 
Members, officers and other employees, so appointed for the purpose 
of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 


The Central Government shall cause the reports of the Board under clause 
(f) of sub-section (4) of section 42 to be laid before each House of 
Parliament, as soon as may be after they are received. 


The Central Government, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Board by way of grants 


5 of 908. 


46 of 2023. 


9 of 923. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 30I 


5. 


6. 


7. 


8. 


9. 


20. 


such sums of money as it may consider necessary for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. 


(0) The Board shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner and at 
such time of each financial year or at such intervals, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or by any person appointed by him in this behalf at such 
intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in 
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board to the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General. 


(3) The accounts of the Board, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, 
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually by the 
Board to the Central Government, which shall cause it to be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 


CHAPTER V 
PROCEDURE, JURISDICTION, AND MISCELLANEOUS 
(0) Offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable. 


(2) No investigation of any offence under this Act shall be initiated 
without the prior approval of a Joint Secretary-level officer in the 
Government of India. 


(0) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, all offences punishable under this Act shall be 
triable only by a Sessions Court, specially designated by the Central 
Government for the said purpose, by notification in the Official Gazette. 


(2) Proceedings or any part thereof may be held by the Court in camera, 
if it is satisfied that it is expedient so to do in the interest of national 
security. 


This Act shall apply to any person outside India who commits an offence 
under this Act affecting the security of India, and such person shall be 
dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 


(0) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act, including classification, 
review procedure, whistleblower protocols, and reporting. 


(2) The Board may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide 
for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the 
purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 


(3) Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation 
made by the Board under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation 
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the 
rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 


(0) The Official Secrets Act, 923 is hereby repealed. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


Cognizance and 
investigation. 


Jurisdiction and 
trial. 


Extraterritorial 
jurisdiction. 


Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules and 
of the Board to 
make 
regulations. 


Repeal and 
Savings. 


302 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken, 
including any investigation, inquiry, prosecution or legal proceeding 
commenced under the said Act, shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act as if this Act were in force 
at the time such act or action was done or taken. 


Act to override 2l. The provisions of this Act shall prevail over any other law for the time 

20202 322 being in force, in the case of any inconsistency therewith, save as to such 
laws which relate to the enforcement of rights guaranteed under Part III 
of the Constitution. 


Power to 22. (4) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
ana the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
difficulties. ae : : . set है 
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 303 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Second Administrative Reforms Commission, in its 2006 report, 
recommended that secrecy provisions be integrated into a broader national 
security framework that is consistent with democratic accountability, 
constitutional safeguards, and transparency obligations. The rise of cyber- 
espionage, Al-enabled surveillance, data leaks, and emerging threats to critical 
infrastructure underscores the urgency of a robust legal mechanism to protect 
India’s strategic interests. 


The Official Secrets Act, 923, a colonial-era law, has been long criticised 
for its vague provisions and alleged incompatibility with democratic norms. Its 
proposed repeal is a necessary reform to clearly address the issue of unauthorised 
access, communication or retention of classified information related to national 
security, defence, and intelligence. In the absence of a modern legal framework, 
the State remains exposed to espionage, cyber-infiltration, and digital breaches 
in an era of transnational data flows and growing threats from foreign powers 
and non-state actors. 


This Bill seeks to establish a comprehensive and rights-compatible legal 
framework for the classification and protection of sensitive information. It 
clearly defines key terms such as espionage, unauthorised disclosure, and public 
interest disclosure, and criminalises the use of modern technological means, such 
as hacking, spyware, and surveillance tools for espionage. It safeguards 
whistleblowers acting in good faith by exempting disclosures made to designated 
authorities. The Bill also establishes an Independent Review Board on National 
Security and Disclosures to oversee the classification decisions and protect 
whistleblower rights. Harmonised with the existing laws including the Right to 
Information Act, 2005, the Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 204, and the Digital 
Personal Data Protection Act, 2023, this Bill proposes to repeal the Official 
Secrets Act, 923 and replace it with a modern and constitutionally sound regime 
that balances national security with democratic accountability. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SUJEET KUMAR. 


304 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment of an Independent 
Review Board on National Security and Disclosures, its composition, the 
appointment of officers and staff by the Central Government to assist the Board 
as well as for the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson, Members, officers and staff thereof. 
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make grants to the 
Board, after due appropriation made by Parliament in this behalf, for the 
purposes of carrying out the provisions of the Act. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about 
rupees one crore would be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 305 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules and 
the Board to make regulations for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 
22 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make such provisions through 
an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the 
provisions of the Bill. 


As the rules or regulations or orders will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 


306 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


XXXVITI 


Bill No. XLVII of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the recognition, prevention, and punishment of ecocide, 
ensure restoration of environmental harm, and promote environmental justice in 
accordance with constitutional and international environmental 
principles and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
l. (J) This Act may be called the Ecocide (Prevention and Accountability) Act, Short title and 
commencement. 


2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 307 


Interpretation. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) “Board” means the National Ecocide Remediation Board 
constituted under section 26; 


(c) “Bond” means the Ecocide Restoration Bond under section 25; 


(d) “Commission” means the District Ecocide Prevention 
Commissions established in every district under section |3; 


(e) “ecocide” means any unlawful or wanton act or omission, 
committed with knowledge of substantial likelihood of severe, 
widespread or long-term damage to the environment, including harm to 
ecosystems, biodiversity, and natural resources; 


(f) “environment” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it 
under clause (a) of section 2 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 986; 


(g) “Fund” means the National Ecocide Remediation Fund 
established under section 26; 


(h) “Local Fund” means the Local Ecocide Remediation Funds 
established under section 28; 


(i) “long-term” means irreversible or non-recoverable damage for 
a period not less than ten years; 


(j) “Magistrate” means a Magistrate, as per the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; 


(k) “person” includes any company or association or body of 
persons, whether incorporated or not; 


(9 “prescribed” means prescribed under the rules made under this 
Act; 


(m) “restoration” means the process of ecological remediation of 
environmental damage as ordered by a competent authority; 


(n) “Tribunal” means the National Green Tribunal; 


(o) “widespread” means extending beyond a limited geographical 
area, crossing ecological boundaries and impacting multiple regions or 
ecosystems or ecological units; and 


(p) “Wing” means Special Environmental Investigation Wing 
established by the Central Government under section 8. 


Meaning of 3. For the purposes of this Act, an act or omission shall be deemed to be 

Anon: “wanton” where it is performed with reckless disregard for substantial and 
foreseeable environmental harm, wherein the actor is aware of the high 
likelihood of causing serious ecological damage, but proceeds without 
justifiable reason or adequate safeguards to prevent or mitigate such harm. 


Explanation.— The term shall include, but not limited to, — 


(i) a conduct that demonstrates callous indifference to 
environmental consequences of the act or omission; 


(ii) a failure to conduct due diligence or necessary environmental 
impact assessment, as per the criteria given in the Second Schedule to 
the Act; or 


(iii) implementing risk mitigation measures in the face of credible 
ecological warnings or objections. 


29 of 986. 


46 of 2023. 


308 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


4. For the purposes of this Act, an act or omission shall be deemed to be 
“unlawful” where it,— 


(a) violates any provision of this Act, or the rules or regulations or 
notifications made thereunder; 


(b) contravenes any law for the time being in force intended to 
protect the environment, biodiversity, forests, wildlife, water bodies, 
climate, or human health; or 


(c) is conducted without obtaining necessary consent, clearance, 
license, or authorization mandated under applicable environmental laws 
or judicial orders in India. 


Explanation.— The term shall also include, but not be limited to 
activities that,— 


(i) continue after suspension, revocation, or expiry of lawful 
permission; or 


(ii) are carried out in defiance of stop-work, remediation, or 
cease-and-desist orders. 


5. Whoever commits any unlawful or wanton act or omission with knowledge 
that such act or omission is likely to cause severe and either widespread or 
long-term damage to the environment, which includes, but is not limited to- 


(i) large-scale destruction of protected ecosystems, as given in the 
First Schedule to the Act or other ecosystems, habitats, or biodiversity in 
the country, as may be notified by the Central Government, in 
consultation with the State Governments; 


(ii) release, dumping, emission, or discharge of toxic or hazardous 
substances or pollutants that causes irreparable harm to air, soil, water, 
marine or terrestrial life; 


(iii) alteration, degradation, or contamination of protected areas, 
critical wildlife corridors, wetlands, coastal zones, glaciers, or protected 
ecological sites; 


(iv) wilful denial of ecological access or environmental rights to 
communities resulting in mass displacement, disease, or livelihood loss; 
whether caused by industrial activity, developmental operations, 
extractive projects, military activity, or any other anthropogenic 
intervention, and irrespective of the presence or absence of a declared 
environmental emergency; 


shall be guilty of the offence of ecocide. 

Explanation .— The offence of ecocide shall be deemed to 
constitute a grave environmental offence crime amounting to a serious 
threat to ecological integrity, public health, intergenerational equity and 
the constitutional values. 

CHAPTER II 
INVESTIGATION AND COGNIZANCE 
6. (Jl) Every offence of ecocide shall be deemed to be — 


(i) cognizable, within the meaning of sub-clause (g) of clause (7) 
30 000: of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; 


(ii) non-bailable: 


Provided that no person accused of ecocide shall be entitled to bail 
as a matter of right; 


Meaning of 
unlawful. 


Environmental 
destruction 
amounting to 
ecocide. 


Nature of 
Ecocide. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 309 


Cognizance by 7. 
Magistrates. 


Establishment 8. 
of the Special 

Environmental 

Investigation 

Wing. 


Composition of 9, 
the Wing. 


Powers and 0. 
functions of the 
Wing. 


(iii) non-compoundable and not subject to compromise, settlement, 
or withdrawal, except with the express leave of Tribunal, Sessions Court 
or the High Court, as the case may be, upon satisfaction that such leave 
will not in any way compromise environmental interest. 


(2) Every offence of ecocide shall be tried by a court not below Sessions 
Court. 


(3) The investigation into an offence of ecocide shall be completed within a 
period of ninety days from the date of filing of the First Information Report: 


Provided that the Sessions Court may, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, extend the period for completion of such investigation by such 
further period, as it may deem necessary. 


(J) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 20 of the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, any Magistrate may take cognizance of an 
offence under this Act upon— 


(i) a police report thereof; 


(ii) receipt of a complaint made by any aggrieved person, local 
authority, or registered environmental group, in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed; or 


(iii) suo motu 


(2) No prior sanction of the Central or State Government shall be required for 
taking cognizance of any offence under this Act. 


The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a specialized body to be called the Special Environmental 
Investigation Wing, for the purposes of enforcement, oversight, 
intelligence gathering, and prosecution of offences under this Act. 


(7) The Wing shall consist of the following officers, to be appointed by 
the Central Government in consultation with the Union Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, in such manner as may be 
prescribed — 


(i) a Director-General, who shall be an officer of the rank not 
below Additional Secretary to the Government of India or 
equivalent, having special knowledge of environmental science, 
ecology, or environmental law; 


(ii) such number of Additional Directors, Deputy Directors, 
Investigating Officers, Environmental Analysts, Legal Officers, and 
other staff, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The qualifications and experience, term of office, salary and/or 
allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the officers of the 
Wing shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(J) The Wing shall exercise the following powers and perform all or any of 
the following functions, namely— 


(i) to investigate into any violations of the provisions of this Act 
including acts amounting to ecocide, extending across the territories of 
two or more States within the territorial boundaries of the country; 


(ii) to supervise and coordinate with the District Ecocide 
Prevention Commissions constituted under section 3; 


(iii) to maintain a National Register of Ecocide and Environmental 
Offenders, in such form and manner as may be prescribed; 


(iv) to advise the Central Government on matters relating to 
prevention, control, and prosecution of offences of ecocide; 


46 of 2023. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(v) to coordinate with other statutory and environmental 
enforcement agencies including the Tribunal, the State Pollution Control 
Boards, and forest and wildlife authorities; 


(vi) to receive and examine quarterly and special reports submitted 
by the District Commissions and issue appropriate advisories or 
directives based thereon; 


(vii) to issue directions for forensic environmental audits, satellite 
surveillance, and scientific damage assessments; 


(viii) to institute or assist in the institution of prosecutions before 
the competent court or Tribunal under this Act; and 


(ix) to maintain a secure central repository of evidence, 
investigations, and judgments under this Act. 


(2) The Wing shall, while investigating any matter referred to it under clauses 
(i) and (viii) of sub-section (/), have all the powers of a Civil Court while 
trying a suit and, in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely,— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from 
any part of India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court 
or office; 


(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses and 
documents; and 


(f) any other matter as may be prescribed. 


ll. The Wing may, by notice in writing, require any person, authority, company, 
or agency to furnish such information or produce such records or documents 
as may be necessary for the performance of its functions under this Act. 


2. The Investigating Officers of the Wing shall have power equivalent to officers 
29 of 986. under the Environment Protection Act, 986, for arrest, search and seizure, 
inspection of premises, and collection of evidence. 


CHAPTER III 
DISTRICT ECOCIDE PREVENTION COMMISSION 


3. The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, constitute, in every district within the States and Union 
territories, a body to be known as the District Ecocide Prevention 
Commission, for the purposes of— 


(a) monitoring, preventing, investigating and reporting acts of 
ecocide within the territorial jurisdiction of the district; and 


(b) facilitating community-based ecological restoration and 
coordination with environmental authorities. 


4. (J) The Commission shall consist of the following members, to be 
appointed or nominated in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government, namely — 


(i) the Executive Magistrate of the district, not below the rank 
of Sub-Divisional Magistrate, who shall be the ex-officio 
Chairperson of the Commission; 


(ii) one representative of the State Pollution Control Board — 
Member ex-officio; 


Power to call 
for 
information 
and records. 


Power of 
arrest, seizure 
and inspection. 


District 
Ecocide 
Prevention 
Commission. 


Composition 
of the 
Commission. 


Powers and 
functions of the 
Commission. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3]] 


5. 


(iii) one officer of the Forest Department, not below the rank of 
Range Forest Officer - Member ex-officio; 


(iv) at least one scientist or ecologist of repute from any 
recognised academic or research institution - Member; 


(9 one member representing the local self-government 
institution, either from the Zila Parishad or the Municipal Council, 
as the case may be; 


(vi) one representative of a registered civil society organisation 
involved in environmental protection having demonstrable activity 
within the district for such period preceding the date of nomination, 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government; and 


(vii) at least one legal practitioner or academician having not 
less than ten years of experience in the field of environmental or 
criminal law; 


(2) The appropriate Government may, having regard to the ecological 
sensitivity, geographical spread, and administrative requirements of 
the district, prescribe by rules the number of members to be appointed 
under clauses (iv) and (vii) of sub-section (J). 


(3) The appropriate Government may appoint such number of officers 
and staff to the Commission, as may be deemed necessary, to assist it 
in the efficient discharge of its functions under the Act. 


(4)The terms and conditions of appointment, remuneration, tenure, 
qualifications and experience of non-governmental members of the 
Commission as well as the method of recruitment, salaries and 
allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and staff of the Commission, shall be such as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government. 


(5) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure with the regard to 
transaction of its business. 


(J) The Commission shall exercise the following powers and discharge all or 
any of the following functions, namely:— 


(i) receive and record complaints of acts amounting to, or likely to 
result in, ecocide within the district in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government; 


(ii) conduct or cause to be conducted environmental site 
inspections, preliminary inquiries on the complaints received under 
clause (i) or otherwise, and ecological audits in response to complaints 
received or suo motu; 


(iii) direct temporary cessation of activities posing an imminent 
threat to the ecological integrity of the district, subject to confirmation 
within seventy-two hours of receipt of information regarding such threat 
by the District Magistrate; 


(iv) recommend preventive or remedial action to the concerned 
authorities including the State Pollution Control Board, Forest 
Department, or the Central Government, as the case may be; 


(9 assist law enforcement agencies in the initiation of prosecution 
under this Act or any other applicable law; 


(vi) refer matters involving trans-district or inter-State 
consequences to the Tribunal or to the Wing, as the case may be; Act; 


(vii) facilitate, supervise and monitor community-led ecological 
restoration in accordance with the approved restoration orders issued by 
it under this Act; 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(viii) maintain a District Register of Ecological Offences and 
Restoration Measures, in such form and manner as may be prescribed; 


(ix) administer and maintain the Local Ecocide Remediation Funds 
established under section 28 of this Act; and 


(x) such other functions as the appropriate Government may assign 
from time to time for the fulfilment of the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Commission shall while investigating any matter referred to it under 
clauses (ii), (iii) and (v) of sub-section (7), have all the powers of a civil court, 

5 of 908. while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 908, in respect of the 
following matters, namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from 
any part of India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court 
or office; 


(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents; and 


(f) any other matter which may be prescribed by the State 
Government. 


6.  (/) The Commission shall, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, 
submit quarterly and special reports to the Wing containing therein— 


(i) the details of complaints received and action taken thereon; 


(ii) records of inspections conducted and restoration orders or 
directives issued; 


(iii) updates on investigations or prosecutions pending or 
concluded; and 


(iv) urgent matters warranting national attention or intervention. 


(2) The Wing may issue such directions as may be necessary, on the basis of 
the reports under sub-section (/) and may require the Commission to furnish 
further information or documents in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 


CHAPTER IV 
PENALTIES AND PUNISHMENTS 


7. Whoever commits the offence of ecocide shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which 
may extend to imprisonment for life, or with fine which may extend to five 
lakh rupees, or with both. 


8. (J) Any person who,— 


(i) fails to comply with any direction, order, or notice issued under 
this Act; or 


(ii) obstructs any officer or authority in the discharge of their 
functions under this Act; or 


(iii) provides false or misleading information in any environmental 
statement, report, audit, or restoration plan required under this Act; or 


(iv) destroys, tampers with, or conceals evidence relating to an 
environmental offence under this Act; or 


Reporting 
mechanism. 


Punishment 
for the offence 
of ecocide. 


Penalty for 
certain acts. 


Offences 
companies. 


by 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


9. 


(v) fails to furnish data, documents, or returns as required by any 
authority empowered under this Act; 


shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with 
both. 


(2) Where the contravention continues after conviction, the offender shall be 
liable to an additional fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees 
for every day during which such contravention continues. 


(3) The offences under this section shall be deemed cognizable and non- 
bailable and may be tried summarily by a Magistrate or a Special Ecocide 
Court. 


(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the applicability of other penalties 
under this Act for graver offences, including ecocide, and this section shall 
operate in addition to and not in derogation of any other provisions of this 
Act. 


(2) Where an offence under this Act is committed by a company, every person 
who, at the time of the commission of the offence, was in charge of and 
responsible to the company for the conduct of its business or operations, as 
well as the company itself, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that no such person shall be liable for punishment under this 
Act, if they prove— 


(a) that the offence was committed without their knowledge, or 


(b) that they had exercised due diligence to prevent the commission 
of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence 
under this Act is proved to have been committed with the consent, 
connivance, or attributable neglect of any director, managing partner, 
managing director, company secretary, compliance officer, or any other 
officer of the company, such individual shall also be deemed guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished in 
accordance with this Bill. 


(3) In the case of a Government company, Public Sector Undertaking, or 
statutory authority, the person appointed or acting in the capacity of Chief 
Executive Officer, Project Head, or Controlling Officer of the activity giving 
rise to the offence shall be deemed responsible unless proven otherwise. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this section— 


(a) “company” means any body corporate, and includes a firm, 
limited liability partnership, trust, public-private partnership, 
consortium, or any other association of persons (whether incorporated or 
not); 


(b) “director” in relation to a firm or LLP means a partner or a 
designated partner, as the case may be; 


(c) “officer’’ includes key managerial personnel, persons 
exercising control over environmental functions, or any other person 
declared by notification to be covered under this provision. 


(4) When an offence is committed by a company, every person who was in 
charge at the time shall be deemed guilty unless proved otherwise. 


(5) Where the company is convicted of the offence of ecocide or any other 
offence under this Act, the court may, in addition to any other penalty, direct 
the suspension, cancellation, or blacklisting of the company’s environmental 
approvals, permits, or licences for such period as it deems fit. 


34 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


20. 


2i. 


Any company or corporate entity convicted under this Act shall be 
blacklisted from government contracts and foreign trade incentives for a 
minimum of five years. 


(3) Every restoration order issued under the provisions of this Act shall be 
founded upon the principles of ecological justice and sustainability, and shall 
be guided by the following doctrines,— 


(i) “Polluter Pays” Principle, wherein the individual, entity, or 
authority responsible for causing ecocide or significant ecological harm 
shall bear the entire cost of restoration, rehabilitation, and remediation, 
including ancillary community support; 


(ii) Principle of Intergenerational Equity wherein the restoration 
measures shall prioritise the preservation of ecological health and natural 
capital for the benefit of present and future generations; 


(iii) Restoration to Original Ecological State wherein the 
restoration efforts shall, to the extent feasible and scientifically possible, 
aim to reinstate the affected ecosystem to its pre-damage baseline, or to 
an equivalent level of biodiversity, productivity, and resilience; 


(iv) Community-led Rehabilitation wherein the formulation, 
design, and execution of restoration activities shall actively involve 
local, tribal, and indigenous communities, ensuring their free, prior, and 
informed participation in all relevant stages; and 


(v) Principle of Ecological Integrity wherein the restoration shall 
consider ecological interconnectedness, prioritising biodiversity 
conservation, functional ecosystem recovery, and avoidance of 
monoculture or artificial substitutes unless ecologically justified. 


(2) Every restoration plan mandated under this Act shall include, but not be 
limited to, the following components,— 


(i) a site-specific ecological damage assessment report, conducted 
in accordance with the criteria laid down in the Second Schedule of this 
Act, by an accredited environmental scientist, institution, or agency, 
outlining the type, scale, and extent of damage to air, water, soil, flora, 
fauna, and ecological services; 


(ii) a valuation of biodiversity and ecosystem loss, including but 
not limited to loss of endangered species, critical habitats, traditional 
livelihoods, and ecosystem functions; 


(iii) a scientifically designed restoration roadmap, comprising a 
realistic and time-bound schedule of remedial actions, ecological 
monitoring checkpoints, community engagement mechanisms, and 
adaptive strategies to ensure sustained recovery; 


(iv) third-party certification and independent verification by a 
recognised environmental institute or scientist, attesting to the adequacy 
and credibility of the proposed restoration measures, before initiation 
and upon completion; and 


(v) a financial estimate and plan indicating source of funds, liability 
obligations, and contribution to the Fund established under section 26, 
wherever applicable. 


(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Wing established 
under section 8, prescribe model guidelines, standards, and monitoring 
frameworks for restoration activities under this Act, having regard to 
ecological fragility, cultural relevance, and climate resilience. 


(4) The competent court, Tribunal, or authority may impose additional 
restoration-related obligations on the offender, including but not limited to— 


(a) payment of interim ecological damages; 


(b) community livelihood rehabilitation; 


Environmental 
disqualification 
of companies. 


Principles and 
components of 
restoration 
orders. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


Mandatory 22. 
measures in 

case of 

unintentional or 

imminent 

ecocide. 


Power of the 23. 
Central 

Government for 

prevention, 

control, and 

remediation of 

ecocide. 


(c) periodic progress reporting; and 
(d) independent environmental audit on completion. 


(5) No restoration plan shall be considered complete unless it results in 
tangible ecological recovery, verified through longitudinal ecological 
monitoring, and reviewed periodically for a minimum period of five years 
from the date of initial restoration. 


(J) Where any act, omission, or accident results in, or is likely to result in, 
grave and widespread environmental destruction amounting to ecocide, the 
following persons shall be legally bound to act without delay — 


(i) the person or entity directly responsible for the act or process; 
and 


(ii) the person in charge of the premises, operation, machinery, or 
site from which such act or event originates or is apprehended to occur, 
shall immediately — 


(a) take all effective measures to prevent, control, or minimize 
the ecological damage; 


(b) report the occurrence or apprehension of ecocide to the 
prescribed authority and local magistrate within twenty-four hours, 
in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government; and 


(c) cooperate fully with any agency, officer, or environmental 
authority in the conduct of investigation or mitigation, and render 
technical, logistical, or material assistance as may be required. 


(2) Upon receipt of such information, or otherwise, if any authority under this 
Act has reasonable grounds to believe that ecocide has occurred or is 
imminent, it shall— 


(a) immediately initiate a field-based ecological risk assessment; 


(b) issue interim orders to suspend, restrict, or seal operations in the 
affected area; and 


(c) cause emergency remedial, containment, or evacuation 
measures to be undertaken, in coordination with disaster management 
and restoration agencies. 


(3) Any expenses incurred by the appropriate Government or any authority, 
as the case may be, in connection with the measures under sub-section (2), 
including ecological restoration, health and habitat rehabilitation, and 
monitoring, shall be recovered from the responsible party as — 


(a) damages under the “Polluter Pays” principle; and 


(b) arrears of land revenue or public demand, together with interest 
at such rate as may be notified by the Central Government. 


(4) The invocation of this sub-section (3) shall not prevent the initiation of 
criminal prosecution under this | Act for the offence of ecocide, nor shall 
compliance under this section constitute a defence to liability. 


(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government shall have 
the power to take such measures as it may deem necessary or expedient for 
the purposes of — 


(i) preventing and deterring acts of ecocide; 
(ii) protecting, conserving, and improving ecological health, and 


(iii) ensuring effective restoration, reparation, and compensation 
for environmental harm. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the measures referred 
to in sub-section (/) may include but shall not be limited to the following— 


(i) coordinating actions of the State Governments, statutory 
authorities, public agencies and local bodies— 


(a) under this Act and the rules made thereunder, or 


(b) under any other law in force relating to environmental 
protection, biodiversity, or conservation of natural resources; 


(ii) planning, financing, and implementing a National Programme 
for Ecocide Prevention and Restoration, including public awareness 
campaigns, capacity-building, and ecological literacy; 


(iii) prescribing national standards for ecosystem integrity, 
biological thresholds, and permissible levels of anthropogenic stress on 
ecosystems; 


(iv) notifying thresholds and limits for emissions, discharges, noise, 
light, or hazardous substances from all sectors, with power to 
differentiate based on zone, ecosystem type, or risk level; 


(v) declaring certain areas as Ecologically Vulnerable Zones or No- 
Degradation Zones, and imposing restrictions or conditionalities on 
industrial, mining, construction, or infrastructure activities therein; 


(vi) issuing precautionary and emergency protocols for the 
prevention of ecological disasters, industrial accidents, or natural 
resource collapse, and directing immediate remedial action; 


(vii) regulating, prohibiting or monitoring the use, storage, 
handling, transport or disposal of substances or technologies considered 
environmentally hazardous or ecocidally potent; 


(viii) reviewing, evaluating, and modifying manufacturing or 
developmental practices likely to cause irreparable ecological 
degradation; 


(ix) undertaking, funding, or mandating scientific research and 
environmental surveillance to detect, quantify, and mitigate emerging 
ecocidal threats; 


(x) authorising the inspection, seizure, or shutdown of premises, 
plants, processes, or technologies in contravention of the provisions of 
this Act or in active violation of ecological rights; 


(xi) establishing and recognizing centres of ecological excellence, 
restoration institutes, and laboratories for ecological audit, bio- 
restoration, and forensic assessment; 


(xii) promoting open-access environmental information systems, 
community right-to-know initiatives, and ecological damage registers; 


(xiii) preparing and issuing national ecological codes, restoration 
manuals, or guidelines relevant to prevention, mitigation, and reversal of 
ecocidal harm; and 


(xiv) taking such other actions as may be necessary for giving effect 
to the provisions of this Act and securing long-term ecological 
sustainability. 


(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Ecocide Authorities at the national, regional, or local 
level by such name as may be specified, for the purpose of exercising any or 
all of the powers referred to in sub-section (2), subject to such conditions and 
supervision as may be prescribed. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Ecocide 
Restoration 
Bonds. 


Establishment 
of the National 
Ecocide 
Remediation 
Fund. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


24. 


25. 


26. 


Explanation.— Any authority constituted under this section shall be 
deemed to have the power to issue binding directions, impose compliance 
obligations, and initiate prosecution or restoration proceedings under this Act, 
as if it were empowered directly by the Central Government. 


No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Government or any officer of the Government or any member or any officer 
or other employee of the Wing or Commission or Board, in respect of 
anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith in pursuance of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder. 


CHAPTER V 
COMPENSATION AND FUND MECHANISM 


(J) Where any person, company, or body corporate is found guilty of the 
offence of ecocide, the competent court may, in addition to any other penalty 
imposed, direct such person or entity to deposit a monetary Bond, to be called 
the Ecocide Restoration Bond, to cover future restoration expenses. 


(2) The amount of such Bond shall be equivalent to the value of 
environmental harm or degradation as assessed by such authorised 
expert in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government, 
together with an additional sum not less than twenty-five per-cent of such 
assessed value. 


Explanation.— For the purpose of this sub-section, the Central 
Government may, by rules, designate one or more authorised expert(s) 
for the purpose of assessing the value of environmental damage and cost 
of ecological restoration. 


(3) Bonds shall be held in an escrow account administered under the Fund 
established under section 26, and shall be released only upon satisfactory 
implementation of the restoration plan, as be certified by such authority, as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a Fund to be called the National Ecocide Remediation Fund, for 
providing relief and compensation to tribal, forest and coastal 
communities adversely affected by damage or harm to the environment 
of their natural residence and for other purposes as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Fund shall be a non-lapsable public account under the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 


(3) The Fund shall be administered by a National Ecocide Remediation 
Board, to be constituted by the Central Government, by notification in 
the Official Gazette and shall be chaired by the Secretary to the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change and shall consist of such other members as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


(4) There shall be credited to the Fund : 


(i) all amounts recovered by way of fines, penalties, and amounts 
of Bonds under section 25 of this Act; 


(ii) budgetary allocations from the Central Government; 


(iii) grants, donations made by any individual, institution, or 
organisation or international contributions permitted under the Foreign 
Contribution (Regulation) Act, 200; and 


(iv) voluntary contributions made by companies as part of their 
Corporate Social Responsibility obligations under section 35 of the 
Companies Act, 203 or otherwise. 


42 of 200. 


8 of 20]3. 


38 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


(J) The Fund shall be utilised for following purposes, namely,— 
(i) ecosystem restoration and biodiversity conservation projects; 


(ii) compensation to displaced or affected individuals and 
communities including relief and compensation to tribal, forest, and 
coastal communities; 


(iii) scientific research and baseline data generation on damaged 
environments; 


(iv) capacity-building and training of environmental officials; and 


(v) emergency response to environmental disasters caused by 
ecocide. 


(2) There shall be maintained under the Fund, a dedicated escrow account, 
wherein shall be deposited the bond amounts collected under section 25 of 
this Act. 


Provided that if restoration plan is not satisfactorily implemented as 
provided under sub-section (3) of section 25, the bond amount held in the 
escrow account shall stand forfeited and credited to the general corpus of the 
Fund. 


(3) The Board shall prepare and publish within such period of time and in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an 
annual statement of accounts and impact assessment reports and forward the 
same to the Central Government, which shall cause it to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament. 


(I) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, establish Local Ecocide Remediation Funds at the district level, 
which shall be administered and maintained by the Commission 
constituted under section ।3 of this Act. 


(2) There shall be credited to the Local Fund, such amounts either by 
way of grants, donations or contributions, as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government and such budgetary allocations as may be 
made by the appropriate Government, from time to time. 


(3) The Local Fund shall be utilised for such purposes as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government in consultation with the Commission. 


(J) All restoration projects funded under the provisions of this Act shall 
undergo independent third-party environmental audits by such auditors and 
in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


(2) Reports of audit done under sub-section (/) shall be placed in public 
domain in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government and submitted to the State Pollution Control Board and Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. 


CHAPTER VI 


MISCELLANEOUS 


(J) Any person aggrieved by an order, direction, action, or decision of the 
Central Government, the State Government, the Ecocide Prevention 
Commission, or any other authority empowered under this Act, may file an 
application for adjudication of the dispute before the Tribunal. 


(2) Such application shall be made in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, within a period of six months from 
the date on which the cause of action arose: 


Utilization of 
the Fund. 


Local Ecocide 
Remediation 
Funds. 


Environmental 
audit and 
third-party 
oversight. 


Adjudication 
of disputes by 
the Tribunal. 


Bar of 
jurisdiction. 


Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 


Power to amend 
Schedules. 


Power of 
Central or State 
Government to 
make rules. 


Savings. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


3l. 


32. 


33. 


34. 


35. 


36. 


Provided that the Tribunal may entertain the application after the expiry 
of the said period if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not making 
the application within that period. 


(3) The Tribunal shall have the jurisdiction to provide relief, compensation, 
and restitution of damaged ecosystems, and may issue any direction, 
including for restoration, remediation, or imposition of environmental costs 
as may be deemed fit in accordance with this Act. 


No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in 
respect of anything done, action taken or order or direction issued by the 
Central Government or State Government or any other authority or officer in 
pursuance of any power conferred by or in relation to its or his functions under 
this Act. 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law on this behalf, provide, from time to time, adequate 
funds for the implementation of the provisions and purposes of this Act. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 


(J) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so 
to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First or the 
Second Schedule and thereupon the First or the Second Schedule, as the case 
may be, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly. 


(2) A copy of every notification made under sub-section (7) shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 


(3) The appropriate Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before the Legislature of that State, where it 
consists of one House, or where it consists of two Houses, before both Houses 
of the Legislature. 


(J) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to— 


(a) affect the operation of any other law for the time being in force in India 
that governs the protection, conservation, and management of the 
environment, biodiversity, or natural resources, unless such law is 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act; 


(b) limit or interfere with any action, proceeding, or remedy that may have 
been initiated or taken by any person or authority under any other law for the 
protection of the environment or against acts of environmental destruction or 
harm prior to the commencement of this Act; 


(c) affect any right, privilege, or liability accrued under any other law before 
the commencement of this Act, or any act that may have been performed 
under such law, which is consistent with the protection and improvement of 
the environment. 


320 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


37. 


(2) In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Act and any 
other law, the provisions of this Act shall prevail, unless otherwise explicitly 
provided in that other law. 


(3) The provisions of this Act shall not invalidate any actions or orders taken 
by the Government or any authority under the provisions of any existing 
environmental laws that are consistent with the objectives of this Act. 


(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period 
of three years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 32] 


THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 5(i)] 


The following ecosystems are designated as protected under this Bill. Any 


substantial harm, degradation, or irreversible alteration to these shall constitute 
prima facie ecocide, unless otherwise permitted under law: 


Ae 


Forested Ecosystems 

(a) Reserved Forests and Protected Forests under Indian Forest Act, |927 
(b) Biodiversity-rich areas notified under the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 
(c) Sacred Groves and Indigenous Forest Zones 

Wetland Ecosystems 

(a) Ramsar Sites in India 

(b) Freshwater lakes, marshes, swamps, mangroves, and coastal wetlands 
(c) Estuarine systems and river deltas 

Marine and Coastal Ecosystems 

(a) Coral reefs 

(b) Seagrass meadows 

(०) Marine Protected Areas notified under the Wildlife Protection Act, 972 
Riverine and Freshwater Ecosystems 


(a) Nationally important rivers, their tributaries, and associated catchment 
zones 


(b) Glacial lakes and high-altitude freshwater bodies 
Mountain and Highland Ecosystems 
(a) Himalayan alpine zones 


(b) Western Ghats, Eastern Ghats, Aravalli Range, and other sensitive 
mountain systems 


Grassland and Savannah Ecosystems 

(a) Shola grasslands 

(b) Terai-Duar grasslands 

(c) Semi-arid savannahs of Central India and Deccan 

Desert and Semi-arid Ecosystems 

(a) The Thar Desert and associated salt marshes (e.g. Rann of Kutch) 
(b) Desert National Park, scrubland reserves 

Agro-ecological and Pastoral Landscapes 

(a) Traditional agro-forestry zones 


(b) Community-conserved areas and pasturelands under Forest Rights Act, 
2006 


Urban Natural Habitats 
(a) Urban lakes, wetlands, and green belts 


(b) Biodiversity parks and peri-urban ecological corridors 


. Cultural and Indigenous Ecosystems 


(a) Sacred rivers, mountains, forests associated with traditional and tribal 
practices 


(b) Customary fishing and agricultural zones 


322 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See Explanation (i) to section 3 and section 2](2)(i)] 


Criteria for environmental impact or ecological damage assessment 
under the Act 
The following multi-criteria matrix shall be used by regulatory authorities, 
scientific panels, and ecocide courts to determine the impact severity of any act or 
project: 


Criterion Measurement Severity Thresholds 
Indicators 


l. Biodiversity Loss Species richness, | => 30% species loss in 
endemic/endangered affected area 
species, IUCN status 


2. Ecosystem Services | Water filtration, soil | > 25% loss in ecological 
Disruption fertility, carbon storage | functions 


3. Area of Impact Size and continuity of | => l0 sq. km. or regionally 
affected zone interconnected 

4. Reversibility Regeneration potential | Irreversible damage or >0- 
within l0 years year recovery 


5. Health & Displacement, disease | >l00 affected individuals 
Community Impact | incidence, food | or villages 
insecurity 


6. Cultural and Loss of traditional | Documented community 
Indigenous Harm livelihood or sacred | cultural erosion 
sites 


7. Cumulative Impact | Combined effect with | >50% cumulative threshold 

past/present activities met 

8. Climate Measurable degradation | >l0,000 tCOc-eq/year or 
Vulnerability or conflict risk deforest >00 ha 


9. Regulatory Non- Violation of | Unauthorised or fraudulent 
compliance Forest/Wildlife/Environ | clearances 
ment laws 


0. Transboundary or | Impact on neighbouring | Measurable degradation or 
Downstream state/country conflict risk 
Effect ecosystems or rivers 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 323 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Constitution of India, under Article 48A, mandates the State to protect and 
improve the environment and safeguard forests and wildlife. Article 5lA(g) casts a 
fundamental duty upon every citizen to protect and improve the natural environment, 
including forests, lakes, rivers, and wildlife, and to have compassion for living 
creatures. 


Despite these constitutional obligations, India continues to witness systematic, 
large-scale destruction of ecologically critical areas due to industrial, commercial, 
and extractive activities. This environmental degradation, often irreversible in 
nature, has led to biodiversity collapse, displacement of indigenous communities, 
and severe public health crises. However, the existing legal framework spread across 
various statutes such as the Environment (Protection) Act, 986, the Wildlife 
(Protection) Act, !972, and the Forest Conservation Act, !980; does not criminalize 
acts of ecocide, nor does it impose personal criminal liability for severe, reckless or 
willful harm to ecosystems. 


The need for a comprehensive and deterrent legal mechanism to prevent, 
punish, and restore damage caused by such acts has become increasingly urgent in 
light of India’s growing industrial activity, unsustainable development practices, and 
the disproportionate impact of environmental harm on marginalised communities. 
The international community has already taken cognizance of this gap through 
legislative measures criminalising ecocide in countries such as France, Russia, 
Belgium, and Georgia, where willful or reckless destruction of the environment is 
treated on par with crimes against peace and humanity. 


In line with these international precedents and India’s constitutional 
commitment under Articles 48A and 5lA(g) to protect and improve the natural 
environment, the present Bill seeks to define the offence of ecocide, establish clear 
accountability for both the State and non-State actors, and provide for institutional 
mechanisms for prevention, investigation, prosecution, and ecological restoration. It 
aims to enforce principles such as the Polluter Pays Principle, Intergenerational 
Equity, and the Right to a Healthy Environment, and to ensure that affected 
communities are actively engaged in restorative efforts. 


In its spirit, the Bill represents a vital step in fortifying India’s environmental 
governance, preventing future ecological catastrophes, and reaffirming the country’s 
leadership in the global movement for environmental justice. 


Hence, this Bill. 


SUJEET KUMAR. 


324 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 

Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Special Environment 
Investigation Wing, whereas Clause 9 provides for its composition and the salaries 
and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Officers of the Wing. 
Clause 3 provides for the constitution of the District Ecocide Prevention 
Commission in every district within the States and Union territories. Clause ।4 
provides for the composition of the Commission and that the appropriate 
Government shall appoint or nominate such number of Members thereto. The said 
clause also provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint such number of 
officers and staff to the Commission as well as for the remuneration of non- 
governmental employees of the Commission and salaries and allowances payable to 
and other terms and conditions of service of the officers and staff. Explanation to 
sub-clause (2) of clause 25 provides that the Central Government may designate one 
or more authorized expert(s) for the purpose of assessing the value of environmental 
damage and cost of ecological restoration to determine the amount the Ecocide 
Restoration Bond. Clause 26 provides that the Central Government shall establish 
the National Ecocide Remediation Fund under the Consolidated Fund of India, 
which shall be administered by the National Ecocide Remediation Board with such 
number of members as may be prescribed and that the Fund shall be credited inter 
alia with budgetary allocations made by the Central Government. Clause 28 
provides that the appropriate Government shall establish Local Ecocide Remediation 
Funds at the district level which shall be credited inter alia with budgetary 
allocations made by the appropriate Government, from time to time. Clause 32 
provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for the 


implementation of the provisions and carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India and of the States. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about 20 crore rupees would be incurred per annum from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of about 50 crore rupees 


is also likely to be involved. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 325 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 35 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 37 empowers the Central Government 
to make such provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise 


in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. 


As the rules or orders will relate to matters of administrative and procedural 


detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


326 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


XXXIX 


Bill No. XXXVI of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of a National Environment Management 
and Regulatory Authority for the effective management, regulation 
and monitoring of the use of environmental resources 
and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (0) This Act may be called the National Environment Management and Short title and 
Regulatory Authority Act, 2025. Commencement: 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Establishment 
of the National 
Environment 
Management 
and Regulatory 
Authority. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


327 


2. 


3. 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 


Government; 


(b) ‘Authority’ means the National Environment Management 


and Regulatory Authority established under section 3; 


(c) ‘environment’ shall have the same meaning as defined under 


section 2(a) of the Environment Protection Act, 986; 


(d) ‘environment risk assessment’ means a systematic approach 
for identification, evaluation, mitigation, and control of hazards that 
could occur as a result of failures in process, procedures, or 


equipment; 


(e) ‘member’ means a Member of the Authority; and 


(f) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


(7) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish an apex agency, to be known as the National 
Environment Management and Regulatory Authority, to exercise the 
powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it 


under this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and 


shall, by the said name, sue and be sued. 


(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and it may with 
the prior approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other 
places in the country as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes 


of this Act. 


(4) The Authority shall consist of the following persons, namely— 


(a) a Chairperson, having specialised knowledge and 
extensive experience in environmental management, natural 
resources protection, international environment policy, 
environmental risk assessment and related field to be appointed by 


the Central Government, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) three Members, to be nominated by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed, from amongst 
persons of ability, integrity and standing who have extensive 


professional experience in,— 


(i) international and national environmental policies and 
programmes on environment protection, climate change, 
pollution, coastal zone management, environmental risk 


mitigation and natural resource conservation; 


(ii) environmental laws and _ legal interventions, 


constitutional provisions, and international treaties 
conventional related to environmental issues; and 


and 


(iii) environmental risks, impact assessment techniques 
and procedures and appraisal of projects for environmental 


clearance. 


(5) The Authority shall have the power to regulate its own procedure with 


regard to transaction of its business. 


29 of 986. 


326 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


4. 


(0) The Chairperson and every member of the Authority shall hold office 
for a period not exceeding four years from the date on which they assume 
office, or for such period as may be specified by the Central Government 
in this behalf. 


(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 


(70) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section () of section 4, the 
Chairperson or a Member of the Authority may by writing under his hand 
to the Central Government resign from his office at any time; 


(2) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office, the 
Chairperson or any member of the Authority, if the Chairperson or as the 
case may be, such other member—. 


(a) has been adjudged insolvent; or 


(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence 
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; or 


(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
competent court; or 


(d) refuses to act or has become physically or mentally incapable 
of acting as a member; or 


(e) has, without obtaining leave of absence from the Authority, 
remained absent from three consecutive meetings of Authority; 


(f) has acquired such financial or other interest which is likely to 
affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or a Member; or 


(g) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his 
office as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the interest 
of the office or public interest. 


Provided that no person shall be removed from office under 
this clause until that person has been given a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard in the matter. 


(3) A vacancy caused under sub-sections (4) and (2) or otherwise shall be 
filled by fresh appointment or nomination, as the case may be. 


Provided that the Chairperson or any other member appointed or 
nominated against any casual vacancy in the Authority shall hold 
office only for the remainder of the term of the Chairperson or member 
in whose place he has been appointed or nominated. 


No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be questioned or shall be 
invalid on the ground merely by reason of: 


(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in its constitution; 


(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or 
member thereof; or 


(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the 
case. 


(70) The Central Government shall, from time to time, appoint such 
number of officers and staff including experts to the Authority, as may 
be required to assist it in its efficient functioning, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(2) The method of recruitment or appointment of officers and staff 
including experts, the salaries and allowances payable to them, and 


Term of office 
and conditions 
of service of 
Chairperson and 
Members 


Resignation or 
removal. 


Vacancies, etc., 
not to invalidate 
proceedings of 
the Authority. 


Officers and 
staff including 
experts of the 
Authority. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 329 


Members, 8. 
officers and 

staff to be 

public servants. 


Functions of the 9, 
Authority. 


other terms and conditions of their service, shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


The Chairperson, Members, officers, staff and experts of the Authority 
shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of 
the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of sub- 
section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


The Authority shall perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely:— 


(a) function as an autonomous, professional, multidisciplinary 
apex authority for managing, regulating and monitoring the protection 
and preservation of our environment with scientific and analytical 
rigour; 


(b) design a comprehensive monitoring and regulatory landscape 
and compliance mechanism for the protection of environmental in the 
country; 


(c) coordinate with various Government departments and 
Ministries of the Central and State Governments for cross-sector 
environmental risk assessment and mitigation; 


(d) support the institutions, organisations and individuals who are 
engaged in the development of ethical and responsible environmental 
management; 


(९) provide and manage an efficient reporting infrastructure for 
national and state-level data flows in order to avoid duplication and 
loss of data; 


(f) carry out independent, objective, and transparent appraisal and 
approval of projects for environmental clearances; 


(g) monitor the implementation of industrial and infrastructural 
projects on a regular basis in order to ensure compliance with the 
existing environmental regulations and standards; 


(h) investigate into matters of violation of the environmental 
laws and regulations existing in the country and impose appropriate 
penalty on the violators; 


(i) provide technical advice and capacity building trainings 
to state level environmental impact assessment authorities; 


(j) carry out and sponsoring investigations and research 
relating to the planning and management of environment and 
other preventive aspects of natural resources management; 


(k) facilitate the national databases of environmental information 
and dissemination thereof including environmental clearances and 
their monitoring; 


(I) promote sustainable development by ensuring that 
environmental considerations are integrated into decision-making at 
various levels; 


(m) recommend to the Central Government or the State 
Governments, as the case may be, the steps to be taken for the 
environmental/ecological protection; 


(n) advise the Government on any other matter as may be referred 
to it, from time to time; 


(0) present to the Central Government, annually and at such 
other times as the Authority may deem fit, reports on its 


45 of 2023. 


330 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


0. 


il. 


2. 


3. 


4. 


working; 


(p) coordinate with the existing statutory regulators in the 
regime of environment protection and devise standard operating 
procedure in cases of overlap of jurisdictions; and 


(q) such other matters as may be prescribed. 


The Authority shall, while investigating any matter referred to in clause 
(h) of section 9, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and, in 
particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person 
from any part of India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any 
document; 


(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from 
any court or office; 


(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses 
and documents; and 


(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 


The appropriate Government shall consult the Authority on all policies 
affecting the management and conservation of environment in the country. 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the 
Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner, at such 
time of each financial year, and such intervals, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him 
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act 
shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection 
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall 
have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices 
of the Authority. 


(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, 
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the 
Central Government by the Authority. 


(0) The Authority shall prepare every year, in such form and within such 
time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report 
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and 
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall cause to be laid before each House of 
Parliament, the annual report along with a memorandum of action taken or 


Authority to have 
powers of a Civil 
Court. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to consult the 
Authority. 


Central 
Government to 
provide adequate 
funds to the 
Authority. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


Annual Report. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Power to make 
rules. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33] 


5. 


6. 


॥ 7, 


8. 


proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the Authority relating to 
the Union and the reasons for non-acceptance, if any, of such 
recommendations, within a period of one year from the date of receipt of 
such report. 


(3) Where the report or any of its part is related to any of the issues 
connected with the State Government, a copy of such report shall be 
forwarded to the Governor of that State, who shall in turn cause it to be 
laid before the Legislature of the State concerned, along with an 
explanatory memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be 
taken on the recommendations related to the State, and the reasons for 
non-acceptance, if any, of such recommendations, within a period of one 
year from the date of receipt of such report. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in 
force. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 


(0) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may 
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


(7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 

it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


332 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Rapid industrialization and infrastructure development in the last two decades 
coupled with population growth and urbanization has exerted tremendous pressures 
on the environment. The existing regulatory institutions at the Central and State 
levels have been unable to cope up effectively with the rising environmental 
challenges. It is now well recognized that the gap between the environmental 
regulatory policies and their compliance is becoming wider. The traditional 
systems of environmental regulation exercised through the Union Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Ministry of Environment in the State 
Governments, Central and State Pollution Control Boards etc. have become 
inadequate to address the alarming threats of climate change, global warming, 
pollution and environmental impacts of largescale infrastructure projects. The 
existing mechanism of criminal prosecution of environmental offenders has also 
failed to yield the desired results. The regime of environmental clearance which 
took shape through the environment impact assessment notification under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 986, involves grant of prior clearance to major 
projects by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the State 
Environment Impact Assessment Authorities (SEIAAs). While the number and 
complexity of the projects being processed for environmental clearance has 
increased manifold, the capacity and resources available with these agencies have 
remained limited. 


Here lies the significance of an impartial, independent and non-political apex 
authority to regulate and control all the activities related to environment 
management and conservation. In 20il, the Honourable Supreme Court in the 
verdict of the Lafarge Umiam Mining Private Ltd. v. The Union of India directed 
the Union Government to set up a national regulator to appraise projects, enforce 
environmental conditions for approvals, and impose penalties on polluters in 
accordance with sub-section (3) of section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 
986. However, this direction hasn’t been implemented even after fifteen years. In 
the past couple of years, the country has witnessed several changes to the 
environmental regulations, particularly regarding clearance mechanisms, with the 
Government advocating for the “ease of doing business.” Several concerns have 
been raised about these changes, especially on the issues of impact assessment, 
inadequate public consultation, lack of transparency and credibility in the 
mechanism, and the non-existence of a proper post-clearance mechanism. This 
further illustrate the need for an independent environmental regulator for 
overseeing, controlling, monitoring and regulating all the concerns related to 
environmental management. The Bill, therefore, proposes to establish an apex 
body to be called the National Environment Management and Regulatory Authority 
to effectively manage, monitor and regulate the use of environmental resources. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SANDOSH KUMAR P. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 333 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National 
Environment Management and Regulatory Authority (NEMRA) and for the 
appointment of the Chairperson and other Members thereof. Clause 4 inter alia 
provides for the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and Members of the NEMRA. Clause 7 provides for the appointment 
of officers and staff including experts of the NEMRA as may be considered 
necessary by the Central Government and for the salaries and allowances payable 
to and other terms and conditions of service of such officers and staff. Clause 9 
lays down the functions of the NEMRA, which inter alia, includes provision of 
technical advice and capacity building trainings to state level environmental impact 
assessment authorities and carry out research relating to the planning and 
management of environment and other preventive aspects of natural resources 
management. Clause 2 provides for the Central to provide adequate funds to 
NEMRA for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is 
difficult to estimate the exact quantum of expenditure likely to be involved at this 
stage. 


334 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 empowers the Central Government to make such provisions 
through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Bill. Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
make rules carrying out the purposes of this Bill. 


As the rules or orders rules will relate to matters of procedure and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 335 


XL 


Bill No. XXXV of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for the 
promotion of scientific temper in the country and 
for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (4) This Act may be called the National Commission for the Promotion of Short title and 
Scientific Temper Act, 2025. POMDEAEE MERE: 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Constitution 
of the 
National 
Commission 
for the 
Promotion of 
Scientific 
Temper. 


336 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


2. 


3. 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 


(b) “Commission” means the National Commission for the 
Promotion of Scientific Temper established under section 3; 


(c) ‘educational institutions” means all schools, colleges, 
professional institutions that impart education and learning; 


(d) ‘Fund’ means the Fund for the Promotion of Scientific 
Temper 


(९) constituted under section 0; 


(f) ‘humanism’ means arational outlook that attaches prime 
importance to human potential and reason rather than religious 
dogmas and superstitions; 


(g) “scientific temper” means a way of life which focusses on 
the search for truth and new knowledge, the refusal to accept anything 
without testing and trial, the capacity to change previous conclusions 
in the face of new evidence and the reliance on observed fact and not 
on pre-conceived theory; 


(h) "member" means a Member of the National Commission for 
the Promotion of Scientific Temper established under section 3; and 


(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


(7) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be 
established, for the purposes of this Act, a Commission, to be known as 
the National Commission for the Promotion of Scientific Temper, to 
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned 
to, it under this Act. 


(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable 
and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi and 
the Commission may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Government, establish offices at other places in the country as it may 
deem necessary, for the efficient discharge of the duties assigned to it 
under the Act. 


(4) The Commission shall consist of the following persons, 
namely— 

(a) a Chairperson, having specialised knowledge, 
outstanding contribution and eminence in the field of 
scientific enquiry, critical thinking, technological innovation 
and related areas to be appointed by the Central 
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) three Members, to be nominated by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed, from 
amongst the persons of eminence, ability, integrity and 
standing who have extensive professional experience in,— 


(i) the application of science and critical thinking 
in education, curriculum, media, work place and 
related fields; 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 337 


(ii) organisations and institutions working for the 
promotion of science policy, scientific temper, science 
education, popular science भाव grassroot level 
innovations; 


(iii) conceptualising and developing innovative 
programmes for popularising science, development of 
critical thinking and rational approach; or 


(iv) formulating and implementing science and 
technology policies of the State and Central 
Governments. 


(c) one Member-Secretary who shall be a senior member 
of the Indian Civil Service, having at least ten years of 
professional experience in the management § and 
administration of matters related to formulation or 
implementation of science policy, to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 


4. (4) The Chairperson and members of the Commission shall hold office for Term of office 
such period not exceeding four years from the date on which they assume pre ie 
office, or for such period as may be specified by the Central Government in 


, Chairperson 
this behalf. and Members of 
the 
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and Commission. 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and members shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
5. () Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section () of section 4, the eee or 
removal. 


Chairperson or a member other than the Member-Secretary, appointed under 
clause (3) of sub-section (4) of section 3, may by writing under his hand to 
the Central Government resign from his office at any time; 


(2) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office, the 
Chairperson or any member of the Commission, if the Chairperson or as the 
case may be, such other member— 


(a) has been adjudged insolvent; or 


(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence 
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; or 


(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
competent court; or 


(d) refuses to act or has become physically or mentally incapable 
of acting as a member; or 


(e) has, without obtaining leave of absence from the 
Commission, remained absent from three consecutive meetings of 
Commission; 


(f) has acquired such financial or other interest which is likely to 
affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or a member; or 


(g) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his 
office as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the interest 
of the office or public interest. 


Provided that no persons hall be removed from office under this 
clause until that person has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in the matter. 


Vacancies, 
etc., not to 
invalidate 
proceedings 
of the 
Commission. 


Officers, 
experts and 
other 
employees of 
the 
Commission. 


Members, 
officers and 
staff of the 
Commission 
to be public 
servants. 


Functions of 
the 
Commission. 


338 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(3) A vacancy caused under sub-sections (l) and (2) or otherwise shall be 
filled by fresh appointment or nomination, as the case may be: 


Provided that the Chairperson or any other member appointed or 
nominated against any casual vacancy in the Commission shall hold office 
only for the remainder of the term of the Chairperson or member in whose 
place he has been appointed or nominated. 


No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be 
invalid on the ground merely by reason of: 


(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the 
Commission; 


(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or 
member of the Commission; or 


(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not 
affecting the merits of the case. 


(0) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and 
staff including experts to the Commission, as may be considered 
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(2) The method of recruitment of officers and staff including experts, the 
salary and allowances payable to them, and other terms and conditions 
of their service, shall be such as may be prescribed. 


The Chairperson, Members, officers and staff including experts of the 
Commission shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance 
of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning 
of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely:— 

(a) promote and encourage scientific temper, humanism and the 
spirit of enquiry in all educational institutions- both public and private, 
workplaces and other spheres of society in which people interact with 
each other; 


(b) cultivate curiosity-driven approach, critical thinking, 
questioning, logic and rational decision making amongst students, 
work force and the general public; 


(c) foster, promote, and sustain, by all appropriate means, the 
cultivation of science, critical thinking and reasoning in all its aspects 
- pure, applied, and educational; 


(d) encourage individual initiatives for the acquisition and 
dissemination of knowledge, and for the discovery of new knowledge, 
in an atmosphere of academic freedom; 


(e) promote scientists and innovators in all realms of societal life 
and offer proper recognition of their achievement; 


(9 promote the concept of ‘scientific temper’ as a compulsory 
part of the school curriculum and encourage students to understand the 
practical and applied aspects of the concept in everyday life; 


(g) trigger changes in the mindset and value systems to 
recognise, respect and reward performances which create wealth from 
science and technology derived knowledge; 


(h) strive for building a strong scientific workforce and 
developing educational programs to train scientists and technicians; 


(6) formulate a comprehensive national policy for promoting 


45 of 2023. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 339 


0. 


iI. 


2. 


scientific temper in the country, and design a strategic action plan, and 
guidelines for the implementation, and monitoring and evaluation 
activities based on the national policy framework; 


(@) perform such functions regarding the formulation and 
implementation of schemes for the promotion of scientific temper and 
critical thinking as may be assigned to it by the appropriate 
Government; 


(k) coordinate with various Government departments, both of 
the Central and State Governments, as may be required, for creating 
technological tools, educational materials and awareness techniques 
for the promotion of scientific temper including audio and video 
records and interviews of Nobel Laureates; 


() conduct in-depth research to suggest to the appropriate 
Government better ways for ensuring the fostering of scientific 
temper in the country; 


(m) support the institutions, organisations and individuals who 
are engaged in the promotion of popularising science and scientific 
thinking in the country; 


(n) enquire into any complaints concerning the promotion of 
science in the country and to recommend to the appropriate 
Government the action to be taken in such matters; 


(0) act as a national-level grievance redressal mechanism in 
matters related to the propagation of superstitions and dangerous 
beliefs among the society; 


(p) advise the appropriate Government in any other matter as 
may be referred to it, from time to time; 


(4) present to the Central Government, annually as_ the 
Commission may deem fit, reports upon its working; and 


(r) such other matters, as may be prescribed. 


The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to inclauses 
(0) and (0) of section 9, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and, 
in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person 
from any part of India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
court or office; 


(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and 
documents; and 


(9 any other matter which may be prescribed. 


The appropriate Government shall consult the Commission on all policies 
related to the promotion of scientific temper in the country. 


() The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Special Fund to be known as the Fund for the 
Promotion of Scientific Temper, for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. 


(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall, from 
time to time, after due appropriation made in this behalf by the 


Commission to 
have powers of 
a Civil Court. 


Appropriate 
Government 
to consult the 
Commission. 


Fund for the 
Promotion of 
Scientific 
Temper. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


Annual 
Report. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


340 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


3. 


4. 


5. 


6. 


7. 


Parliament or the respective State Legislature by law, contribute such 
sums of money to the Fund, in such ratio as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Fund shall be administered and maintained by the Commission, 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Commission shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
including the administration of the Fund and prepare an annual statement of 
accounts in such form and manner, at such time of each financial year, and 
such intervals, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him 
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the National Commission 
under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in 
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of 
the offices of the Commission. 


(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, 
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the 
Central Government by the Commission. 


(0) The Commission shall prepare every year, in such form and within such 
time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report 
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and 
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall cause to be laid before each House of 
Parliament, along with a memorandum on the action taken or proposed to be 
taken on the recommendations of the Commission relating to the Union and 
the reasons for non-acceptance, if any, of such recommendations, within a 
period of one year from the date of receipt of such report. 


(3) Where the report or any of its part is related to any issues connected with 
the State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the 
Governor of that State who shall in turn cause it to be laid before the 
Legislature of the State concerned, along with an explanatory memorandum 
on the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations related 
to the State, and reasons for non-acceptance if any, of such recommendations 
within a period of one year from the date of receipt of such report. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 


(0) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear 
to be necessary for removing the difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 34] 


8. 


(0) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all 
matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purposes of 
giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 


(3) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be 
made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 


Power to make 


rules 
regulations. 


and 


342 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Promoting scientific temper is crucial for societal progress, personal 
development, and creating a more rational world. It encourages evidence-based 
decision-making, challenges superstitions, and fosters a spirit of inquiry that 
ultimately leads to a more informed and open-minded society. It was Pandit 
Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of the country, who popularised the 
concept of scientific temper in India. According to Nehru, scientific temper points 
out the way along which man should travel. It is the temper of a free man. Scientific 
temper, in essence, ‘is the search for truth and new knowledge, the refusal to accept 
anything without testing and trial, the capacity to change previous conclusions in 
the face of new evidence, and above all, the reliance on observed fact and not on 
pre-conceived theory’. 


Scientific temper is not merely about scientific knowledge, but also about a 
way of approaching the world with curiosity, scepticism and a quest for deeper 
understanding. India is the first and only country that adopted the concept of 
‘Scientific Temper’ in the constitution. The 42"4 amendment to the Constitution of 
Indiain 976 added Article 5-A(h)Part IVA on Fundamental Duties, which states 
that: “It shall be the duty of every citizen of India to develop the scientific temper, 
humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform”. 


Although scientific temper enjoys constitutional sanctity for almost half a 
century, the Indian society hasn’t recognised it as a way of life. In order to foster a 
culture of rational decision-making that questions religious dogmas and 
superstitions, we need serious effort from the Government to popularise the concept 
of scientific temper. By empowering individuals with the tools to understand and 
appreciate scientific concepts, we can pave the way for amore informed and rational 
society. In this era of religious dogmas, witchcraft, honour-killing and black-magic, 
there is an urgent need to foster a mindset that values evidence, reason, and critical 
thinking. The role of the Government in fostering scientific temper is critical. 
Therefore, creation of a specialised National Commission for the Promotion of 
Scientific Temper is required to empower the children and common man in order to 
make them active stakeholders in the scientific process. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SANDOSH KUMAR P. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 343 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National 
Commission for the Promotion of Scientific Temper and for the appointment of the 
Chairperson and other Members of the Commission. Clause 4 inter alia provides for 
the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson 
and Members of the Commission. Clause 7 provides for the appointment of officers 
and staff including experts of the Commission, as may be considered necessary, and 
for the salaries and allowances payable to them as well as the terms and conditions 
of their service. Clause 9 lays down the functions of the Commission, which inter 
alia, provides for the conduct of in-depth research to suggest to the appropriate 
Government better ways of ensuring the fostering of scientific temper and to support 
institutions, organisations and individuals engaged in the promotion and 
popularisation of science and scientific thinking in the country. Clause 2 of the Bill 
provides for the constitution of a Fund for the Promotion of Scientific Temper to be 
utilised for the effective implementation of the provisions of the Act, to which the 
Central and State Governments shall contribute in such ratio, as may be prescribed. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is 
difficult at this stage, to estimate the exact quantum of expenditure likely to be 
involved. 


344 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 empowers the Central Government to make such provisions 
through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the 
provisions of the Bill., whereas Clause 8 empowers the Central Government to 
frame rules and the National Commission for the Promotion of Scientific Temper to 
frame regulations for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


As the rules or orders will relate to matters of procedure and administrative 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 345 


XLI 


Bill No. XXXII of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Companies Act, 203. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows: — 


l. (4) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2025. Short title and 
commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


346 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Amendment of 2. In section 35 of the Companies Act, 203 for sub-section (), the following 8 of 203. 
section 35. shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(l) Every company having net worth of rupees one hundred 
crore or more, or turnover of rupees five hundred crore or more or a 
net profit of rupees three crore or more during the immediately 
preceding financial year shall constitute a Corporate Social 
Responsibility Committee of the Board consisting of three or more 
directors, out of which at least one director shall be an independent 
director and one among the other directors shall have extensive 
experience in planning and implementing Corporate Social 
Responsibility projects. 


Provided that where a company is not required to appoint an 
independent director under sub-section (4) of section 49, it shall have 
in its Corporate Social Responsibility Committee two or more 
directors.” 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 347 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


In India, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs introduced Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) as a mandatory compliance for large companies under the 
Companies Act, 203. Thus, it is a statutory obligation for companies to engage in CSR 
activities, which will help them to achieve sustainable development goals and transform 
societal conditions. As of now, it is stipulated in the Companies Act, 203 that all firms 
with net worth of rupees 500 crore or higher, or turnover of rupees ,000 crore or above 
that, or anet profit of rupees 5 crore or more during the immediately preceding financial 
year, are required to compulsorily spend 2 per cent. of their average annual profit of the 
preceding three years on CSR activities. 


Ever since the Government has made CSR mandatory for companies belonging 
to a certain category, there has been substantial investment in community development, 
education and health. The spending on CSR by the firms indeed plays a vital role in 
social and economic transformation especially when the Government is retreating from 
social sector spending. Therefore, there is a need to increase the magnitude of CSR 
operations in order to reach more people and communities. This can be attained through 
the expansion of the scope of the CSR into more companies with medium size. Hence, 
the proposed bill provides for lowering the limits of the mandatory conditions for CSR 
in order to reach out to smaller companies. If CSR is mandatory for all firms with net 
worth of rupees 00 crore or more, or turnover of rupees 500 crore or more or a net 
profit of rupees 3 crore or more, a large number of companies will be automatically 
included under the purview of CSR funding. This would result in more social sector 
funding from the private sector. 


Besides, the existing CSR law stipulates the formation of a CSR Committee at the 
board level, with three or more directors with an independent director. However, there 
is no provision for including a director with deep knowledge and expertise in the idea 
and practice of CSR. The proposed Bill aims to fill this gap with the appointment of a 
director with extensive experience in CSR activities. 


Hence, this Bill. 


SANDOSH KUMAR P. 


348 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


XLII 


Bill No. XXX VII of 2025 


A Bill to amend the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


. 0) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 
(Amendment) Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Insertion of 
new _ section 
73A. 


Mandatory 
response to 
public reports 
of cognizable 
offences 
causing public 
safety incident 
widely 
disseminated 
through 
electronic 
means. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 349 


After section 73 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“73A. (l) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita 
or any other law for the time being in force, where a report, 
complaint, or information relating to the commission of a 
cognizable offence, which causes or is likely to cause a public safety 
incident or public disorder, is — 


(a) widely disseminated or reported through any 
electronic means, including digital social media 
intermediaries, instant messaging services, or publicly 
accessible online forums; and 


(b) brought to the notice of the officer in charge of a 
police station within whose jurisdiction such offence is being 
or has been committed, 


such officer shall, subject to verification of the credibility of such 
report, complaint, or information, record the substance thereof in a 
book to be kept in the police station in such form as the State 
Government may by rules prescribe in this behalf and initiate 
appropriate proceedings under this Sanhita or any other law 
applicable, without undue delay: 


Provided that the book shall be inspected and supervised by 
the Superintended of Police on a weekly basis. 


(2) Upon recording the information under sub-section (), it 
shall be the duty of the officer in charge of the police station to — 


(a) _ issue, within twenty-four hours of such recording, 
a public statement, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, clarifying the status of preliminary verification, 
and the steps taken or proposed to be taken; and 


(b) disseminate the public statement through 
appropriate public communication channels including, where 
feasible, official social media handles of the local police unit 
or other official means as may be directed by the State 
Government or the Director General of Police. 


(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the 
State Governments, prescribe guidelines for the verification of 
credibility of such public reports, formats of public communication, 
and procedures to be followed for compliance with this section. 


(4) Where the officer in charge of the police station fails to 
take action under sub-section (7) without sufficient cause, it shall be 
treated as dereliction of duty and such officer shall be liable to 
disciplinary action as per applicable service rules. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, expressions not defined 
in this Sanhita but defined in the Information Technology Act, 2000 shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.” 


46 of 2023. 


2 of 2000. 


350 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


In this age of digital communication, citizens often use social media to report 
crimes, raise safety concerns, or share real-time updates from the ground. However, 
the lack of timely police response to such public reports often leads to distress, 
misinformation, and public mistrust. Therefore, a Bill to amend the relevant 
provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and to provide for 
mandatory public response within twenty four hours by the police authorities to any 
crime, incident, or public grievance reported via social media platforms within their 
jurisdiction is a necessity in the changing times. This will enhance transparency, 
accountability, and responsiveness in law enforcement. 


Hence, this Bill. 


MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35] 


XLill 


Bill No. LXXI of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


l. 08) This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act, Short title and 
2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 
of section 6. 


Insertion of 
new sections 
43A to 43C. 
Regulation of 
Halal 
Certification 


Committee on 
Certification 
of Religious 
Dietary Food 
Items. 


352 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


In the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in section 6, in sub-section (2), after clause (c), the following 
new clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ca) the procedure for regulation, grant and monitoring of 
certifications relating to religious, ethical, or faith-based dietary 
practices, including Halal certification, exclusively through 
Government-notified authorities or agencies under the Union Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare;”. 


After section 43 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely— 


“434, (l) No private organization, trust, society, or association shall 
issue, collect fees for, or act as an intermediary in the process of Halal 
certification of any food item. 


(2) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, designate such authority or agency under its control for the 
purpose of granting, supervising, renewing and revoking Halal 
certification for food items. 


(3) All fees or charges payable for the issuance, renewal or testing 
of Halal certification shall be deposited in the Consolidated Fund of India. 


(4) Halal certification shall apply only to food products intended for 
human consumption, and shall not extend to non-edible goods, services, 
industrial products or machinery. 


(5) Any person or entity contravening the provisions of this section 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both. 


(6) The Central Government may, by rules made under this Act, 
prescribe the procedure, forms, validity, and audit mechanism for halal 
certifications under this section. 


43B. (l) The Central Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a Committee to be called the Committee on 
Certification of Religious Dietary Food Items consisting of the following 
members, namely, — 


(a) Secretary, Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
— Chairperson ex-officio; 


(b) one representative each from the Union Ministries of 
Food Processing Industries; Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution; and Minority Affairs, to be nominated by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed — Members ex- 
Officio; 


(c) two experts, one each in the field of food safety and public 
health, to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner 
as may be prescribed - Members; and 


(d) two representatives from State Food Safety Authorities, 
to be nominated by the Central Government in consultation with the 
State Government concemed, in such manner as may be prescribed 
— Members ex-officio. 


(2) The Committee shall be administered by the Union Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, which shall provide necessary secretarial 
assistance and bear the expenditure from its existing budget grant for the 
functioning of the Committee. 


(3) The Chairman and Members of the Committee other than ex- 
officio Members shall hold office for such term as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government by rules made under this Act. 


34 of 2006 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 353 


(4) The salary and/or allowances payable to and other terms and 


conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members other than ex- 
officio Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government by rules made under this Act. 


43C. The Committee shall perform all or any of the following 


functions, namely — 


(a) identify and notify classes of food items that may require 
religious dietary certification under this Act or by rules made 
thereunder; 


(b) recommend uniform national standards and procedures for 
such certification; 


(c) advise the Central Government on criteria for slaughter, 
processing, packaging, and labelling consistent with public health 
and religious dietary considerations; 


(d) review and update standards periodically; 


(2९) monitor and report on the implementation and misuse of 
religious dietary certifications; and 


(f) perform such other functions as may be assigned by the 
Central Government, from time to time. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this section “religious dietary certification” 
means any form of certification, labelling, or declaration that a food item, 
ingredient, or process conforms to any religious dietary requirement, including 
but not limited to Halal, Kosher, Jhatka, or any equivalent term, whether 
expressed in writing, mark, symbol, or otherwise.” 


Functions 
the 
Committee. 


of 


354 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


At present, there is no statutory authority or law that regulates and 
standardizes halal certification for domestic consumption. Halal certification is 
voluntary and market-driven for domestic products and private entities conduct and 
charge for such certifications without statutory accountability. 


The purpose of this Bill is to ensure transparency, standardization, and 
governmental oversight in religious dietary certifications, including Halal 
certification. 


This Amendment Bill to the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 seeks to— 


l. Vest exclusive authority for Halal and similar certifications in 
Government agencies; 


2. Establish a Committee on Certification of Religious Dietary Food 
Items to identify and regulate items requiring such certification; 


3. Ensure that all fees are paid only to the Government; and 


4. Restrict certification strictly to food items to prevent misuse in non- 
food sectors. 


This will promote consumer confidence, uphold public accountability, and 
strengthen the integrity of India’s food regulation system. 


Hence, this Bill. 
MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 355 


XLIV 


Bill No. LXXIII of 2025 


A Bill to promote inter-faith harmony, ensure protection of all religions and 
sacred beliefs, and prevent acts intended to insult or malign any religion or 
religious community in the country in accordance with the 
secular and pluralistic spirit of the Constitution of 
India, and to provide for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


WHEREAS, the Constitution of India guarantees to all citizens the 
freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate 


religion; 


AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to safeguard the dignity of every faith, 
promote mutual respect among followers of different religions, and prevent 
deliberate acts that incite hatred or disturb communal harmony. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


Short title and 


]. (0) This Act may be called the Protection of All Religions and Promotion of 
commencement. 


Mutual Respect for Faiths Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


356 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) Commission” means the National Commission for Inter-Faith 
Harmony established under section 3 of this Act; 


(b) “deliberate insult” means any public act, publication, 
communication, or display intentionally meant to outrage religious 
feelings or show contempt towards any religion; 


(c) “faith” means a system of beliefs, rituals, practices and sacred 
texts adhered to by a community or class of persons professing or 
practising a religion; 


(d) “faith-based offence” means any act or omission committed 
under this Act which violates the rights of persons practising a religion or 
faith, or which insults, vilifies, demeans a religion or sacred object or 
incites hatred between communities or classes of persons; 


(e) “Fund” means the National Inter-Faith Harmony Fund 
established under section 6 of this Act; 


(f) “inter-faith harmony” means peaceful coexistence, dialogue, 
and respect amongst persons of diverse faiths or religions; 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(h) “religion” includes all faiths, spiritual paths, and systems of 
belief practised in India; and 


(i) “sacred object” means any text, symbol, structure, place or item 
held in reverence by the followers of a religion or faith. 


CHAPTER II 


PROMOTION OF INTER-FAITH HARMONY 


Establishment 3. 06) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, 
eb ine Nancnel establish a body to be known as the National Commission for Inter-Faith 
Commission if 

for Inter-Faith Harmony to carry out the purposes of this Act. 


ae (2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having 


perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions 
of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and 
immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi and it may, 
with the prior approval of Central Government, establish office(s) at any 
other place in the country, as it may deem fit, for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act. 


(4) The Commission shall consist of the following, namely — 


() a Chairperson with substantial knowledge of various 
religious traditions and high level of commitment to the promotion, 
protection and preservation of inter-faith harmony; and 

(ii) ten members, who shall be persons of eminence from 
different religions and faiths in the country, in such proportion as 
may be prescribed; 

to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(5) The term of office of, the salary and allowances payable to, and other 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the 
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 357 


(6) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary and at such times and 
places as the Chairperson may deem fit for the efficient discharge of the 
functions assigned to it under this Act. 


(7) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure with 
regard to transaction of its business. 


4. (6) The Commission shall appoint such number of officers and staff with Officers गाते 
the prior approval of the Central Government, as may be required, for its ae me 
efficient functioning. : 


(2) The method of recruitment, qualifications and experience, salaries and 
allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and staff of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 


5. The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely:— Functions of the 
Commission. 


(a) advise the appropriate Government on policies for promoting 
inter-faith harmony, respect amongst religions and prevention of faith- 
based offences; 


(b) recommend measures to prevent communal conflicts; 


(c) organise awareness and educational programmes in schools, 
Universities, and through media for promoting mutual respect 
amongst different religions and faiths and peaceful co-existence; 


(d) coordinate with the Central and State Governments, religious 
institutions, non-governmental organisations etc. for  inter-faith 
dialogues; 


(९) prepare reports, annually and also at such other times as the 
Commission may deem fit on any matter relating to promotion or 
preservation of inter-faith harmony and in particular in relation to its 
functions assigned under this Act, in such form and manner, as may be 
prescribed, containing therein its recommendations to the Centre and the 
States, as the case may be, for the effective implementation of the 
provisions of this Act; and 


(f) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the 
Central Government under this Act. 


6. () The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, National Inter- 
establish a fund to be called the National Inter-Faith Harmony Fund for Sas Hamnony 
financing programmes promoting religious tolerance, peace and inter- ; 
faith cooperation and for other purposes as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Fund shall be administered by the Commission under the supervision 
and control of the Union Ministry of Home Affairs. 


(3) There shall be credited to the Fund:— 


(i) any sums provided by the Central Government to carry out the 
purposes of this Act; 


(ii) grants, CSR contributions or donations from institutions or 
persons, approved by the Central Government; 


(iii) amount accrued on account of monetary penalties imposed; and 
(iv) such other sums as may be specified from time to time. 


(4) The Fund shall be subject to audit by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India and the Central Government shall cause such audit report to be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 


7. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Central 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the ane 2 
Commission, as it may deem fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. ; 


358 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Offence of 8. 
insulting 

religion or 

religious 

beliefs. 


Protection of 9, 
sacred places 
and symbols. 


Dissemination 0. 
of hatred on 

grounds of 

religion. 


Protection of ]. 
artistic and 

academic 

expression. 


Accounts and 2. 
audit. 


Annual report. 3. 


CHAPTER III 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 


Whoever, with deliberate intent to insult or demean the religious beliefs or 
practices of any class of citizens of India, commits any act, publication, or 
representation that insults or attempts to insult the religion or religious beliefs 
or feelings of that class of persons, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and 
with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees. 


Provided that the penal provision shall be read in addition to the 
punishment, if any, prescribed in the relevant sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 and not in derogation of it. 


Whoever defiles, damages or desecrates any place of worship or sacred object 
of any religion with the deliberate or malicious intent to insult that religion or 
any class of persons of that religion shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to two 
lakh rupees. 


Provided that the penal provision shall be read in addition to the 
punishment, if any, prescribed in the relevant sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 and not in derogation of it. 


Whoever promotes enmity or hatred between persons on the ground of religion, 
or by speech, writing, image, or electronic communication intends to do so 
deliberately, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine which may extend to two lakh rupees. 


Provided that the penal provision shall be read in addition to the 
punishment, if any, prescribed in the relevant sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 and not in derogation of it. 


(7) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to — 


(a) any fair and bona fide expression made in good faith in art, 
literature, research or academic discourse; and 


(b) any constructive criticism, discussion or commentary made 
without malicious intent. 


(2) The Commission established under this Act shall frame guidelines for the 
purposes of this section, within such period as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(0) The Commission shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner and at such 
time of each financial year, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 

(3) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together 
with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually by the Commission 
to the Central Government, which shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 


(0) The Commission shall prepare every year, in such form and within such 
time, as may be prescribed, an annual report, giving a true and full account of 


45 of 2023. 


45 of 2023. 


45 of 2023. 


25 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 359 


4. 


5. 


6. 


7. 


8. 


its activities during the previous year and forward a copy thereof to the Central 
Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after its receipt, cause to 
be laid before each House of Parliament, the annual report under sub-section 
(7) as well as any report under clause (९) of section 5 along with amemorandum 
of action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendation(s) of the 
Commission and the reasons, if any, for non-acceptance of any of the 
recommendation(s) contained therein. 


(3) Where the report or any of its part thereof is relates to any matter with the 
which any State Government is concerned, the Commission shall forward a 
copy of such report or part thereof to the concerned State Government, who 
shall in turn, as soon as may be after its receipt, cause it to be laid before the 
each House of State Legislature concerned, where it consists of two Houses, or 
where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House, along with a 
such report along with an explanatory memorandum on the action taken or 
proposed to be taken on the recommendation(s) related to the State, if any, and 
reasons, if any, for not accepting any of the recommendation(s) made therein. 


(0) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a 
complaint made by a public authority or with prior sanction of the District 
Magistrate. 


(2) All offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable. 


No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Commission 
or any of its members or any other person for any action taken in good faith 
under this Act or any rule made thereunder. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any 
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have over riding effect on the 
provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. 


(0) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters 
for which provisions is necessary or expedient for the purposes of 
implementing the provisions of this Act. 


(3) Every rule or regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two 
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both 
Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or 
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule or regulation. 


(0) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or 
expedient for removing such difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament. 


Cognizance and 
investigation. 


Protection _ of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 


Power to make 
rules. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


360 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The purpose of this Bill is to strengthen India’s secular and plural ethos by 
ensuring that every religion receives equal protection from deliberate insult or 
desecration, while upholding freedom of expression and to provide for a legal 
framework that safeguards the dignity of every faith, promotes mutual respect, and 
prevents acts which incite communal hatred or disturbance of communal harmony. 
It seeks to create an institutional framework for inter-faith dialogue, education, and 


prevention of communal hatred. 
Hence, this Bill. 
MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 36 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National 
Commission for Inter-Faith Harmony consisting of a Chairperson and ten Members 
and their salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of their service. 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appointment of officers and staff of the 
Commission, their salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of their 
service. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the functions of the Commission inter- 
alia including the organization of awareness and educational programmes in 
schools, Universities, and through media for promoting mutual respect for different 
religions and peaceful co-existence. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for establishment 
of the National Inter-faith Harmony Fund for financing programmes promoting 
religious tolerance and peace. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the Central 
Government to provide adequate funds to the Commission for carrying out the 
purposes of this Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is 
difficult, at this juncture, to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved. 


362 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules and 
the Commission with the approval of the Central Government to make regulations 
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 8 of the Bill provides that the 
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, as may be 
necessary, for removing any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this Bill. 


As the rules or regulations or orders or directions will relate to matters of 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


363 


XLV 


Bill No. LI of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the segregation and re-cycling of municipal solid 
waste, use of re-cyclable waste in waste-energy plants for generation 
of energy and transportation of non-recyclable waste 
into landfills and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. 0) This Act may be called the Solid Waste Management Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Duty of waste 
generating unit 
and large 
manufacturing 
facility. 


Duty of the 
municipal 
authority. 


364 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


2. 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 


(b) "large manufacturing facility" means any manufacturing 
facility with an investment of more than rupees twenty crore; 


(c) "municipal authority" means Municipal Corporation, 
Municipal Committee, Municipality, Nagar Palika, Nagar Nigam, 
Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council including Notified Area 
Committee (NAC) or any other local body constituted under the 
relevant statutes and entrusted with the responsibility of 
management and handling of municipal solid wastes; 


(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 


(e) "segreagate" means separation of municipal solid wastes 
into organic, inorganic, bio-degradable, non-biodegradable, 
recyclable and non-recyclable waste and hazardous wastes; 


(9 “waste-energy plants" means plants where solid waste is 
treated using different techniques to produce any form of energy; 
and 


(g) "waste generating unit" means any entity, household or 
large manufacturing facility where waste is generated and which 
require waste disposal. 


(0) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every waste generating 
unit within its jurisdiction segregates waste before its disposal. 


(2) In case of large manufacturing facility, the owner or the in-charge of 
the facility shall, as the case may be— 


(a) ensure that the waste is segregated, re-used and re-cycled 
at source; and 


(b) undertake transportation of re-cyclable waste to waste- 
energy plants and the non-recyclable and non-biodegradable waste 
to the notified landfills, as the case may be. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the waste generating 
units are liable to pay for the waste generated by them that is sent to the 
landfills on the basis of the weight of the waste in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


It shall be duty of the municipal authority to— 


(a) collect the segregated waste from the waste generating 
units; 


(b) ensure that the segregated waste collected and transported 
is not mixed with any other waste or any material, to the extent that 
mixing would hamper its re-use, re-cycle, further treatment or its use 
in waste-energy plants; 


(c) undertake treatment of organic waste through bio- 
degradation such as vermin composting, mechanical composting, by 
window method or any other suitable method as approved by the 
Central Pollution Control Board or the State Pollution Control 
Board, as the case may be; and 


(d) transport the non-recyclable waste, non-biodegradable 
waste to the notified landfills. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


365 


Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months and with fine 
which may extend to rupees twenty thousand. 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State 
Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 
any other law, for the time being in force. 


(0) The Central Government in consultation with the State Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


Penalty. 


Central Government 
to provide funds. 


Act not in 


derogation of any 


other law. 
Power 
rules. 


to 


make 


366 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Solid waste management (SWM) is a major problem for many urban local 
bodies (ULBs) in India, where urbanization, industrialization, and economic 
growth have resulted in increased municipal solid waste (MSW) generation per 
person. Effective SWM is a major challenge in cities with high population 
density. Achieving sustainable development within a country experiencing 
rapid population growth and improvements in living standards is made more 
difficult in India because it is a diverse country with many different religious 
groups, cultures, and traditions. It is estimated that more than ten lakh tonnes of 
waste is generated in our country. The waste is largely composed of bio-waste, 
metals, plastics, paper, food, glass and presently majority of the waste is sent to 
the landfills with only a portion being used in waste-energy plants or recycled 
or reused. For this every Municipal Corporation should be provided with 
incinerators of different capacities depending upon the waste generated. This 
energy from waste can be used as an alternative to the depleting petroleum 
products and it would also keep the environment safe and clean. Waste is not a 
waste until it is wasted. 


The Bill seeks to ensure that waste from landfills is segregated and 
recycled, reused as input to waste-energy projects. Non-recyclable waste and 
hazardous waste can be dumped in the notified landfills. Proper handling and 
disposal of municipal waste could result in generating employment and serve as 
an opportunity for entrepreneurs in the waste-energy sector. In various countries 
there are laws for proper disposal of waste. 


Hence, this Bill. 


R. GIRIRAJAN. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


367 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate 
funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


This Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure 
of about rupees five hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also 
likely to be involved. 


368 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislation power is of a normal character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 369 


XLVI 


Bill No. XLIX of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, /956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 


India as follows:— 


l. (2) This Act may be called the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Amendment Short title and 
Act, 2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 
of section 2. 


Insertion of 
new section 
5A 


Punishment 
for 
trafficking in 
person. 


370 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


2. 


3. 


In the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, !956 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in section 2, after clause (7), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely,— 


"(ia) “trafficking in person” means the recruitment, 
transportation, transfer, harbouring or obtaining of person, by means 
of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, abduction, 
kidnapping, fraud, deception, abuse of power or of a position of 
vulnerability or of giving or receiving of payments or benefits to 
achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, 
for the purpose of exploitation. 


Explanation 76. expression "exploitation" includes, 
exploitation for prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation, 
forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, 
servitude or the removal of organs and the consent of a victim of 
trafficking in persons to the intended exploitation set forth in clause 
(ia) shall be irrelevant where any of the means mentioned in clause 
(ia) have been used. 


Explanation 2.—The expression 'trafficking in person’ includes 
recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or obtaining of a 
child for the purpose of exploitation even if it does not involve any of 
the means as mentioned in clause (ia)". 


In the principal Act, after section 5, the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


"5A. Any person who commits trafficking in person shall be 
punished with imprisonment for life.". 


04 of 956. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The menace of child trafficking in our country has been growing at an 
alarming pace. The common reasons for child trafficking range from economic 
deprivation, lack of employment opportunities, low social status (more common 
for girls), low education level and general awareness, disadvantageous socio- 
cultural norms, gender and minority discrimination etc. The prevalence of child 
trafficking is high in poverty stricken areas of the country. 


Traffickers force young girls into prostitution, and other men, women, and 
children are held in debt bondage and face forced labour working in brick kilns, 
rice mills, factories, homes as domestic servants, or as beggars or in hazardous 
occupations etc. The traffickers of young girls are often those women who 
themselves have been trafficked and who use their personal relationships and trust 
in people in their villages to recruit additional girls. 


A large number of children are abducted every year of which a sizeable 
number remain untraced according to a report by the National Human Rights 
Commission of India. The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) has 
estimated that the majority of children trafficked are engaged in hazardous 
occupations. 


Although the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 956 is in place to address 
the issue of human trafficking. The Act only refers to trafficking for prostitution, 
hence does not provide comprehensive protection for children. The Act also does 
not provide clear definition of "trafficking". Thus, there is an imperative need to 
define, trafficking and to enhance the punishment for the heinous offence to 
protect children and others against trafficking. 


Hence this Bill. 


KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU. 


372 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


XLVI 


Bill No. LXIII of 2025 


A Bill to create mass awareness among the people of all walks of life 
about breast cancer and the need to detect, diagnose and prevent 
breast cancer among females, to provide free screening including 
mammography for all women across the country, and 
provide advanced state-of-the-art treatment, free 
of cost for those diagnosed with breast cancer 
and for all matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (2) This Act may be called the Breast Cancer (Awareness, Early Detection Short title and 
and Diagnosis) Act, 2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Awareness 
programmes. 


Provision for 
free medical 
screening. 


Provision for 
free medical 
treatment. 


Constitution of 
National 
Executive 
Committee. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 373 


2. 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 


(b) "breast cancer" means a disease in which cells in the breast 
begin to grow out of control to form a lump; 


(c) "free medical treatment" includes supply of medicines, access 
to laboratory and laboratory tests, medical therapy and other medical 
procedures, as may be required, free of cost to breast cancer patients; 


(d) "prescribed" means as prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; and 


(e) "screening" means procedures for detection and diagnosis of 
breast cancer including mammography or x-ray of the breast or other 
tests as may be required. 


(7) The Central Government shall take such steps, as it may consider 
necessary, for the purpose of creating awareness amongst the general 
public about the symptoms, prevention, early detection, and treatment 
of breast cancer through the means of mass media including print, 
electronic, and social media and shall organise workshops, seminars, 
health camps, and such other awareness programmes throughout the 
country, as it may deem fit, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Central Government shall issue necessary directions to the State 
Governments, from time to time, for effectively implementing the steps 
under sub-section (/). 


The appropriate Government shall make arrangements, in such manner 
as may be prescribed, for providing free medical screening for all 
women in both urban and rural areas under their territorial 
jurisdiction, with the aid of local authorities to diagnose cases of breast 
cancer. 


The appropriate Government shall provide free medical treatment to 
every woman diagnosed with breast cancer in Government hospitals, or 
such other public health institutions, as may be identified and notified 
in such manner and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed. 


(7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a National Executive Committee for the purposes of 
coordination, oversight, and implementation of the provisions of this 
Act and for performing such other functions, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The National Executive Committee shall be headed by the Minister of 
Health and Family Welfare in the Government of India, who shall be the ex- 
officio Chairperson thereof. 


(3) The Committee shall consist of the following Members, to be 
nominated by the Central Government, in such number and manner as 
may be prescribed,— 


(a) representatives from amongst eminent oncologists, 
surgical oncologists, medical professionals, and researchers in the 
field of cancer diagnosis and treatment; and 


(b) representatives of reputed non-governmental 
organisations actively engaged in breast cancer awareness and 
patient support in the field. 


(4) The Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare shall be the ex-officio Member-Secretary of the National 
Executive Committee. 


374 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


(5) The National Executive Committee shall meet at least once in every six 
months at such time and place as may be decided by the Chairperson and 
shall submit an annual report to the Central Government on its activities 
during the previous calendar year along with the status of implementation of 
the provisions of this Act. 


(6) The Central Government shall cause the report referred to in sub-section 
(5) to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of 
Parliament. 


(7) The Central Government may appoint, such number of officers and 
other employees to the National Executive Committee, as it may 
consider necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this 
Act. 


(8) The term of office of, the salaries and allowances payable to, and 
other terms and conditions of service of, the Members of the National 
Executive Committee other than the Member-Secretary and the officers 
and other employees appointed under sub-section (7), shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law on this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to 
time, to the National Executive Committee for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act. 


(7) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a State Executive Committee in all States and Union 
territories, for the purposes of coordination, oversight, and 
implementation of the provisions of this Act in the State or Union 
territory concerned and for performing such other functions, as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) The State Executive Committee shall be headed by the Minister in- 
charge of the Ministry/Department of Health and Family Welfare in the 
appropriate Government, who shall be the ex-officio Chairperson thereof. 


(3) The State Executive Committee shall consist of the following members, 
to be nominated by the appropriate Government, in such number and 
manner as may be prescribed— 


(a) representatives from amongst eminent oncologists, 
surgical oncologists, radiologists, medical professionals, and 
researchers in the field of cancer diagnosis and treatment in the 
State or Union territory, as the case may be; and 


(b) representatives of reputed non-governmental organisations 
actively engaged in awareness, prevention, or treatment of breast 
cancer in the State or Union territory, as the case may be. 


(4) The Secretary in the Department of Health and Family Welfare in the 
appropriate Government, shall be the ex-officio Member-Secretary of the 
State Executive Committee. 


(5) The State Executive Committee shall meet at least once in every six 
months at such time and place as may be decided by the Chairperson and 
shall submit an annual report on its activities during the previous calendar 
year along with the status of implementation of the provisions of this Act to 
the appropriate Government and to the National Executive Committee. 


(6) The appropriate Government, shall cause the report referred to in sub- 
section (5), to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each 
House of Parliament or as the case may be before each House of the State or 
Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two Houses and before the 
Legislature of the State or the Union territory, where it consists of only one 
House. 


Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 


Constitution of 
State Executive 
Committees. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 375 


Sharing of 9, 
financial 
responsibilities. 


Act to have 0. 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to l. 
make rules. 


Power to 2. 
remove 
difficulties. 


(7) The appropriate Government may appoint, such number of officers 
and other employees to the State Executive Committee, as it may 
consider necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this 
Act. 


(8) The term of office of, the salaries and allowances payable to, and 
other terms and conditions of service of, the Members of the State 
Executive Committee other than the Member-Secretary and the officers 
and other employees appointed under sub-section (7), shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the appropriate Government. 


(7) The Central Government and the State Governments shall, have 
concurrent responsibility for providing funds for the effective 
implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and 
recurring expenditure for the implementation of the provisions of the 
Act. 


(3) The Central Government shall provide to the State Governments, as 
grants-in-aid of revenues, such percentage of expenditure referred to in 
sub-section (2) as it may determine, from time to time, in consultation 
with the State Governments. 


(4) The State Governments shall, after taking into consideration, the 
sums provided by the Central Government and its other resources, be 
responsible to provide funds for implementation of the provisions of this 
Act. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law in this regard for the time being in force or any 
other instrument having effect by virtue of any such law and in case of any 
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the 
provision of any such to the extent of such inconsistency. 


(3) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament while it is session for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid both Houses agree 
in making any modifications in the rule of both the Houses agree that the 
tules should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under the rule. 


(3) Every rule made by a State or Union territory Government with 
Legislature under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of the Legislature of that State or Union territory, as the 
case may be, where it consists of two Houses, or before the Legislature of 
the State or Union territory, where it consists of only one House. 


(J) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may 
appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


376 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer in women around the 
world, accounting for one quarter of all female cancers. Breast cancer deaths 
in the South-East Asia region are expected to increase to 64 per cent. by 
2040. Breast cancer among women in India has seen a rapid rise in the last 
decade and according to the Indian Council of Medical Research, 2.2 lakh 
new cases of breast cancer were reported in the year 2023 alone. With the 
incidence rising in the early thirties and twenties and peaking at ages fifty to 
sixty-five years, Breast cancer is the most common cancer in India, 
accounting for 29 per cent. of all female cancers, with an estimated 252,08 
cases by October 2025. It is estimated that 28 women in 00 are likely to 
develop breast cancer during her lifetime. 


Due to the lack of awareness among masses about breast cancer and 
Breast Self-Examination methods, it is usually diagnosed at an advanced 
stage, where the treatment becomes ineffective and very expensive. Recent 
trends also show that younger women in the country are also exposed to the 
risk of breast cancer. 


The Bill proposes that the Centre and State Governments should 
work together to provide free diagnosis and medical treatment to women 
affected by breast cancer and help combat this grave disease by creating 
mass awareness amongst the people about breast cancer and the need to 
detect it at an early stage. 


Hence, this Bill. 


KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 377 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 provides that the Central Government shall take all necessary 
steps for creating awareness about breast cancer amongst the general public 
through mass media and arrangement of workshops, seminars etc. Clauses 4 
and 5 provide for free medical screening for and treatment of breast cancer 
respectively for all women Clauses 6 and 8 provide for the constitution of 
National and State Executive Committees, including their composition, 
appointment of officers and employees thereto, payment of salaries and 
allowances to the Members other than the Member-Secretary and their other 
terms and conditions of service. Clause 7 provides that the Central 
Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, provide 
funds to the National Executive Committee for carrying out the provisions 
of the Bill. Clause 9 provides that the Central and State Governments shall 
have concurrent responsibility in providing funds for the effective 
implementation of the provisions of this Bill and that the Central 
Government shall provide as grants-in-aid of revenues to the State 
Governments, such percentage of expenditure as it may determine, from 
time to time, in consultation with the State Governments. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two 
thousand crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum. A 
non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crores is also likely to be 
involved. 


378 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause | of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause l2 of the Bill 
empowers the Central Government to make such provisions through an 
order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the 
provisions of the Bill. 


As the rules or orders will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 379 


XLVI 


Bill No. LIII of 2025 


A Bill to provide for mandatory population control 
and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (0) This Act may be called the Mandatory Population Control Act, 2025. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definition. 


Central 
Government to 
promote two 
child norm. 


Facilities in 
case of 
sterilization 
after two living 
children. 


Introduction of 
population 
control as a 
compulsory 
subject in 
educational 
institutions. 


Establishment 
of Health Care 
Centre for 
promoting 
population 
control 
awareness. 


Minimum 
marriageable 
age. 


Undertaking 
by 
Government 
employees. 


380 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State, and in other cases, the Central Government; 
and 

(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


It shall be the duty of the Central Government to encourage, promote and 
motivate all citizens of the country to adopt two child family norm, with a 
view to control the rising population in the country. 


If either the husband or the wife in the case of a married couple, who 
have only two living children on the date of commencement of this Act, 
voluntarily undergoes sterilization, the appropriate Government shall 
provide them with the following benefits, namely:— 


(6) free education including higher education to both 
children; 


(ii) suitable employment to one child after he completes his 
education; and 


(iii) such other benefits as may be prescribed. 


The appropriate Government shall introduce population control as a 
compulsory subject in all educational institutions for all children who 
have attained the age of fifteen years, irrespective of the class in which 
they are studying and the course they are pursuing, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(0) The appropriate Government shall, set up a Health Care Centre in 
every village of the country, with a view to create awareness about 
population control amongst the people and provide necessary 
assistance as required by the people in this regard: 


Provided that where a Health Care Centre is already set up and is 
functioning in a village, then such centre shall promote awareness about 
population control amongst and provide necessary assistance as required by 
the people in this regard. 


(2) The Health Care Centre established under sub-section (4) shall 
disseminate such information amongst, and provide such assistance to the 
masses, with regard to population control, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 


No marriage shall be solemnized between a male who is less than twenty- 
seven years of age and a female who is less than twenty-two years of age. 


(0) Any person who is serving in connection with the affairs of the Central 
Government or of the State Government or in any undertaking or 
organization under the control of the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, and,— 


(a) who has only one living child or who has not procreated any 
child or who is unmarried on the date of commencement of this Act, 
shall give an undertaking that he shall not procreate more than two 
living children; or 


(b) who has two living children on the date of coming into force 
of this Act, shall give an undertaking that he shall not procreate any 
child one year after the coming into force of this Act. 


(2) Any person violating the provisions of sub-section (4) shall be subject 
to such disciplinary action as per the applicable rules of the service or as 
may be determined by the appropriate Government. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 38] 


0. 


iI. 


Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 7 shall be punished 
with simple imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than five years 
and with fine which shall be not less than rupees twenty thousand. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


(7) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature 
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one 
House, before that House. 


Penalty. 


Overriding 
effect of the Act. 


Power to make 
rules. 


382 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

Rapid increase in population has given rise to many socio-economic 
problems like poverty, food and housing shortage, unemployment, environmental 
degradation, etc. India is the most populous country after China. If the present 
trend continues, it will not be possible for the country to tackle the growing socio- 
economic problems. It is, therefore, imperative that certain effective steps are taken 
to check the increasing growth of our population. Since resources are limited, 
proper upbringing of children is possible only if small family norm is adopted by 
all citizens of the country. Despite existence of various birth control measures and 
various family planning programme, the problem of overpopulation still remains. 


The Bill, therefore, seeks to promote voluntary sterilization among the 
married couples having two children and also provides for certain measures like 
fixing the minimum age for marriages, promoting small family norm, introduction 
of acompulsory subject on population control in the school curricula for promoting 
and inculcating small family norm in the future generation. 


Hence, this Bill. 


KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 383 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain benefits to be given by the Central 
or State Government, as the case may be, to married couples with two living 
children, who undergo sterilization voluntarily. Clause 5 provides for the 
introduction of population control as a compulsory subject in all educational 
institutions. Clause 6 provides for the setting up of a Health Care Centre in every 
village of the country to provide assistance and information regarding population 
control. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve an annual recurring 
expenditure of about rupees Five Hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. A non-recurring expenditure of rupees Five hundred crore is also likely to 
be involved. 


364 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause of the Bill empowers the Central and the State Government, 
as the case may be, to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As 
the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power 
is of a normal character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 385 


XLix 


Bill No. XLVIII of 2025 


A Bill to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. 08) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (Amendment) Act, Short title and 


2025 commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


386 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Insertion of new 2. After Section 72 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the following new 
26 07008 40% section shall be inserted, namely:— 

Prohibition of “724. (l) Whoever insults, ridicules, blames, shames or 
victim shaming. intimidates a woman or child against whom a sexual offence has been 


committed, as defined under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the 
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 202, or any other 
law for the time being in force, and makes, publishes, circulates, or 
transmits any statement, whether written, oral, or visual in any place 
within public view including digital or electronic platforms, which is 
intended to, or is likely to, lower the reputation of such victim or 
discredit them, shall be liable to punishment as provided under sub- 
section (3). 


(2) Whoever makes, publishes, circulates, or transmits any 
statement, whether written, oral, or visual in any place including 
digital or electronic platforms, with or without reference to any 
specific incident or individual, attributes the commission of sexual 
offences to the behaviour, clothing, manner of speech, lifestyle, or 
conduct of women or children in a manner that promotes, justifies, 
trivialises, or normalises such offences, shall be liable to punishment 
as provided under sub-section (3). 


(3) Whoever commits an offence under sub-sections () or (2) 
shall be punished— 


(a) on first conviction, with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, and with 
fine which may extend to two lakh rupees; and 


(b) on second or subsequent conviction, with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to five years, and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees. 


(4) Where the offence under sub-sections () or (2) is committed 
by a public servant or public figure, such person shall be punished— 


(a) on first conviction, with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, and with 
fine, which may extend to five lakh rupees; and 


(b) on second or _ subsequent conviction, with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to seven years, and with fine which may extend to fifteen lakh 
rupees. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, “public 
figure” means any person who, by virtue of his profession, public role, 
or media visibility, commands significant public attention or influence 
in matters of public interest. 


(5) Any intermediary, publisher, or broadcaster, including but 
not limited to a social media platform, messaging service, digital 
news website, over-the-top content provider, television channel, or 
print publication, shall be liable for the publication, dissemination, or 
continued availability of any content in violation of the provisions of 
this section in the following circumstances: — 


(a) where such intermediary, publisher, or broadcaster, 
having actual knowledge of any content in violation of the 
provisions of this section, fails to remove or disable access to 
such content within twenty-four hours of obtaining such actual 
knowledge, shall be punished with fine which may extend to ten 
lakh rupees; 


45 of 2023. 


45 of 2023. 
32 of 202. 


2 of 2000. 


7 of 995. 


37 of 978. 


37 of 952. 


25 of 990. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 387 


(b) where such intermediary, publisher, or broadcaster, 
despite prior complaint, notice, lawful orders, or takedown 
directions issued in accordance with law, repeatedly permits the 
publication, dissemination, or continued availability of content 
prohibited under this section, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
fine which may extend to twenty lakh rupees, or with both; and 


(c) The liability under this sub-section shall apply 
notwithstanding any protections or exemptions available 
under— 


(i) section 79 of the Information Technology Act, 
2000 and the rules made thereunder; 


(ii) the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 
995; 


(iii) the Press Council Act, 978; 
(iv) the Cinematograph Act, 952; 


(v) the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of 
India) Act, 990; or 


(vi) any other law for the time being in force. 
Explanation .— For the purposes of this sub-section,— 


(i) intermediary or publisher or broadcaster 
includes any entity as defined under clause (w) of sub- 
section [/) of Section 2 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000, and includes entities 
regulated under the Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Act, 995; the Press Council Act, 978; 
the Cinematograph Act, 952; the Prasar Bharati 
(Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 990; 
and the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 
202I. 


(ii) “actual knowledge” shall mean knowledge 
obtained through a direction from a court of 
competent jurisdiction, a lawful order issued by the 
appropriate Government or its authorised agency, or 
a written complaint from the victim or their 
authorised representative. 


(6) The provisions of this section shall be in addition to, and not 
in derogation of, the provisions of section 72 of this Sanhita. 


368 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The proposed amendment seeks to insert a new section 72A in the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, to explicitly criminalise the shaming, blaming, or public 
targeting of victims of sexual offences. It introduces graded punishments for 
individuals and enhanced penalties for public figures or public servants misusing 
their positions. It further ensures accountability of intermediaries and media 
platforms in promptly removing harmful content, thereby reinforcing a survivor- 
centric approach within the legal framework. 


This legislative intervention is intended to create a safer and more dignified 
ecosystem for survivors, deter acts that contribute to their re-victimisation, and 
strengthen India's commitment to justice, gender sensitivity, and human rights. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SWATI MALIWAL. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 389 


Bill No. L of 2025 


A Bill to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
. (J) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Short title and 
Senior Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment 
of section 24. 


Exposure and 
abandonment 
of senior 
citizen. 


Insertion of 
new _ sections 
24A to 24D. 


Administrative 
penalty 
through 
Maintenance 
Tribunal. 


Complaint 
mechanism 
and redress. 


Penalties for 
non- 
compliance. 


390 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


For section 24 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens Act, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following 
shall be substituted, namely:— 


“24. Whoever, having the care or protection of a senior citizen, 
intentionally abandons such senior citizen, thereby failing to provide 
necessary care, safety, and basic needs, shall be deemed to have 
committed the offence of abandonment, and shall be punishable with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees, or with 
both.” 


After section 24 of the principal Act, the following new sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“24A. (7) In addition to the criminal penalties provided under 
section 24, the Tribunal shall have the authority to impose financial 
maintenance obligation as an administrative remedy. 


(2) Where the person liable for maintenance has any regular 
source of income, whether from salaried employment, business, 
professional practice, consultancy, pension, rental income, or any other 
means, the Tribunal may, either upon receipt of a complaint from the 
senior citizen or their authorised representative, or on its own motion 
direct such person or their employer, or any person responsible for 
disbursing such income, through a written order issued in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed, to deduct up to twenty per cent. of 
the monthly gross income and deposit the same directly into the bank 
account(s) of the senior citizen(s) as interim or permanent maintenance. 


(3) In cases, where both parents are alive and are eligible to 
receive maintenance, the Tribunal shall ensure that the amount 
deducted is equally divided and transferred into the individual bank 
accounts of each parent, unless the Tribunal directs otherwise based on 
specific needs or circumstances. 


(4) The deduction and direct transfer shall continue until the 
Tribunal modifies, cancels, or varies the order based on changed 
circumstances. 


24B. (J) Any senior citizen, family member, neighbour, social 
worker, or Non-governmental Organisation may file a complaint of 
abandonment before the Tribunal, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) The Tribunal shall ensure that a hearing is conducted within a 
period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the complaint and the 
final decision is issued within ninety days thereof. 


(3) An appeal against any order passed under section 24 or 24A 
may be filed before an Appellate Tribunal designated by the State 
Government, and such appeal shall be disposed of within sixty days 
from the date of filing of such appeal. 


24C. Where the salary, pension, business income, or any other 
regular income deduction order issued under section 24A is not 
implemented within thirty days from the date of its issuance — 


(a) in the case of salaried employment or pension, the 
employer or pension disbursing authority, as the case may be, 
shall be liable to a penalty of one thousand rupees for each day of 
default; and 


(b) in the case of self-employment, business income, 
professional income, or any other income controlled directly by 
the person liable, such person shall be liable to pay a penalty of 
one thousand rupees for each day of default. 


56 of 2007. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39] 


24D. All complaints involving senior citizens who have attained 
the age of seventy-five years or above shall be disposed of on a 
priority basis within a period of forty-five days from the date of 
receipt of such complaint." 


Special 
protection for 
persons above 


seventy-five years 
of age. 


392 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007, was 
enacted to provide effective provisions for the maintenance and welfare of parents 


and senior citizens. However, incidents of abandonment continue to rise, 
necessitating stronger deterrents and a more robust enforcement mechanism. 


This Bill seeks to strengthen the punishment for abandonment and empower 
the Maintenance Tribunal to order direct financial maintenance through income 
deductions. It also establishes a clear complaint mechanism, an appellate process, 
penalties for non-compliance, and special provisions for senior citizens above 
seventy-five years of age. 


The proposed amendments aim to reinforce the dignity, security, and well- 
being of senior citizens by providing accessible remedies and strict accountability 
for those charged with their care. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SWATI MALIWAL. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 393 


LI 


Bill No. LVITI of 2025 


A Bill to provide for compulsory sports education from primary to senior 
secondary level and provision of requisite basic infrastructure 
for sports in all government and private schools in the 
country and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


Short title and 
commencement. 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Compulsory Sports Education and Basic 
Infrastructure Development for Sports in Schools Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


National Policy 
on Sports 
Education and 
Infrastructure 
Development. 


Implementation 
of the National 
Policy by the 
appropriate 
Government. 


394 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


2. 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: — 


(a) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) "basic infrastructure" means requisite resources such as 
playground, sports articles, sports instructor and environment required 
for sports in schools; 


(c) “Fund” means the National Sports Education and 
Infrastructure Development Fund constituted under section 5; 


(d) “National Policy” means the National Policy on Sports 
Education and Infrastructure Development to be formulated under 
section 3; 


(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 


(f) “school" means any Government, Government-aided or 
private school, which imparts education from primary to senior 
secondary level. 


(J) The Central Government shall as soon as may be, after the date of 
commencement of this Act, formulate a National Policy on Sports Education 
and Infrastructure Development for providing sports education and ensuring 
basic infrastructure development for sports in all schools in the country. 


(2) The National Policy referred to in sub-section (/) shall include the 
following provisions:— 


(i) promotion and awareness of sports and sports education 
amongst students; 


(ii) free and compulsory sports education for all students from 
primary to senior secondary level in all schools across the country; 


(iii) ensuring the availability of trained sports instructors in every 
school; 


(iv) adequate financial assistance for basic sports infrastructure in 
all schools; 


(v) utilization of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) for basic sports infrastructure 
development in the schools in rural areas; 


(vi) preparation of an age-appropriate syllabus for sports education 
in all schools under expert guidance; 


(vii) in corporation of sports as a compulsory subject in all schools; 


(viii) instituting sports scholarships/stipend to students with 
meritorious performance in sports; 


(ix) providing academic weightage for achievements in sports for 
admissions to institutions of national importance; and 


(x) reservation or preference to outstanding sports persons in 
recruitment to posts under the Central and State Government services. 


(I) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the 
National Policy to be formulated under section 3 in all schools under its 
territorial jurisdiction. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall periodically review the progress 
and quality of sports education being imparted in schools, at such 
intervals and in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 395 


(7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the National Sports 
Education and Infrastructure Development Fund for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Central and the State Governments shall, by due appropriation 
made by the Parliament and the State Legislature respectively, by law 
in this behalf, contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The Fund shall be utilized exclusively for the purposes of 
implementation of the provisions of this Act in alignment with the 
principles outlined in the National Policy formulated under section 3. 


(4) The Fund shall be administered by such authority of the appropriate 
Government as may be prescribed. 


If any school fails to comply with the provisions of this Act, the appropriate 
Government may take such action, including withdrawal of recognition of 
the school, in such manner, as may be prescribed: 


Provided that no recognition shall be so withdrawn without giving an 
opportunity of being heard to such school, in such manner, as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before the Legislature of that State, where it 
consists of one House, or where it consists of two Houses, before both 
Houses of the Legislature. 


Constitution of 
a National 
Sports 
Education and 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Fund. 


Effect of non- 
compliance. 


Power to make 
tules. 


396 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India has one of the largest youth populations in the world. As this segment 
grows, ensuring their holistic development is imperative for the nation’s future. 
Sports have long been part of India’s ancient culture, offering physical fitness, 
discipline, and community building. Despite India’s immense potential in sports, 
lack of structured training and infrastructure at the school level has hindered the 
emergence of world-class talent. 


This Bill aims to introduce compulsory sports education, along with basic 
infrastructure, in all Government and private schools across India. By identifying 
and nurturing talent early, India can become a global sports powerhouse, while 
promoting physical fitness and healthy lifestyle among students. The integration 
of sports into mainstream education also helps in character building and reducing 
social disruptions. 


Hence, this Bill. 


DHANANJAY BHIMRAO MAHADIK. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 397 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides that it shall be duty of the appropriate 
Government to implement the National Policy on Sports Education and 
Infrastructure Development in all schools under its territorial jurisdiction and also 
to periodically review the progress and quality of sports education in all schools. 
Clause 5 provides for the constitution of a National Sports Education and 
Infrastructure Development Fund and that the appropriate Government shall 
contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of fifteen 
thousand crore rupees will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India per 
annum. 


A non-recurring expenditure of one hundred crore rupees is also likely to be 
involved. 


398 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central and State Governments, as the 
case may be, to make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. 


As the rules relate to matters of procedural and administrative details only, 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 399 


LIT 


Bill No. LXI of 2025 


A Bill to provide for a mechanism to maintain, preserve and 
protect identified and unidentified ancient, historical or 
archaeological sites, remains, monuments, 
modules and carvings in the country 
and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 


l.—_ (4) This Act may be called the Historical Heritage Conservation Act, 2025. Short title and 
commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Setting up of a 
mechanism 
for heritage 
conservation. 


400 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


2. 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, 
the Government of that State, and in other cases, the Central 
Government; 


(b) “Authority” means the Heritage Conservation 
Regulatory Authority to be constituted under clause (c) of sub- 
section (2) of section 3; 


(c) “historical or archaeological site” means areas having 
or believed to have ruins or remains of historical or archaeological 
importance for more than one hundred years, including locations 
related to Indian civilization or the freedom movement; 


(d) “historical heritage” includes any historical site, 
archaeological remain, antiquity, or monument of national or 
cultural significance; 


(e) “non-governmental organisation” means any institution 
engaged in the conservation of historical heritage for at least three 
years with a demonstrable track record; and 


(9 “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 


(0) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish a mechanism for the conservation of historical 
heritage across all States of the country. 


(2) The mechanism established under sub-section (/) shall include the 
following, namely: 


(a) entrusting conservation work, to eligible non- 
governmental organisations, of historical or archaeological sites 
declared to be of national or local importance by the appropriate 
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) defining the eligibility criteria for selection of non- 
governmental organisations for the purpose under clause (a); 


(c) constitution of a Heritage Conservation Regulatory 
Authority, with such composition, functions and subject to 
such procedural regulations, as may be prescribed, to 
monitor, approve, and report on the activities of the selected 
non-governmental organisations; 


(4) provision of financial assistance to the selected non- 
governmental organisations on the recommendation of the 
Authority constituted under clause (c); 


(e) mandating the selected non-governmental 
organisations to undertake public awareness campaigns on 
heritage conservation; 


(f) provision for appropriate legal action against selected 
non-governmental organisations in case of any malpractice or 
violation of the provisions of the Act; 


(g) designating the Union Ministry of Culture as the nodal 
agency for implementation of the mechanism established under 
sub-section (l) and oversight on the functioning of the Authority 
constituted under clause (c); 


(h) empowering the selected non-governmental 
organisations to collect nominal entry fees to historical or 


24 of 958. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 40! 


archaeological sites, with prior approval of the Authority 
constituted under clause (c); and 

(i) authorizing selected non-governmental organisations 
with the responsibility of excavation, maintenance, and 
protection of local-level historical or archaeological sites, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(0) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure 
effective and timely implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall regularly review and monitor the 
functioning of non-governmental organisations working in the historical 
heritage conservation sector as provided under this Act, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State 
Governments and the Authority for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 
the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains Act, 958 or the rules made thereunder or any other law in this 
regard for the time being in force and in case of any inconsistency, the 
provisions of this Act shall have over riding effect on the provisions of any 
such law to the extent of such inconsistency. 


If any non-governmental organisation entrusted under this Act is found to 
have violated the objectives of this Act or misused funds or acted in a 
manner detrimental to heritage conservation as provided under this Act, 
the appropriate Government may _ in addition to taking appropriate legal 
action as provided under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 3, 
withdraw the work permission entrusted under clause (a) of sub-section 
(2) of section 3: 


Provided that no such work permission shall be withdrawn 
without giving the concerned non-governmental organisation a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(0) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature, where it 
consists of two Houses or where such Legislature consists of only one 
House, before that House. 


Implementation 
by the appropriate 
Government. 


Central 
Government to 
provide adequate 
funds. 


Act not in 
derogation of any 
other laws. 


Action against 
non- 
governmental 
organisations. 


Power to make 
rules. 


402 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India’s rich and ancient heritage is a global symbol of civilization, culture, and 
freedom. However, several historical sites, monuments, and ruins remain unidentified, 
unprotected, or poorly maintained. Unplanned urbanization, neglect, and lack of local 
participation threaten this legacy. Therefore, there is a compelling need for a formal 
mechanism that involves public institutions and credible non-governmental organisations 
(NGOs) in the conservation effort. 


This Bill aims to: 


e Identify and preserve both well-known and lesser- explored heritage sites; 

e Empower experienced non-governmental organisations to participate in 
preservation efforts; 

e Ensure adequate financial and administrative support for these efforts; 

e@ Create awareness and local ownership for heritage protection. 


Hence, this Bill. 


DHANANJAY BHIMRAO MAHADIK. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 403 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to establish a mechanism for 
conservation of historical heritage across all States of the country including inter alia therein 
to constitute a national-level Heritage Conservation Regulatory Authority to monitor, approve 
and report on the activities of non-governmental organisations entrusted with the work of 
conserving historical or heritage sites of national or local importance, provision of financial 
assistance to such non-governmental organisations and mandating them to undertake public 
awareness campaigns on heritage conservation. Clause 4 mandates that it shall be the duty of 
the appropriate Government to ensure effective and timely implementation of the provisions of 
this Bill. Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the 
State Governments and the Authority for carrying out the provisions of this Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve recurring expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India, which is estimated at one thousand crore rupees per annum. No 
major non-recurring expenditure is anticipated. 


404 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions 
of the Act. As these rules pertain to procedural and administrative detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a routine and normal character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 405 


LI 


Bill No. LIX of 2025 


A Bill to provide for housing facilities to destitute senior citizens, widows 
and orphans and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 


. (J) This Act may be called the Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and Short title and 
Orphans (Housing Facility) Act, 2025. Onno en 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions. 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State, and in other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) “Centre” means the Residential Centre for destitute senior 
citizens, widows, and orphans to be established by the appropriate 
Government under section 4; 


National Policy 
on housing for 
destitute senior 
citizens, 


widows and 
orphans. 
Establishment 


of Residential 
Centres. 


Facilities at the 
Centres. 


Constitution of 
Managing 
Committee. 


406 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


3. 


5. 


6. 


(c) “destitute senior citizen” means any person, whether male or 
female, who has attained the age of sixty years and has no shelter or no 
family to provide such shelter and has no financial support; 


(d) “Fund” means the Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and 
Orphans Welfare Fund constituted under section 8; 


(e) “National Policy” means the National Policy for the provision 
of housing facilities to destitute senior citizens, widows and orphans 
under section 3; 


(6) “orphan” means a child below fourteen years of age who has 
no living or caring parent, legal guardian, or capable relatives; 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 


(h) “widow” means a woman who has not remarried after the 
death of her husband and who has no shelter or financial and familial 
support. 


The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after commencement of 
this Act, formulate and notify, in the Official Gazette, a National Policy for 
the provision of housing facilities to destitute senior citizens, widows and 
orphans. 


(07) The appropriate Government shall establish Residential Centres 
all over the country for destitute senior citizens, widows, and orphans, 
free of cost, in accordance with the provisions in the National Policy. 


(2) Every Centre established under sub-section (४) shall house not fewer 
than eighty and not more than two hundred destitute persons, at a time. 


(3) Every unit within each Centre shall, as far as possible, accommodate two 
orphans, one widow, and one senior citizen, fostering a familial and 
intergenerational living environment. 


The appropriate Government shall ensure that each Centre, — 


(a) provides shelter, food, water, medical care, security and 
other essential amenities to the residents; 


(b) utilizes existing Government welfare schemes for 
providing education, health, and nutrition to the residents; 


(c) ensures easy accessibility for eligible individuals; 


(d) promotes interpersonal bonding and shared care giving 
among residents; and 


(e) develops income-generating domestic production units for 
residents' empowerment. 


(72) The appropriate Government shall constitute, in such manner as 
may be prescribed, a Managing Committee to monitor and coordinate 
each Centre, comprising: — 


(i) the Chairperson of the local body, ex-officio Chairperson; 


(ii) an officer in the appropriate Government of such rank as 
may be prescribed, ex-officio Member; 


(iii) a senior-most senior citizen of the Centre, Member; 
(iv) an oldest widow of the Centre, Member; and 


(9 an eminent social worker to be nominated by the 
appropriate Government, Member. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 407 


0. 


(2) The term of office and other service conditions of the 
Chairperson and Members of the Managing Committee, 
remuneration of the Member nominated under clause (v) of sub- 
section (7) and the procedure to be followed by the Managing 
Committee in the discharge of its functions shall be such as may 
be prescribed. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of 
staff to each Centre, in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service as well as salaries and allowances, as may be 
prescribed from time to time. 


(J) The appropriate Government shall be responsible for the 
implementation of the National Policy. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall, at such periodic intervals as 
may be prescribed, review and monitor the functioning and quality of 
services at each Centre. 


(7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Destitute Senior Citizens, 
Widows and Orphans Welfare Fund, for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 


(2) The Central and State Governments shall, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament and the State Legislature, as the case may be, by 
law in this behalf, contribute to the Fund in such ratio, as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The Fund shall be used for the purposes of maintenance, development, 
and expansion of the Centres and for such other purposes as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) The Fund shall be administered by such authority of the appropriate 
Government as may be prescribed. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, 
any other law in force relating to the welfare of senior citizens, widows, or 
orphans. 


(29 The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before the Legislature of that State, where it 
consists of one House, or where it consists of two Houses, before both 
Houses of the Legislature. 


Implementation 
and monitoring. 


Constitution of 
the Destitute 
Senior Citizens, 
Widows and 
Orphans Welfare 
Fund. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
other laws. 


Power to make 
tules. 


408 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India is witnessing a growing number of destitute senior citizens, widows, 
and orphaned children who are deprived of shelter, care, and protection. While old- 
age homes, widow shelters, and orphanages exist, they often operate in isolation 
and face infrastructure or care deficiencies. 


This Bill proposes an integrated solution by bringing these vulnerable groups 
under one roof, encouraging a nurturing family-like environment. Senior citizens 
can provide guidance, widows can offer maternal care, and orphaned children can 
benefit from their wisdom and support. 


This interdependent model not only improves emotional well-being but also 
empowers residents through shared responsibilities and domestic livelihood 
activities. 

Hence, this Bill. 

DHANANJAY BHIMRAO MAHADIK. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 409 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Residential Centres for 
destitute senior citizens, widows, and orphan children by the appropriate 
Government. Clause 5 relates to the provision of facilities at such Centres, as 
enumerated therein. Clause 6 provides for the constitution of a Managing 
Committee and appointment of the Chairperson and Members thereof as well as the 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members including 
remuneration to one Member thereof. The Clause also provides for appointment of 
staff to the Centres and the terms and conditions of their service as well as the 
salaries and allowances payable to them. Clause 8 provides for the constitution of 
the Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and Orphans Welfare Fund and that the 
Central and State Government shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be 
prescribed. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause l0 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 


As the rules will relate to matters of procedural and administrative detail only, 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4il 


LIV 


Bill No. XCIV of 2024 


A Bill to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Welfare of 
Sugarcane Farmers and Workers and for matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


l. (4) This Act may be called the National Commission for Welfare of Short title and 
Sugarcane Farmers and Workers Act, 2024. ERC Cen 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Constitution of 
the National 
Commission for 
Welfare of 
Sugarcane 
Farmers. 


4i2 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


2. 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:— 


(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 


(b) 'Commission' means the National Commission for Welfare of 
Sugarcane Farmers and Workers constituted under section 3; 


(c) 'Fund' means the Sugarcane Farmers and Workers Welfare Fund 
constituted under section 4; 


(d) 'member' means a Member of the Commission and includes the 
Member-Secretary; 


(e) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(9 ‘sugarcane farmer' means a farmer engaged in cultivation of 
sugarcane and has no income from any source other than cultivation of 
sugarcane; and 


(9) ‘sugarcane workers' means a skilled or non-skilled person engaged 
in sugarcane cultivation. 


CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WELFARE OF SUGARCANE FARMERS AND 
WORKERS 


(0) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Commission to be known as the National 
Commission for Welfare of Sugarcane Farmers and Workers to 
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned 
to it, under this Act. 


(2) The Commission shall consist of the following, to be nominated by 
the Central Government, in such manner as may be prescribed— 


(a) a Chairperson, committed to the cause of sugarcane farmers 
and protection of their livelihood and welfare; 


(b) five members, from amongst persons of ability, integrity and 
standing, who had experience in sugarcane farming, understanding 
the plight of sugarcane farmers, sugar pricing and international 
issues, social justice, law or legislation and are committed to the 
welfare of sugarcane farmers; 


(c) Vice-Chancellors of all Agricultural Universities, as members 
ex-officio; 


(d) a Member-Secretary, who shall be — 


(6) an expert in the field of management, organizational 
structure on sugarcane issues, or 


(ii) an officer who is a member of a civil service of the Union or 
of an All-India Service or holds a civil post under the Union 
Government with appropriate experience, as may _ be 
prescribed, or 


(iii) an expert who has done research on agriculture especially 
on sugarcane and holding a post equal/equivalent to the post of 
Professor in a college or a university. 


(3) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or 
be sued. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


(4) The head office of the Commission shall be at such place in New 
Delhi, as may be notified by the Central Government. 


(5) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central 
Government, establish offices at other places in the country, as it may 
deem necessary, for the efficient discharge of its functions as assigned 
under this Act. 


(0) The Chairperson and every member, except ex-officio members, shall 
hold office for such period, not exceeding three years, as may be specified 
by the Central Government in this behalf. 


(2) The Chairperson or a member (other than the Member-Secretary who is 
a member of a Civil Service of the Union or of an All-India Service or holds 
a Civil post under the Union Government) may, at any time, by writing 
under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign from the Office 
of Chairperson or, as the case may be, of the member and on such 
resignation being accepted, such person shall be deemed to have vacated his 
office. 

(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of the 
Chairperson or a member, as the case may be, if that person— 


(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent; 


(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which 
in the opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude; 


(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent 
court; 


(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; 


(e) without taking leave from the Commission, absent himself from 
three consecutive meetings of the Commission; and 


(f) in the opinion of the Central Government, has abused his position of 
Chairperson or a member so as to render his continuance in office 
detrimental to public interest: 


Provided that no person shall be removed under this sub-section unless 
he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 


(4) A vacancy caused under sub-sections (2) and (3), shall be filled within 
one month from the date of occurrence of the said vacancy. 


(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson and members shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 


(0) The Central Government shall provide such number of suitable 
officers and employees to the Commission, as may be required, for its 
efficient performance under this Act. 


(2) The method of recruitment, the qualifications and experience, 
salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of 
service of officers and employees shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(0) The Commission may, for efficient discharge of its functions, constitute 
such number of Committees, as may be necessary, for dealing with or 
studying issues that may be taken up by the Commission from time to time. 


(2) The Commission may appoint such members, as it may deem fit, on 
Committees constituted under sub-section (): 


Provided that the members of the Committee who are not members of 
the Commission shall not have the right to vote on matters of the 
Commission. 


Term of office, 
conditions of 
service, 
resignation and 
removal of the 
Chairperson and 
members. 


Officers and 
employees of the 
Commission. 


Committees of 
the Commission. 


Procedure to be 
regulated by the 
Commission. 


Vacancies etc. 
not to invalidate 
the proceedings 
of the 
Commission. 


Chairperson, 
members, 
officers and 
employees to be 
public servants. 


Salaries and 
allowances to be 
paid out of 
grants. 


Functions of the 
Commission. 


44 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


0. 


il. 


(3) The allowances payable to the members appointed to the 
Committees shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(0) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure 
with regard to transaction of its business in order to exercise the powers 
conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act. 


(2) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary and at such times 
and places as the Chairperson may deem fit for the efficient discharge of the 
functions assigned to it under this Act. 


(3) All orders and decision of the Commission shall be authenticated by the 
Member-Secretary. 


No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid or be questioned 
merely on the ground of existence of any vacancy in or any defect in the 
constitution of the Commission or any defect in the nomination of a person 
as Chairperson or member of the Commission or any irregularity in the 
procedure of the Commission not affecting the merits of the case. 


The Chairperson, the members, officers and employees and members of the 
Committees of the Commission shall be deemed, when acting or purporting 
to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants 
within the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023. 


The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and members 
and the administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and 
pensions payable to the officers and employees, referred to in section 5 
and allowances payable to the members appointed to the Committees of 
the Commission, referred to in section 6, shall be paid out of the grants 
referred to in sub-section (7) of section 6. 


CHAPTER III 
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 


The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely— 


(a) undertake annual income surveys of sugarcane farmers and 
sugarcane workers across various categories, including different 
crops and landholding sizes; 


(b) make policy suggestions to ensure that minimum income accrues to 
sugarcane farmers and workers across various categories; 


(c) design periodically an income security framework for various 
categories of farmers, inter alia including market interventions, 
compensation, subsidies, reduction in cost of production, 
mechanization, capacity building, credit enhancement, strengthening 
supply chains or any other tool that the Commission deems fit; 


(d) review, from time to time, various schemes of the appropriate 
Government pertaining to agriculture and income of sugarcane 
farmers; 


(e) make recommendations to the appropriate Government for effective 
implementation of policies and schemes ensuring that the minimum 
income accrues to sugarcane farmers and workers; 


(f) formulate a scheme for payment of old age pension at the rate 
of at least five thousand rupees per month to every sugarcane 
farmer and worker, who have attained the age of sixty years and is 
unable to perform his job on account of infirmity and incapacity; 


45 of 2023. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


2. 


(g) call for special studies and investigations into problems arising 
out of agrarian distress, and make timely recommendations to the 
appropriate Government for appropriate action; 


(h) undertake promotional and educational research to ensure 
minimum incomes for farming households, enhancement of income 
of farmers and productivity in agriculture; 


(i) take suo moto notice of matters relating to— 


(i) sugarcane farmers' distress particularly sugarcane farmers' 
suicides across the country; 


(ii) non-implementation or poor implementation of policies or 
schemes of farmers; and 


(iii) non-compliance of policy decisions, guidelines and 
instructions taken for farmers. 


() evaluate the status of livelihood of sugarcane farmers across 
various regions in the country; 


(k) make periodic reports to the Central Government on any matters 
pertaining to sugarcane farmers and workers; 


(0) ensure payment to sugarcane farmers within a week after delivery 
of sugarcane to sugar mills; 


(m) ensure payment of interest at the rate of fifteen per cent. for the 
delay in payment by sugar mills; 


(n) impart training on modern and mechanised agricultural 
practices, use of fertilizers, crop management and other issues 
related to sugarcane farmers and workers; 


(०) ensure subsidized loan for fertilizers, seeds, pesticides, 
equipments, labour and transportation cost to the sugarcane farmers; 


(p) ensure compensation to sugarcane farmers in case of loss of crops 
on non-acceptance of sugarcanes by sugar mills; 


(4) receive grievances or complaints from sugarcane farmers and 
workers or their representatives regarding deprivation of their rights, 
exploitation or violation of any of the provisions of this Act and 
investigate into complaints so received from them; and 


(r) take up any other matter related to sugarcane cultivation, farmers 
and their welfare, that may be referred to it by appropriate 
Government. 


The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in clause 
(q of section , have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and, in 
particular in respect of the following matters, namely, — 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any 
part of India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or 
office; 


(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses and 
documents; and 


(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 


Commission to 
have powers of a 
Civil Court. 


Appropriate 
Government to 
consult the 
Commission. 


Constitution of 
Sugarcane 
Farmers and 
Workers Welfare 
Fund. 


Facilities to the 
sugarcane farmers 
and workers. 


Grants by Central 
Government. 


Accounts and 
Audit. 


46 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


3. 


4. 


5. 


6. 


7. 


The appropriate Government shall consult the Commission on all major 
policy matters affecting the interests of sugarcane farmers and workers. 


(0) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Sugarcane Farmers and 
Workers Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Central and State Governments shall from time to time, after 
due appropriation made in this behalf by the Parliament or the 
respective State Legislature by law, contribute such sums of money to 
the Fund in such proportion, as may be provided. 


(3) The Fund shall be administered by the Commission in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER IV 
FACILITIES TO THE SUGARCANE FARMERS AND WORKERS 


The appropriate Government shall provide the following facilities, in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed, to the sugarcane farmers 
and workers, namely— 


(6) implement the Scheme formulated by the Commission for 
payment of old age pension to every sugarcane farmer and worker, 
who have attained the age of sixty years and is unable to perform 
his job on account of infirmity and incapacity; 


(ii) subsidized healthcare facilities to the sugarcane farmers and 
workers and dependent family members at Government and other 
designated hospitals; 


(iii) subsidized education facilities including supply of books, 
uniform, writing materials, transportation and hostel facilities for 
the children of sugarcane farmers and workers; 


(iv) free insurance cover to sugarcane farmers and workers; and 
(v) subsidized housing loan to sugarcane farmers and workers. 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 


(0) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide to the Commission by way of 
grants such sums of money, as the Central Government may think fit, 
for being utilized for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Commission may spend such sums, as it thinks fit, for 
performing the functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated 
as expenditure payable out of grants under sub-section (). 


(0) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form, as may 
be prescribed by Central Government in consultation with Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 


(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by Comptroller 
and Auditor- General of India at such intervals as may be specified by 
him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall 
be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India. 


(3) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor- General along with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government by the Commission. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4I7 


8. 


9. 


20. 


2i. 


22. 


The Commission shall prepare once every year, in such form and within 
such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full 
account of its activities during the previous year, and copies thereof shall be 
forwarded to the Central Government. 


(0) The Central Government shall cause the annual report and the audited 
annual accounts of the Commission along with भा explanatory 
memorandum on the action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendations contained therein and the reasons for non-acceptance, if 
any, of any of such recommendations to be laid, as soon as may be, after the 
reports are received, before each House of Parliament. 


(2) Where any such report, or any part thereof relates to any matter with 
which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be 
forwarded to the Govemor of that State, who shall in turn, cause it to be laid 
before each House of the Legislature of the State, where it consists of two 
House, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House, 
along with an explanatory memorandum explaining the action taken or 
proposed to be taken on the recommendations related to the State, and the 
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(7) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary 
or expedient for removing the difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of 
any inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on 
the provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. 


(0) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all 
matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purposes of 
giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 


(3) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be 
made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 


Annual Report. 


Annual report 
and audit report 
to be laid before 
Parliament. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 


Power to make 
rules. 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The sugarcane farming sector is a vital part of India's agricultural 
landscape, providing livelihood to millions of farmers and their families 
across the country. Sugarcane is a major cash crop, contributing 
significantly to the country’s rural economy and supporting industries such 
as sugar production, ethanol, and bioenergy. However, despite its 
importance, sugarcane farmers face numerous challenges, including delayed 
payments, volatile market prices, high production costs, and lack of 
adequate support during crop losses. These issues lead to financial insecurity 
and distress among sugarcane farmers, affecting their quality of life and 
sustainable livelihood. 


Recognizing these challenges, the National Commission for Welfare of 
Sugarcane Farmers and Workers Bill, 2024 seeks to establish a dedicated 
Commission focused on the welfare and economic empowerment of 
sugarcane farmers and workers. The primary objective of the Bill is to create 
a structured and permanent mechanism to address the unique issues faced by 
sugarcane farmers and workers, propose policy recommendations, and 
ensure that adequate financial, technical, and institutional support is 
provided to this sector. 


The establishment of the National Commission for Welfare of 
Sugarcane Farmers and Workers will allow for continuous monitoring of the 
welfare conditions of sugarcane farmers and workers and the overall health 
of the sugarcane industry. The Commission will be empowered to make 
timely interventions, recommend policy measures, ensure implementation of 
welfare schemes, and take proactive steps in addressing agrarian distress 
specifically affecting sugarcane farmers. This structure will be instrumental 
in bridging the gap between the needs of farmers and the assistance provided 
by the Government, ultimately leading to an enhanced standard of living and 
more secure income for sugarcane farming communities. 


This Bill is expected to have a transformative impact on the sugarcane 
farming sector. The establishment of a dedicated Commission will bring 
much-needed focus to the sector’s unique challenges, enabling targeted 
interventions that are currently lacking. By addressing payment delays, 
providing financial support, and ensuring social security, the Bill aims to 
reduce the economic vulnerability of sugarcane farmers and workers and 
improve their standard of living. 


The Bill’s provisions for a Sugarcane Farmers and Workers Welfare 
Fund will allow for immediate and effective financial interventions, helping 
farmers manage risks associated with market fluctuations and crop losses. 
Furthermore, the mandated seven-day payment schedule and interest on 
delayed payments are intended to improve cash flow stability for farmers, 
allowing them to plan and invest in their crops without financial stress. This 
framework will empower sugarcane farmers with a reliable support system, 
reducing the distress that has long plagued this community. 


Overall, the National Commission for Welfare of Sugarcane Farmers 
and Workers Bill, 2024, will provide a holistic approach to tackling the 
economic and social challenges faced by sugarcane farmers, paving the way 
for a more resilient and sustainable sugarcane sector in India. This 
legislation will also set a precedent for other crop-specific welfare 
commissions, potentially leading to further sectoral reforms in India’s 
agriculture sector. 


Hence this Bill. 
IRANNA KADADI 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National 
Commission for Welfare of Sugarcane Farmers and Workers with 
headquarters at New Delhi and also provides that the Commission with the 
approval of the Central Government may set up regional offices anywhere in 
the country as may be deemed necessary. Clause 4 inter alia provides for 
the salaries and allowances to be paid to and other terms and conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and members of the Commission. Clause 5 
provides that the Central Government shall provide such number of suitable 
officers and employees to assist the Commission and for the salaries and 
allowances payable to them as well as their terms and conditions of service. 
Clause 6 provides for constitution of Committees by the Commission for 
dealing with or studying issues that may be taken up by it and for the 
appointment of such number of members to such Committees and the 
allowances payable to them. Clause 0 provides that the salaries and 
allowances of the Chairperson and members of the Commission, the 
administrative expenses of the Commission including the salaries, 
allowances and pensions payable to the officers and employees and 
allowances payable to members appointed to the Committees of the 
Commission shall be met from the grants provided by the Central 
Government. Clause l stipulates the functions of the Commission which 
inter alia includes undertaking annual income surveys of sugarcane farmers 
and sugarcane workers across various categories, including different crops 
and landholding sizes as well as promotional and educational research to 
ensure minimum incomes for farming households, enhancement of income 
of farmers and productivity in agriculture, conducting special studies and 
investigations into the problems arising out of agrarian distress and 
imparting training on modern and mechanized agricultural practices, use of 
fertilizers, crop management and other issues related to sugarcane farmers 
and workers. Clause 4 provides for the constitution of the Sugarcane 
Farmers and Workers Welfare Fund. Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the 
appropriate Government shall provide certain facilities to the sugarcane 
farmers and workers including implementation of a Scheme for payment of 
old age pension; free insurance cover; subsidized housing loans to them as 
well as subsidized health care and educational facilities for the families and 
children respectively of sugarcane farmers and workers. Clause l6 provides 
that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the 
Commission. Clause 7 provides for payment of expenditure incurred in 
connection with audit of the annual accounts of the Commission. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of one thousand crore 
rupees will be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of fifty crore 
rupees is also likely to be involved. 


420 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government make 
such provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might 
arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. Clause 22 of the Bill 
empowers the Central Government to make rules and the National 
Commission for Welfare of Sugarcane Farmers and Workers, with the 
approval of the Central Government, to make regulations, for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the matters in respect of which rules or 
regulations or orders may be made are matters of procedure and 
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill 
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 42] 


LV 


Bill No. LXXXVII of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the National Food Security Act, 203. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the National Food Security (Amendment) Act, Short title and 
2024. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In section 2 of the National Food Security Act, 203 in clause (5), the Amendment of 
following shall be substituted, namely: — 2660 0:25 


“(5) “foodgrains” means millets, rice, wheat or coarse grains or any 
combination thereof conforming to such quality norms as may be 
determined, by order, by the Central Government from time to 
time.” 


422 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Under the National Food Security Act, 20l3 (NFSA), the term 
“foodgrains” is defined as rice, wheat or coarse grains or any combination 
thereof conforming to such quality norms as may be determined, by order, 
by the Central Government from time to time. There is no specific 
provision for millets, such as, bajra, jowar, maize, ragi etc. as they have 
not been defined under “foodgrains” in the Act. However, to improve the 
level of nutrition amongst the beneficiaries covered under the NFSA, all 
the States and Union territories have been requested to procure millets and 
distribute for NFSA beneficiaries as per local consumption preferences 
and as per the guidelines issued by the Government from time to time. The 
United Nations, on India’s initiative, has declared the year 2023 as the 
International Year of Millets. 


Recognizing the nutritional value of millets and the fact that 
consumption of millets can significantly improve key nutrition parameters 
among children and women in rural and urban areas, the Government of 
India has created a sub-mission under the National Food Security Mission 
to encourage millet cultivation and its inclusion in Targeted Public 
Distribution System (TPDS). Now, millets are already a part of the TPDS. 
The procurement, storage, and distribution of coarse grains by the States 
and Union territories is done under the Decentralized Procurement (DCP) 
system. 


The word ‘millets’ is used to describe small-grained cereals like 
sorghum (jowar), pearl millet (bajra), foxtail millet (kangni/ Italian millet), 
little millet (kutki), kodo millet, finger millet (ragi/ mandua), proso millet 
(cheena/ common millet), barnyard millet (sawa/ sanwa/ jhangora), and 
brown top millet (korale). Millets were among the first crops to be 
domesticated. There is evidence for consumption of millets by the Indus 
valley people (3,000 BC), and several varieties that are now grown around 
the world were first cultivated in India. West Africa, China, and Japan are 
home to indigenous varieties of the crop. 


Millets can help combat health challenges such as obesity, diabetes 
and lifestyle problems as they are gluten-free, have a low glycemic index 
and are high in dietary fiber and antioxidants. Distribution of millets or 
coarse grains, such as, jowar, bajra and ragi in addition to rice and wheat 
under the National Food Security Act and other social welfare schemes 
including Integrated Child Development Services and Pradhan Mantri 
Poshan Shakti Nirmal (PM-Poshan) is, therefore, required to ensure 
overall health and development of the citizens of the country. The Bill 
accordingly, seeks to amend the National Food Security Act, 20l3 to 
include millets as a foodgrain to ensure targeted distribution and improve 
nutritional status. 


Hence, the Bill. 


IRANNA KADADI 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 423 


LVI 


Bill No. XCVIII of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) 
Act, 986. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: — 


l. 8) This Act may be called the Child and Adolescent Labour Short title extent 
(Prohibition and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2024. ane 
commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


424 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Amendment of 2. In the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 
Section 3. 986 (hereinafter referred to as the principal act), in section 3, for sub- 
section (2), the following shall be substituted, namely— 


“(2) Nothing in sub-section (4) shall apply where the child, — 


“(a) helps his family or family enterprise, which is other 
than any hazardous occupations or processes set forth in the 
Schedule, after his school hours or during vacations; or 


(b) works as an artist in an audio-visual entertainment 
industry, including advertisement, films, television serials, 
sound or audio-visual recording with respect to those 
uploaded on social media networks, or any such other 
entertainment or sports activities, except the circus, subject 
to such conditions including working for not more than 
twenty four days in a month and requisite safety measures, 
as may be prescribed: 


Provided that anyone other than “family” who records videos or 
audios that feature a child for the purpose of monetization on video 
sharing platforms shall be liable for penalty as provided under clause 
(e) of sub-section (3) of section 4 and no such work under this clause 
shall affect the school education of the child and fifty per cent. of the 
income generated by the child as an artist shall be deposited as fixed 
deposit in any of the Scheduled Banks, as defined under clause (e) of 
section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 934, and shall be made 
available to the child, when he completes eighteen years of age.” 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression, 


(a) “family” in relation to a child, means his mother, father, 
brother and sister and also includes guardian as defined in clause 
(2) of section 4 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 890. 


(b) “family enterprise’ means any work, _ profession, 
manufacturing or business which is performed by members of 
the family with engagement of other persons; 


(c) “artist” means a child who performs or practices any work 
as a hobby or profession directly involving him as an actor, 
singer, sports person or content creator in audio-video form for 
social media networks or in any such other activities as may be 
prescribed relating to the entertainment or sports activity falling 
under clause (b) of sub-section (2). 


Amendment of 3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause (d), 
Beenon Ey the following new clause shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(e) fails to comply with or contravenes the provisions of section 
3 of the Act shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which 
may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees or with both.” 


6 of 986. 


2 of 934. 


8 of 890. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 425 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 
986 provides for prohibition of the engagement of children in certain 
employments and for regulating the conditions of work of children in certain 
other employments. 


Section 3 of the said Act, inter alia, provides that employment of 
children below the age of fourteen years is prohibited in any of the 
occupations or processes specified in the Schedule to the said Act. Section 6 
of the said Act provides that the provisions of Part II of the Act (which 
relates to the regulation of conditions of work of children) shall apply to an 
establishment or a class of establishments in which none of the occupations 
referred to in section 3 is carried on. 


With rapid strides in mass media communications and technological 
innovation, social media has become the new rage in society with adults, 
adolescents and children being addicted to watching and making reels and 
posting content thereon. It is being observed that families often post audios 
or videos of their children who are talented in music, dance, acting etc. on 
social media as a form of encouragement and to popularize their talent. 
Often families together participate in such activities. In consonance with 
this trend, it is proposed to include these activities within the purview of 
Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 986 by 
making suitable amendments in section 3 thereof and to exclude such 
activities, which are being pursued as part of family activity. The definition 
of ‘family’ and ‘artist’ in the Explanation to section 3 is also proposed to be 
amended to include ‘Guardian’ as defined under the Guardians and Wards 
Act, 890 and to include social media activities respectively. However, if 
persons other than the family of the child indulge in such activities for the 
sole purpose of monetary benefit, they will be penalized for the same with 
simple imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both, for which provision has 
been made under section 4 of the Act through due amendment thereto. 


It is also imperative to ensure that the earnings of a child artist accrue 
to him as a future investment and are not squandered away by the family. 
For this, it is proposed to provide that fifty per cent. of the income generated 
by the child as an artist shall be locked in Fixed Deposits in any of the 
Scheduled Banks, as defined under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 934, 
which shall be available to the child after he completes eighteen years of 
age. 


Hence, this Bill. 
IRANNA KADADI 


426 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


LVII 


Bill No. XLIV of 2024 


A Bill to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,2023 and the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
l. (J) This Act may be called the Criminal Laws (Amendment) Act 2024. Short title and 
commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment of 
section 299. 


Sacrilege of 
religious texts. 


Amendment of 
section 346. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 427 


CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENT TO THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023 


2. In Chapter XVI of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, after section 299, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely: — 


“299A. Whoever damages, destroys or defiles any religious text, 
revered by any religious community in India, including but not limited to 
‘Sri Guru Granth Sahib’, ‘Srimad Bhagwad Geeta’, ‘Holy Quran’ and 
‘Holy Bible’, with the deliberate and malicious intention of hurting the 
religious feelings of that community, shall be guilty of sacrilege and shall 
be punished with imprisonment for a term not less than seven years but 
which may extend to imprisonment for life.” 


CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENT TO THE BHARATIYA NAGARIK SURAKSHA SANHITA, 2023 


3. In Chapter XXVI of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023, in section 
346, after sub-section (8), for the existing proviso, the following shall be 
substituted, namely: — 


“Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates to an offence under 
section 64, section 65, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70, section 
7 or section 299A of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the inquiry or 
trial shall be completed within a period of two months from the date of 
filing of the chargesheet.” 


45 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


45 of 2023. 


428 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Sacred religious texts are sacrosanct to every religion in India and we have 
witnessed increase in cases of sacrilege of religious texts across the country due to 
insufficient punishment to deter such a heinous crime which can lead to law and order 
issues. The importance and sensitivity of our religious texts can be ascertained from the 
fact that the sacred Guru Granth Sahib Ji is considered living guru by Sikhs and is 
accorded respect accordingly. 


The State of Punjab has witnessed several cases of sacrilege and in order to deal 
with such a sensitive issue, the Punjab Assembly, in 208, had unanimously passed the 
Indian Penal Code (Punjab Amendment) Bill, 208 and the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Punjab Amendment) Bill 208, which stipulated punishment upto life imprisonment for 
injury, damage or sacrilege to Guru Granth Sahib, Bhagwat Gita, Holy Quran and Holy 
Bible with the intention to hurt the religious feelings of the people. The Bill is currently 
under consideration of the Hon’ble President. 


The Criminal Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2024 proposes to add Section 299A to the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 to make “sacrilege of religious texts such as Sri Guru 
Granth Sahib, Srimad Bhagwad Geeta, Holy Quran and Holy Bible with the intention to 
hurt the religious feelings of the people”, a crime punishable with a maximum punishment 
of life imprisonment. 


The proposed penal provision is based on the premise that such sacrilege leads to 
enormous hurt to religious sentiments of the people, causes disruption of public order and 
disturbs communal harmony, which the State has a duty to maintain. This Bill is a major 
step towards curbing such incidents of sacrilege and maintaining communal harmony in 
the country. 


This Bill is a sine qua non for a diverse country like India wherein, several cases 
of sacrilege have been reported across the States and the same have been used to invoke 
communal tensions and therefore, in order to maintain communal harmony across the 
country, it is necessary that rigorous punishment is given to deter criminals trying to 
disturb communal harmony. 


The quantum of punishment for sacrilege is inadequate under the existing laws 
and therefore, this Bill seeks to create deterrence for any kind of sacrilege by prescribing 


a minimum punishment of seven years and a maximum punishment of life imprisonment. 


Hence, this Bill. 


RAGHAV CHADHA 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


429 


[शा 


Bill No. XLVI of 2024 


A Bill to amend the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) 
Act, 2024. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows: - 


(0) This Act may be called the Public Examinations (Prevention of 
Unfair Means) Amendment Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


430 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Substitution of 
section 0. 


Punishment for 
offences under this 
Act. 


In Chapter III of the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) 
Act, 2024, for section 0, the following shall be substituted, namely: - 


“0. 6) Any person or persons resorting to unfair means and offences 
under this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not less 
than seven years but which may extend to life imprisonment and with 
fine up to two crore rupees: 


Provided that in case of default of payment of fine, an additional 
punishment of imprisonment shall be imposed, as per the relevant 
provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 


Provided further that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is 
brought into force, the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be 
applicable in place of the said Act. 


(2) The service provider shall also be liable to be punished with 
imposition of a fine up to five crore rupees and proportionate cost of 
examination shall also be recovered from such service provider and he 
shall also be barred from being assigned with any responsibility for the 
conduct of any public examination for a period of ten years. 


(3) Where it is established during the investigation that offence under 
this Act has been committed with the consent or connivance of any 
Director, Senior Management or the persons in-charge of the service 
provider firm, he shall be liable for imprisonment for a term not less 
than seven years but which may extend to life imprisonment and with 
fine of ten crore rupees: 


Provided that in case of default of payment of fine, an additional 
punishment of imprisonment shall be imposed as per the provisions of 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 


Provided further that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is 
brought into force,the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be 
applicable in place of the said Act. 


(4) Nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable 
to any punishment under the Act, if he proves, that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge and that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.” 


l of 2024 


45 of 2023. 


45 of 2023. 
45 of 860. 


45 of 2023. 


45 of 2023. 
45 of 860. 


Sec-2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


43] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 
2024 was enacted to prevent “unfair means” in order to “bring greater 
transparency, fairness and credibility to the public examinations 
system”. 


The occurrences of paper-leaks have made the stakeholders put 
a question mark on the credibility of the competitive and higher- 
education exams. India for years has seen around seventy paper-leaks 
in the last seven years across fifteen States. The recent alleged NEET- 
UG 2024 and UGC-NET paper leak reportedly affecting twenty-four 
lakh aspirants, has brought to the fore excessive control of the paper 
leak mafia over exams in India. These leaks disrupted the schedules 
of .7 crore applicants and there are wide-spread protests over the 
alleged malpractices in the NEET entrance exams. 


As per reports, paper leaks over the last five years have resulted 
in forty-one recruitment exams across fifteen States being cancelled, 
hampering the employment hopes of .4 crore applicants. In the case 
of NEET itself, the Central Bureau of Investigation is probing alleged 
irregularities in the examinations held in 208, 202 and 2022. The 
scale of paper leaks in India is huge. The paper-leak industry is a 
well-oiled one, destroying the dreams of crores of students and job 
aspirants in the last five years alone. 


However, the current law prescribes a maximum imprisonment 
of five years for persons who are found guilty of paper leak. 
Considering the gravity of the offence and the amount of damage it 
does to the career prospects and livelihoods of youth of the country, it 
is imperative that the quantum of punishment is increased to serve as 
a deterrent and instill fear in the minds of the people who commit this 
crime. 


The punishment prescribed in the Public Examinations 
(Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 2024 is much lesser than the anti- 
cheating law of various State Governments. Therefore, this Bill 
proposes to enhance the minimum punishment to seven years and a 
maximum of life imprisonment for paper leak and also seeks to 
increase the fine to rupees two crore. 


Hence, this Bill. 


RAGHAV CHADHA 


432 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


LIX 


Bill No. XCVII of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 95. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (8) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Short title and 
Act, 2024. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Interpretation 


Insertion रण 
new Part VB. 


Initiation — of 
recall process 
for a member. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 433 


2. In section 2 of the Representation of the People Act, 95 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (व),-- 


(a) after clause (bb), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(bc) “constituency” means the Parliamentary constituency or 
the Assembly constituency, as the case may be;”; 


(b) after clause (e), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ea) “member” in reference to PART VB means a Member of 
the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a 
State, as the case may be”; 


(c) after clause (h), the following new clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ha) “recall” means removal of an elected candidate durin 
8 
his or her term by the electorate.” 


(hb) “recall petition” means a petition calling for vacation of 
the seat of a Member of the House of the People or the 
Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be;”; and 


(d) after clause (i), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(ia) “Speaker” means the Speaker of the House of the People 
or the Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be;” 


3. After PART VA of the principal Act, the following PART and sections 
thereunder shall be inserted, namely:— 


“PART VB 
RECALL OF REPRESENTATIVES 


78C. () Any elector of a particular constituency, if not satisfied with the 
performance of the elected member of that constituency, may file a recall 
petition, signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of 
electors of that constituency, with the Speaker in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), no process of recall of a 
member shall be initiated— 


(i) within a period of two years from the date of election of that 
member; or 


(ii) if that member was elected in a bye-election and one-half of 
the period of tenure of such member has not expired; or 


(iii) before the expiry of a period of six months from the date of 
submission of an earlier recall petition; or 


(iv) within a period of six months prior to the polling day for the 
next general election for the purpose of constituting anew House 
of the People or a new State Legislative Assembly, as the case 
may be; or 


(v) if that member is already subject to a recall petition process. 


Explanation —For the purpose of this section, the expression “member is 
already subject to a recall petition process” means the period beginning 
with the reference of the recall petition by the Speaker to the Election 


43 of 95. 


434 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


Commission and ending with the notification by the Speaker of the 
outcome of the petition. 


78D. 6) The Speaker shall, as soon as possible, after confirming the 
genuineness of the recall petition filed under section 78C refer the recall 
petition to the Election Commission, within thirty days, for verification 
and signing by the electors of the respective constituency of the concerned 
Member against whom the recall petition is filed and that the recall 
petition is not prima facie frivolous. 


Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, it is clarified that the 
Speaker shall not entail a review of the merits of the recall petition or 
decide as to whether that member should be recalled or not, but shall 
instead limit his review to decide whether the petition has been filed by 
an eligible person, whether it bears the requisite number of signatures and 
whether it sets out in detail, reasons for recall of the member. 


(2) The Election Commission shall, on receipt of recall petition from the 
Speaker, initiate the verification process for authentication of the 
signatures on the recall petition in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the verification process for authentication of 
signatures shall be completed within a period of thirty days from the date 
of receipt of the recall petition from the Speaker. 


78E. (/) The Election Commission shall, if satisfied about the 
genuineness of signatures on the recall petition, designate one of its 
officials to be the Recall Election Officer with respect to the concerned 
recall petition. 


Provided that if the Election Commission is not satisfied about the 
genuineness of the recall petition or on scrutiny finds that it does not fulfill 
the stipulated criteria for admission, the said recall petition shall be 
deemed to be rejected and the Election Commission shall notify the 
rejection of the recall petition along with reasons therefor. 


(2) The Recall Election Officer shall be responsible for conducting the 
recall election as per the procedure given under section 78F. 


(3) The Election Commission shall provide the Recall Election Officer 
with such number of employees and funds as may be necessary for the 
purposes enumerated under Sections 78F, 78G. 


78F. (7) The Recall Election Officer shall, within ten days of the receipt 
of a recall petition, by way of a notification, specify— 


(a) a place or places where the recall petition shall be made 
available for signing by the electors; and 


(b) the designated day on and the time duration upto which the 
recall petition shall be made available for signing to the electors: 


Provided that the Recall Election Officer shall not specify more 
than ten places within the constituency for signing the recall petition: 


Provided further that, in extraordinary circumstances, the Recall 
Election Officer may specify more than ten places within the constituency 
for signing the recall petition, after presenting in writing the detailed 
reasons thereof, to the Election Commission and the Speaker: 


Provided also that in specifying the number of places where the 
recall petition shall be made available for signatures, due consideration 
shall be given to the size and population of the constituency of the 
concerned member, against whom the recall petition has been filed. 


Verification of 
signatures on 
recall petition. 


Appointment of 
Recall Election 
Officer and other 
employees. 


Procedure _ for 
signing the recall 
petition 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 435 


(2) The Recall Election Officer, while specifying the place or places under 
clause (a) of sub-section (), shall ensure that— 


(a) all electors entitled to sign the recall petition have such 
reasonable facilities for signing it as are practicable in the 
circumstances; and 


(b) _ as far as practicable, every place where the recall petition is 
made available for signing is accessible to senior citizens, 
persons with disabilities. transgenders as well as other socially 
deprived sections of the society: 


(3) The Recall Election Officer, shall also specify the days on which an 
eligible voter, who is unable to be physically present at the designated 
place(s) on the designated day, shall be able to sign the recall petition by 
means of postal ballot. 


Public Notice 78G. (8) The Recall Election Officer shall, within a period of ten days 
for signing on after specifying the places and the days under sub- section () of section 
the recall 78F.— 

petition. , 


(a) issue a public notice containing details of the designated 
places, day on and time during which every elector eligible to 
vote in the constituency may sign on the recall petition as well 
as the details for signing by means of postal ballot; 


(b) cause such notice to be printed in all the leading 
newspapers circulated in the constituency; and 


(c) cause such notice to be put up on the notice board of all 
the Courts, Government offices and institutions in the 


constituency. 
Eligibility of 78H. Every elector of the constituency of the concerned Member, in 
electors. respect of whom the recall petition has been filed, shall be eligible to sign 


the recall petition: 


Provided that if any eligible elector is unable to be physically 
present at the designated place(s) on the designated day, he may sign the 
recall petition by means of a postal ballot and every such postal ballot 
shall be deemed to be the signature of the elector on the recall petition. 


Explanation: For the purposes of this section, every person of the said 
constituency, who is eligible to vote in accordance with the Constitution 
of India as on the date of recall election, shall be eligible to sign the recall 


petition. 
Process of 78I. () The Recall Election Officer shall, without any delay, and within 
counting. a period of not more than fifteen days after the end of the signing period, 


cause the signatures including the postal ballots, to be counted and 
forward the result of counting to the Speaker. 


(2) A recall petition of a member shall be deemed to be a successful recall 
petition for the purposes of this Act, if it is signed under Section 78H by 
such number of electors, which is not less than two-third of the number of 
valid votes which that member was polled in his respective election. 


(3) The Speaker shall, within twenty-four hours of the receipt of the result 
of counting under sub-section (2), notify the result to the general public in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


436 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


78J. The member, in respect of whom the recall petition was filed, upon 

notification of the successful recall petition under sub-section (3) of 
section 78J, shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in the House of the 
People or Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be. 


78K. When as a result of a successful recall petition, a seat in the House 
of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be, 
is duly vacated under section 78K, the Election Commission shall cause a 
bye-election to be held to fill the vacant seat in such manner as may be 
prescribed under Part IX of the Act. 


Provided that the elected member who has been recalled, shall be 
not be entitled to participate in the bye-election for the remaining term. 


78L. Whoever,— 
(a) tampers with or forges any of the signatures including on the 
initial recall petition submitted to the Speaker; or 


(b) signs the same recall petition more than once; or 


(c) either directly or through an agent, gives bribe by way of gift, 
offer or promise any gratification to any person with a view to 
directly or indirectly induce such person to sign or refrain from 
signing a recall petition; or 


(d) receives, either directly or through an agent, by way of gift, 
offer or promise any gratification, either himself or through an 
agent, from any person in respect for signing or refraining from 
signing a recall petition, 


shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto 
five years or with a fine which may extend upto rupees ten lakh orwith 
both. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the term “gratification” 
shall not be restricted to pecuniary gratifications or gratifications 
estimable in money and shall include all forms of entertainment and all 
forms of employment for reward. 


78M. Notwithstanding anything contained in the above provisions, the 
pendency of a recall petition against a member shall not affect the rights 
of the said member and will not deter the duties of the said Member, who 
will be bound by the oath of his office. 


78N. Every recall petition shall be disposed of within a maximum period 
of sixty days, beginning from the date of filing till the date of outcome of 
the said recall petition.” 


. In section 69 of the principal Act, after clause (hh), the following new 


clause shall be inserted, namely:- 


“(hhh) the manner of filing a recall petition, verification process for 
authentication of the signatures on the recall petition and notification of 
the result of counting of signatures on recall petition;” 


Vacation of seat 
by 3 recalled 
member. 


Filling up of a 
vacant seat of a 
recalled 


member. 
Offence for 
giving a 


frivolous — recall 
petition 


Pendency of 
recall petition 
not to affect the 
rights and duties 
of the member. 


Time limit for 
final disposal of 
recall petition. 


Amendment of 
section 69. 


Sec-2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 437 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Bill underscores that citizens deserve direct mechanisms to hold 
underperforming representatives accountable. As per the proposed provisions, 
if aminimum of one-fourth of a constituency's electorate is dissatisfied with the 
performance of their elected Member of Parliament or of a State Legislative 
Assembly, they can initiate a recall petition. Further, on receiving the signatures 
and consent from two-third of the valid votes which that member was polled in 
his respective election, the concerned member may be removed from his or her 
tenure. More so, the proposed amendment tends to penetrate awareness across 
the masses and equips the citizens with right to recall their votes. It is widely 
observed that electors after casting their votes, are usually oblivious about the 
future outcome till the next elections, however the introduction of the right to 
recall shall instill a sense of agility amongst the electors to participate in the 
democratic process with alacrity. This measure responds to growing demands 
for participatory governance and aims to bridge the trust deficit between elected 
representatives and their constituents. By empowering citizens with the right to 
recall, the Bill proposes a fundamental shift towards a more accountable 
political framework in India, aligning with democratic principles and reflecting 
citizens’ rights to ensure their representatives act in their best interests. 


Globally, the right to recall has been effectively incorporated in several 
democratic countries, demonstrating its utility in strengthening representative 
accountability. Notable examples include Switzerland and the United States. In 
Switzerland, local recall laws empower citizens to remove office-bearers based 
on performance criteria. Similarly, in the U.S., several States allow the recall of 
officials, with specific processes defined for elected representatives across state 
and local governments. These examples demonstrate how the right to recall can 
serve as a check on power and ensure that representatives adhere to their 
mandates. Through this Bill, India aspires to emulate such best practices, 
introducing a recall mechanism suited to the country’s unique democratic and 
political landscape. 


This Bill seeks to empower Indian citizens by allowing them the right to 
recall their elected representatives under specific conditions. This initiative is 
rooted in the principle of enhanced accountability, ensuring that elected 
members maintain a high standard of integrity and performance throughout 
their tenure. Currently, Indian citizens lack direct recourse if their elected 
officials fail to fulfill their duties satisfactorily, resulting in a democratic deficit. 
This Bill addresses this gap by proposing the right to recall, which would 
reinforce citizens’ voices and re-establish faith in representative governance. 


A distinctive feature of the proposed amendment is the provision for a 
postal ballot for signing on recall petition in case an eligible elector is not able 
to be physically present at the designated place(s) in his constituency on the 
designated day. This will ensure that no eligible elector misses out on the 
opportunity to participate in the process of recall of amember. Every eligible 
elector within the concerned constituency can participate in the recall election 
via postal ballot, making the process more inclusive and ensuring maximum 
participation. 


In conclusion, the proposed Bill seeks to introduce a recall mechanism 
that reinforces the accountability of elected representatives in India, and serves 
to deter the underperformance, mismanagement, corruption or apathy of the 


438 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part-II 


elected representatives. By setting out stringent requirements and a systematic 
approach to initiate recall petitions, verification of signatures, and conduct of 
recall elections, the Bill upholds democratic values while providing practical 
safeguards against potential misuse. The inclusion of the postal ballot system 
further ensures the integrity of recall elections, making the process fair, 
accessible, and credible. 


Hence this Bill. 


RAGHAV CHADHA 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 439 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill inter alia provides that the Election Commission 
shall provide the Recall Election Officer with such number of employees and 
funds as may be necessary for the conduct of recall election and that the Recall 
Election Officer shall issue public notice specifying the places and day 
designated for signing the recall petition and cause such notice to be printed in 
all the leading newspapers in the constituency and to be put up on the notice 
board of all the Courts, Government offices and institutions in the constituency. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. As the expenditure to be incurred would depend 
upon the number of recall petitions filed, it is not possible at this stage to give 
the exact amount of recurring expenditure which would be involved out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


No non-recurring expenditure is however, likely to be involved. 


P.C. MODY, 
Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-I0054. 


Digitally signed 


KSHITIZ, ४७४४ 
MGIPMRND—377GI(S4)—9-2-2025. MOHAN ०५८ 7०७००७ 


